# Humphreys, The Virginia Campaign of ’64 and ’65: Appomattox campaign selections, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Illinois scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, soft-hyphen marks (¬), running headers, page numbers and footnotes interleaved with the text. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; page locators refer to unverified OCR page markers. Reports, returns, despatches, testimony and memoirs quoted or summarized by Humphreys are not separately inspected originals.

## chapter-xiii-opening

Having established liis army at Goldsboro’, North Caro¬ lina, about 145 miles south of Petersburg, General Sherman visited General Grant at City Point on the 27th of March, and stated, as he had done before by letter, that he would be ready to move by the 10th of April, if it should be necessary to bring his army in co-operation with the forces in front of Richmond and Petersburg. He proposed, in the event of such a movement, to threaten Raleigh, and then, turning suddenly to the right, reach the Roanoke River near Weldon (60 miles south of Petersburg), from which point he could move to the Richmond and Danville Railroad at its junction with the Petersburg and Lynchburg Railroad, Burke’s junc¬ tion, which would cut off Lee’s retreat to Danville and to Lynchburg, or could join the armies operating against Rich¬ mond, as might be deemed best. This plan, General Grant says, he was directed to carry out, if, in the meantime, he received no further directions. The movement ordered for the 29th of March was explained to him. Apprehensive that General Lee might any night abandon his intrenchments, and being satisfied that he would do so as soon as he heard that General Sherman had crossed the MOVEMENT TO TURN LEE’S RIGHT. 323 Roanoke, General Grant determined not to delay the move¬ ment ordered for the 29th, but to take the initiative. On the night of the 27th, General Ord, commanding the Army of the James, taking with him General Gibbon, with Turner’s and Foster’s divisions of the Twenty-fourth Corps, Brigadier-General Birney’s division (colored) of the Twenty-* fifth Corps, and General Mackenzie’s cavalry (formerly Kautz’s) made a secret march of 36 miles to the left of the Army of the Potomac, taking post in rear of the Second Corps on the evening of the 28th. He managed this move¬ ment so well that the enemy remained in ignorance of it un¬ til the 2d of April. General Devens’s division of Gibbon’s corps remained in the intrencliments on the north side of the James ; General Weitzel’s two divisions of the Twenty-fifth Corps in the Bermuda Hundred intrenchments, he having command there and on the north side of the James.

## march-28-29

On the 28tli of March General Grant instructed General Sheridan to move at an early hour on the morning of the 29th, cross Hatcher’s Run below where it would be crossed by the Fifth Corps (at Monk’s Neck bridge), pass near to or through Dinwiddie Court House, and reach the right and rear of the enemy as soon as practicable. He was informed that the Second and Fifth Corps would be in position on the Vaughan road, south of Hatcher’s Run, extending to, or near to Dinwiddie Court House. It was not the intention, he said, to attack the enemy in his intrenched position, but to force him out, if possible, with a view to attacking him. Should the enemy remain within his main intrenched line, then General Sheridan might “ cut loose and push for the Danville Road.” If practicable, he was to cross the South Side Railroad between Petersburg and Burkesville, destroy it as much as practicable without interfering with the com¬ plete destruction of the Danville Railroad, which he was to strike as near the Appomattox as possible. That being done, the South Side Railroad west of Burkesville was to be simi¬ larly destroyed. Having accomplished the destruction of these two roads, he might return to the two armies, or join General Sherman. These instructions were preliminary, and might be changed on the following day. General Humphreys was directed to cross Hatcher’s Run by the Vaughan road on the morning of the 29th, as soon as General Ord’s troops occupied the intrenchments held by the Second Corps, and take position with his right near Hatcher’s Run, and his left in communication or connection with the Fifth Corps, and advance toward the enemy’s po¬ sition. General Warren was directed to cross Hatcher’s Run at Monk’s Neck bridge early on the morning of the 29th, but not to proceed beyond the junction of the Vaughan and MOVEMENT TO TURN LEE’S RIGHT. 325 Quaker roads until the Second Corps was in position, when he would advance toward the enemy by the Boydton road, his right connecting with the Second Corps ; but at mid¬ day on the 29th he was directed to move up the Quaker road. * General Wright was directed to hold himself ready to with¬ draw the Sixth Corps from the intrenchments it was hold¬ ing ; General Parks to remain in the intrenchments manned by the Ninth Corps, and be prepared to take up the return- works from his left at Fort Sedgwick, when the Sixth Corps should be withdrawn. In accordance with these instructions, General Sheridan marched to Dinwiddie Court House on the 29th, by way of Reams’s Station and Malone’s crossing of Rowanty Creek, encountering only small pickets of the enemy’s cavalry ; but learning that a strong force of the enemy’s cavalry was on the south side of Stony Creek, near the railroad depot, Custer’s division was directed to remain near Malone’s crossing to protect the trains. This Confederate cavalry force consisted of W. H. F. Lee’s and Rosser’s divisions. General Warren, moving as directed, after advancing Grif¬ fin’s division to within two miles of Dinwiddie Court House, withdrew it to the Quaker road, under his modified instruc¬ tions, and in the afternoon moved up that road, Griffin in advance. About a mile from its junction with the Boydton plank-road, in the vicinity of the steam sawmill, his leading brigade, General Chamberlain’s, came in contact with Wise’s and Wallace’s brigades of Anderson’s command, when a sharp engagement took place, in which the enemy wTas forced to fall back into their intrenchments on the White Oak road, after suffering severely, losing some 200 prisoners, besides the wounded left on the field. A portion of Bartlett’s bri¬ gade took part in the action toward its close. The loss in Griffin’s division was 367 killed and wounded, Brigadier- 326 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. General Sickle among tlie latter. The loss of the enemy was evidently greater. General Humphreys, taking position as directed, moved forward, meeting with little opposition until darkness put a stop to further progress. As soon as the movement of our troops was perceived by the enemy on the morning of the 29th, General Lee sent General Anderson, with Bushrod Johnson’s division and Wise’s brigade, to the extreme right of his intrenchments along the White Oak road. A part of this force, as we have seen, encountered Griffin’s division in the afternoon of that day. Pickett’s division, which had been relieved from the charge of the Bermuda Hundred intrenchments by Mahone’s division early in March, was likewise transferred to the ex¬ treme right of the intrenchments, reaching there at daylight on the 30th. General Fitz Lee’s division was on the extreme left of the Confederate army, when, on March 28th, General Lee, learn¬ ing that Sheridan’s cavalry was held on the left of the Army of the Potomac, and surmising that it was to move against the South Side Railroad and his right rear, directed General Fitz Lee to move at once to Five Forks, assume the com- mand of all the cavalry, and- with the infantry supports he would send, attack General Sheridan in that vicinity. Gen¬ eral Fitz Lee arrived at Sutherland Station with his division on the night of the 29tli. General Hill extended to his right in the course of the night of the 29tli, and early in the morning of the 30th, Mc¬ Gowan’s and McRae’s brigades, moving into the intrench¬ ments on the White Oak road on Johnson’s left, Scales’s and Cooke’s brigades into the intrenchments in front of Burgess’s mill and along the south side of Hatcher’s Run, probably including the Crow house intrenchments, while Lane’s, Da¬ vis’s, McComb’s, and Thomas’s brigades held those main- MOVEMENT TO TURN LEE’S RIGHT. 327 tained by Hill north of Hatcher’s Run. General Heth com¬ manded the brigades south of the run, General Wilcox those north of it.1 In the course of the 29th, General Grant instructed Gen¬ eral Sheridan not to move against the enemy’s railroads for the present, but to endeavor, on the following morning, to push around the enemy and get on his right rear. The rain fell heavily all the night of the 29th, and all the next day, rendering the roads impassable for artillery and wagons until corduroyed. The country was flat, covered generally with dense forest and tangled undergrowth, with numerous small, swampy streams, that, owing to the flatness of the country, did not drain the downfall quickly. The soil was a mixture of clay and sand, partaking in some places of the nature of quicksand.

## march-30-31-white-oak-ridge

On the 30th General Humphreys continued his advance, driving the enemy inside his intrenchments along Hatcher’s Run from the Crow house to the Boydton road, pressing close up against them, but not assaulting. General Warren moved up the Quaker and Boydton roads as far as the Dabney Mill road, and occupied a line covering the Boydton road as far as Gravelly Run. A reconnoissance was made by General Ayres’s division northwestward to the vicinity of the point where the White Oak road intrench¬ ments turned north to cover the Claiborne road, and a picket line was established in that vicinity, supported by a part of his division, the other part remaining on Griffin’s left in ad¬ vance of the Boydton road. General Sheridan directed General Merritt to gain posses¬ sion of Five Forks with Devin’s division, supported by Davies’s brigade of Crook’s division, while General Crook guarded the Boydton road crossing of Stony Creek. Gen- 1 For the space of a mile above the Crow house intrenchments the run was dammed so as to be impassable, and required only a picket line to watch it. 328 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. eral Merritt advanced to the forks of the road, near J. Bois¬ seau’s, from which point reconnoissances were sent on the left hand or Five Forks road, and on the right hand road leading past Dr. Boisseau’s to the White Oak road. On both these roads the enemy’s cavalry was encountered and heavy skirmishing ensued. Devin halted for the night at the forks near J. Boisseau’s. Early on the morning of the 30th, General Fitz Lee marched to Five Forks by the most direct road, and advan¬ cing toward Dinwiddie Court House, encountered Sheridan’s cavalry, when sharp skirmishing ensued, in which Lee lost a general officer wounded. At dark General W. H. F. Lee and General Bosser joined him. At sunset General Pickett arrived at Five Forks, by way of the White Oak road, with Corse’s, Terry’s, and Steuart’s brigades of his own division, and Ransom’s and Wallace’s brigades of Johnson’s division. General Sheridan was soon made aware of Pickett’s arrival there, and reported it to General Grant. According to the Return of February 20th, the cavalry di¬ visions of the two Lees numbered 5,760 enlisted men, in¬ cluding Roberts’s brigade, which, under the orders of General Anderson, picketed the White Oak road from the right of the Confederate intrencliments to Five Forks. The infantry under Pickett, by the same return, numbered about 3,600 en¬ listed men of his own division and 3,000 of Johnson’s, mak¬ ing a total of 6,600. Hunton’s brigade, of Pickett’s division, and Fulton’s and Moody’s brigades, of Johnson’s division, to¬ gether with Wise’s brigade, remained in the intrenchments along the White Oak road. Upon arriving at Five Forks, General Pickett assumed command of the operation to be undertaken the following morning against General Sheridan. In connection with Pickett’s attack, General Lee intended to get on the left flank of the Fifth Corps, with part of Hill’s and Anderson’s troops, MOVEMENT TO TURN LEE’S RIGHT. 329 and roll it up, the troops that remained in the intrenchments to join successively this flank attacking force as it arrived in front of the intrenchments held by them. In this way he hoped to defeat the attempt upon the South Side Railroad and his right rear. General Lee’s line was now so extended on his right that it was apparent that some part of it must be very thinly held, and Generals Ord, Wright, and Parke were directed on the 30th to ascertain the feasibility of carrying the intrenchments in their fronts by assault. Both Generals Wright and Parke reported that it was practicable to carry them in that way. It was now General Grant’s intention to reinforce General Sheridan with an infantry corps to enable him to turn Lee’s right, and while he was accomplishing this to assault the Petersburg lines with the other infantry corps ; but the con¬ dition of the roads prevented immediate movement. Late in the afternoon General Warren, in reporting the result of General Ayres’s reconn oissance, suggested that a division of the Second Corps should take Griflin’s place dur¬ ing the night, and that the Fifth Corps should occupy the White Oak road early the next morning, an important object, since it would cut Lee’s direct communication with Pickett at Five Forks. This was so far approved that General Humphreys was directed to relieve General Griffin’s division during the night (which was done with Miles’s division be¬ fore daylight of the 31st), and General Warren was directed to place Crawford’s and Griffin’s divisions within supporting distance of Ayres. General Ayres was directed by General Warren to reinforce his advance by daylight of the 31st with his whole division, General Crawford to hold his command ready to follow General Ayres, and General Griffin to take up the position Ayres had held at Mrs. Butler’s, as soon as his division was relieved by troops of the Second Corps. The position taken by General Ayres was in the open ground on 330 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. the south side of the White Oak road, near W. Dabney’s, and about 600 yards from that road. At 7 a.m. of the 31st General Crawford was ordered to move out to the Holliday house, about 500 yards in rear of Ayres, and support him. General Griffin was about 1,000 yards in rear of Crawford on the south or east side of a branch of Gravelly Run, which had become very much swollen during the night, and was on that account difficult to cross. At 8 o’clock General Ayres was informed of Pickett’s presence at Five Forks, about four miles from his left, and was cautioned to be prepared for an attack against his left flank as well as on his front. General Ayres formed his division, with General Winthrop’s brigade looking north fronting the White Oak road, General Denison’s Maryland brigade along a ravine on Winthrop’s left looking west, his third brigade somewhat to Winthrop’s right, and a brigade Which Crawford sent him in rear of his centre. At half-past eight o’clock corps commanders were notified that there would be no movement of troops that day, owing to the almost impassable condition of the roads and country, caused by the continuous heavy rain that had fallen. But at 9.40 a.m. General Warren telegraphed General Meade that the enemy’s pickets covered the White Oak road, and that he had sent word to General Ayres to drive them off or ascer¬ tain with what force the enemy held the road. General Meade replied to this, that if his reconnoissance should show that he could get possession of and hold the White Oak road, he was to do so, notwithstanding the order to suspend operations during the day. General Lee, in furtherance of his plan of attacking the left flank of the Fifth Corps on the morning of the 31st, directed General McGowan to take his own brigade and Gracie’s (commanded by Colonel Sanford) and move out of ACTION OF WHITE OAK RIDGE. 331 tlie intrenchments by the White Oak road, get across the flank of the Fifth Corps, and attack. General Hunton’s brigade was drawn np on the edge of the wood along the north side of the White Oak road, fronting the open ground of W. Dabney. General Wise’s brigade was formed on his left, but at precisely what hour does not appear. General Lee was on the ground, directing the movement in person. General McGowan had not quite got into the position he intended to take, and General Hunton had just formed his brigade, when, at eleven o’clock, General Winthrop’s brigade moved forward, supported on the right by the Third Bri¬ gade, commanded by General James Gwyn. When within 50 yards of the White Oak road the enemy’s line of battle moved forward out of the wood across the road into the open field to meet them, and the firing began. Seeing that he had a much superior force to encounter, General Win- throp faced his brigade about, General Ayres says, and marched back across the field in good order. It was now General Ayres’s intention to form his line of battle along the edge of the wood on the south side of the field, but the sup¬ ports could not be held, due, in part, he says, to the enemy’s attack on his left flank at the same time that the front at¬ tack was made. Again he endeavored to form his troops along a ravine, but in this he also failed, and they fell back to the ground they had occupied the day before, behind a branch of Gravelly Bun, where Griffin was in position, and to the intrenchments along the Boydton road, along the left of Miles’s division. Brigadier-General Denison was among the wounded. Crawford’s division fell back in con¬ fusion, Colonel Kellogg attempting with his brigade to make a stand, but uselessly. General Hunton, in his testimony before the Warren Court of Inquiry, says of this affair that he had scarcely formed line of battle when a large force of infantry marched out upon 332 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. them ; that he had no orders to attack or charge, but that a lieutenant in his brigade, promoted for gallantry, rushed out from his company, waved his sword, and said, “ Follow me, boys,” and from that the three brigades, McGowan’s, Gracie’s, and his own, made the charge. General McGowan says of it, that he had not completed his movement to the right across the left flank of Ayres when the firing in front began, and he at once ordered the charge to be made ; that it was successful ; and although the enemy attempted to rally two or three times, yet they were driven from the ground and across a branch of Gravelly Run, on the other side of which was a strong force with artillery. General Hunton mentions the successive attempts to reform made by Warren’s troops when they wTere falling back. His brigade, he says, did not advance to the run, but about two-thirds of the way to it from the White Oak Road, that is, not much beyond the Holliday fields. The sudden burst of heavy musketry firing, coming from the position of Warren’s advance troops, followed soon by a large and increasing number of stragglers coming to the rear, satisfied General Humphreys that Warren’s advance needed support, and he at once ordered General Miles to go forward quickly with two of his brigades and attack the enemy’s left flank. This was done in a prompt and spirited manner. The other two brigades of his division followed soon after. Mott was ordered to attack in his front, and Hays the Crow house intrenchments. These directions were in conformity to those subsequently received from General Meade. Wise’s brigade had advanced on the left of Hunton’s, and being struck in front and flank by Miles, fell back rapidly into the intrenchments with severe loss of killed, wounded, and prisoners. The prisoners taken numbered more than 300, some of whom belonged to Hunton’s brigade. The flag of an Alabama regiment was also captured. ACTION OF WHITE OAK RIDGE. 333 Wise being driven from the ground, Hunton was forced to fall back also, and General Warren having by that time got some part of Griffin’s division across the run, with which he threatened McGowan’s right flank, the whole force fell back to the position occupied by Ayres in the morning near the W. Dabney house. The enemy’s intrenchments covering the White Oak road were on the crest of a long slope, with wide slashings in front, and abatis along the ditch, with artillery at short intervals. The works were unused and in good order. General Mott attempted to carry the redoubts and intrench¬ ments covering the Boydton road crossing of Hatcher’s Run, but without success. General Hays attempted to carry the Crow house redoubt, but although he kept down the fire of their artillery, the heavy slashing in front of the works was absolutely impassable to even a small body of troops.1 By half-past two o’clock General Warren had formed his corps on the north side of the branch of Gravelly Run ready to move forward to the White Oak road where the morning’s engagement had begun, Griffin in the centre (Chamberlain’s brigade leading), Ayres’s division on Griffin’s left, Crawford’s on his right, both in echelon. General Chamberlain, driving in some skirmishers as he went forward, came in front of Hunton’s brigade, in slight breastworks, from which he re¬ ceived a sharp fire. General Gregory came to his support, moving into the wood on his right. Chamberlain then charged the breastworks in his front, General Hunton says, 1 General Wilcox says of these attempts of Mott and Hays, and of the pressing of General Ord’s troops close up against the intrenchments north of Hatcher’s Run, that during most of the day, while the fighting was severe further to the right there was a very heavy skirmish going on about Burgess’s mill, and on Cooke’s brigade below the mill and on Lane’s brigade. It was so heavy and threat¬ ening about the mill (Mott’s attack) that General Heth sent to him for a brigade, but that the firing was increasing so on his own front (Hays's and Ord’s troops) ■ that he could not send any assistance to Heth. 334 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. in the most gallant manner, carried them, capturing some prisoners and a battle-flag, while Gregory turned their left. Hunton was driven into the White Oak road intrenchments, and McGowan, seeing Hunton’s line give way, fell back at once with his two brigades into their main works. The killed and wounded in General Warren’s corps to-day were 173 in the First Division, 325 in the Second, and 431 in the Third, and 7 in the artillery and escort. Total, 936. The missing were 470, making an aggregate of 1,406. The casualties in General Humphreys’s corps were 374 killed and wounded, officers and enlisted men. General Ord pushed up close to the enemy’s works, losing sharply in doing so, and capturing many prisoners.

## dinwiddie-court-house

In the morning of the 31st General Fitz Lee moved with his cavalry toward Dinwiddie Court House on the direct road to it from Five Forks, encountering Devin’s division, which was moving toward Five Forks. Pickett’s infantry had not yet moved. Leaving Munford (Fitz Lee’s division) in con¬ tact with Devin, near the fork of the Gravelly Bun Church road, Pickett moved with his infantry, Fitz Lee with W. H. F. Lee’s and Bosser’s cavalry divisions leading, by way of Little Five Forks, wTest of Chamberlain’s Creek or bed, intending to cross that stream at Fitzgerald’s and Danse’s and attack General Sheridan’s left flank, while Munford at¬ tacked his front. General Crook was holding Fitzgerald’s crossing with General Smith’s brigade, Danse’s crossing, a mile above, with Davies’s brigade, keeping Gregg in reserve. Fitzger¬ ald’s crossing was two and one-half miles from Dinwiddie Court House, measured by the road, and in a direct line a mile and three-quarters from it in a northwest direction. As soon as General W. H. F. Lee arrived upon the ground he attempted to force the passage of Chamberlain’s bed at Fitzgerald’s crossing, and succeeded in getting over, but ACTION OF DINWIDDIE COURT HOUSE. 335 was driven back with heavy loss. No better success was met with at Danse’s crossing at first, but about one o’clock the infantry, Corse’s brigade leading, succeeded in carrying it after sharp fighting, in which it met with severe loss.' Gregg attacking held them here for a time. Munford mean¬ while had forced Devin back, and Pickett’s infantry driving Davies upon Devin’s left, passed between Devin and Crook. Being thus isolated, and unable to withdraw to Dinwiddie Court House by the direct road, Devin and Davies were ordered to retire, fighting, toward the Boydton road, and by that road to reach the Court House. Gibbs (of Devin’s division) withdrew his brigade toward the Court House and joined Crook’s command. W. H. F. Lee had now forced the crossing of Chamberlain's Bun, and moving up the road through the Adams farms, united with and formed the right of Pickett’s troops — Munford his left. Crook’s two brigades, Smith’s and Gregg’s, had been forced to fall back. Pickett having exposed his rear in following Devin and Davies toward the Boydton road, General Sheridan ordered Gibbs and Gregg to attack him, and directed Custer to bring up two of his brigades, Pennington’s and Capehart’s, to join in the attack. This attack freed Devin and Davies from further molestation, and forced Pickett to face about and meet Sheridan’s line of battle in front of the Court House. A spirited, obstinate contest ensued, which lasted until night, Smith’s brigade, General Sheridan says, bearing the brunt of the cavalry attack. Devin and Davies reached the Court House by way of the Boydton road, but not in time to take part in the closing action. The ground over which the greater part of the fighting took place during the day was very heavy ; a large part of it was densely wooded. The two contending lines of battle lay very close to each 336 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. other that night, Pickett’s infantry across the road from Din- widdie Court House to Five Forks, with cavalry on each flank, whose pickets extended on his left to the vicinity of the Boydton road near G. U. Brooks’s, and on his right to Fitzgerald’s crossing of Chamberlain’s Bun. Custer held Sheridan’s front, supported by Devin. About five o’clock in the afternoon General Warren, then at W. Dabney’s on the White Oak road, heard the sound of General Sheridan’s engagement coming from a southwest direction. It seemed to him to have receded and to be still receding. He at once sent General Bartlett with his brigade of Griffin’s division across the country to General Sheridan’s support, with directions to attack the enemy in flank. He sent his topographer, Major Cope, with him. A little later he received directions from General Meade to push a brigade down the White Oak road so as to open it for General Sheri¬ dan, and to support the brigade if necessary. At half-past six he was directed to send the force which had been ordered to move out the White Oak road down the Boydton plank- road as promptly as possible, as a staff-officer of General Merritt had reported to General Meade that the enemy had penetrated between General Sheridan’s main command and Warren’s position. But as General Bartlett was at that time too distant to be recalled for the prompt execution of this order, General Warren directed General Pearson, who was then on the Boyd¬ ton road with three regiments, to move at once toward Din- widdie Court House. But the bridge at the Boydton road crossing of Gravelly Bun had been destroyed by the enemy on the 29th, and the stream, swollen by the rains, had be¬ come unfordable for infantry, and General Pearson was com¬ pelled to stop there. At eight o’clock General Warren was advised by General Meade that General Sheridan had been forced back to Dinwiddie Court House by a strong force of ACTION OF DINWIDDIE COURT HOUSE. 337 cavalry supported by infantry, and as this left the rear of the Fifth and Second Corps open on the Boydton road, it would require great vigilance on their paft ; that the brigade sent down the Boydton road should not go farther than Gravelly Run. But about half-past nine General Warren received or¬ ders to withdraw his command from the White Oak road to the Boydton road, and send Griffin’s division at once to Gen¬ eral Sheridan by the Boydton road. General Humphreys was directed to throw back the left of the Second Corps. General Warren at once sent a staff officer, and afterward Captain Benyaurd, of the Engineers, to examine and repair, or rebuild the bridge, which, it was found, required the building of a span forty feet in length, and prepared to with¬ draw to the plank-road, and send Griffin to General Sheridan, advising General Meade of the position and condition of his several divisions. Somewhat later General Warren was noti¬ fied that the division to be sent to General Sheridan must start at once. In replying to this, General Warren stated that the bridge was broken, and that it would take he did not know how long to repair or rebuild it ; that he would make every effort to render it passable by the time General Griffin reached it. At 8.40 General Warren telegraphed General Meade,1 sug¬ gesting that he should move with his corps, and attack the enemy near Dinwiddie Court House on one side, while Gen¬ eral Sheridan attacked on the other, provided the enemy did not threaten us south of Gravelly Run , east of the planjc-road. 1 General Meade’s headquarters were at the Vaughan road crossing of Hatcher’s Run, about five miles from General Warren’s, which were on the Boydton road. General Grant’s headquarters were near Dabney’s mill, about two miles from General Meade’s. It is evident, from the great length of time that was required to communicate between these headquarters, that the telegraph was working badly. General Grant’s headquarters were about eight miles from Dinwiddie Court House. XII.— 15 338 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’04 AND ’65. At 9.45 General Meade submitted this proposition (which, under the circumstances, was the best thing on all accounts to do) to General Grant, and at the same time stated that Bartlett’s brigade was at or near Gravelly Run, on the road running north from Dinwiddie Court House, past J. Bois- seau’s, to the White Oak road ; that Warren could move at once that way and take the force threatening Sheridan in rear, or he could send one division to support Sheridan near Dinwiddie Court House, and move on the enemy’s rear with the two other divisions of the Fifth Corps. To this General Grant replied, “ Let Warren move in the way you propose, and urge him not to stop for anything. Let Griffin go on as he was first directed.” At 10.50 General Warren received General Meade’s reply to his suggestion of 8.40, which, conforming to General Grant’s despatch just quoted, directed General Warren to send Griffin promptly, as ordered, by the Boydton road, and to move the rest of his corps by the road Bartlett was on, and strike the enemy in rear. He was informed that Gene¬ ral Sheridan reported his own position to be north of Dinwid¬ die Court House, near Dr. Smith’s, and that the enemy held the cross-roads at that point. He was directed to be very prompt in this movement, and get the forks of the Brooks cross-road, so as to open communication by it with the Boyd¬ ton road, and cautioned not to encumber himself with any¬ thing that would impede his progress or prevent his moving in any direction. General Meade informed General Sheridan of the orders given General Warren, and what had been done to get troops to him, and by what routes part of them would unite with him, and part co-operate with him. General Grant also in¬ formed him of the orders given for the same object, and that he had also sent Mackenzie’s cavalry to him. Upon receiving the above order at 10.50, General Warren ACTION OP DINWIDDLE COURT HOUSE. 339 replied that he would send Ayres instead of Griffin to Gen¬ eral Sheridan by the Boydton road, as in withdrawing his troops to that road in accordance with previous orders, Ayres’s division was necessarily the first to reach it ; and that he would move with Griffin’s and Crawford’s divisions against the enemy, as the last despatch from General Meade di¬ rected. At the same time he gave the preliminary orders for the movement of these two divisions. His despatches do not clearly explain why he did not move with these two divisions as quickly as the troops could be got in motion, though it is to be inferred from the subse¬ quent despatches that it was because he apprehended that Ayres might not get to General Sheridan in time to pre¬ vent him from being forced back to the Vaughan road, and that in that case the best route for the whole corps would be by the Boydton road. The tenor of General Meade’s instructions to him before and after 11 p.m., was, that the first and most important object for him to accomplish was to get a division to General Sheridan by the Boydton, or any other road not closed by the enemy, at the earliest possible moment, and in time to go into action at day¬ light. It was not until one o’clock in the morning of the 1st of April that General Warren had a reply from General Meade, concerning the destruction of the bridge over Gravelly Run, which neither General Meade nor General Grant had been aware of, and in which it was suggested that the troops for General Sheridan should go by the Quaker road ; and stat¬ ing that time was of the utmost importance ; that General Sheridan could not maintain himself at Dinwiddie Court House without reinforcements ; that he, General Warren, must use every exertion to get troops to him as soon as possi¬ ble. If necessary to insure that, he could send troops by both roads, and give up the rear attack. If General Sheridan was 340 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. not reinforced and was compelled to fall back, lie would re¬ tire by the Vanglian road. But the distance from the posi¬ tion of General Warren’s troops to Dinwiddie Court House, by the Quaker road, was from 9 to 10 miles, and by that route they could scarcely reach General Sheridan before eight o’clock in the morning — too late an hour to accomplish the object of their going. Of this General Meade was ad¬ vised, but General Warren added that if he failed to send reinforcements by the Vaughan road, he would send them by the Quaker road. In case General Sheridan should be obliged to retire by the Vaughan road, the best route, in General Warren’s opin¬ ion, by which the rear of the enemy could be attacked would be by the Boydton road. As it appeared to General Warren that this despatch left it discretionary with him as to how he could best reinforce General Sheridan, he determined to abide by the movement already in progress. At two o’clock in the morning the bridge over Gravelly Bun was practicable for the passage of infantry, and General Ayres was crossing it, in his advance toward Dinwiddie Court House. Of this General Warren at once advised Gen¬ eral Meade. An hour before daybreak, when about two miles from the Court House, General Ayres v^ts met by an officer of General Sheridan’s staff, who led him back about a mile to the Brooks road, and along it to the road leading north from the Court House to the White Oak road, where, by direction of General Sheridan, the division was massed to await further orders. General Ayres says that about the dawn of day, soon after entering the Brooks Boad, one of Munford’s ve¬ dettes was seen moving off. At half-past four o’clock General Warren learnt that Ayres had communicated with General Sheridan, and he was about joining Generals Griffin and Crawford to move across the ACTION OF DINWIDDIE COURT HOUSE. 341 country against Pickett’s rear, when lie received General Sheridan’s despatch sent at 3 a.m.1 But General Warren should have moved with Griffin and Crawford as soon as practicable after receiving Meade’s order at 10.50 p.m., though it will be observed that subsequent to that hour General Meade subordinated all General Warren’s efforts to ensuring the presence of one of his divisions with General Sheridan by daylight.2 1 This despatch said: “ I am holding in front of Dinwiddie Court House, on the road leading to Five Forks, for three-quarters of a mile, with General Cus¬ ter’s division. The enemy are in his immediate front, lying so as to cover the road just this side of the Adams House, which leads out across Chamberlain’s Bed or Run. I understand you have a division at J. Boiseau’s [Dr. Boisseau’s was meant] ; if so you are in rear of the enemy’s line, and almost on his flank. I will hold oil here. Possibly they may attack Custer at daylight ; if so, have this division attack instantly and in full force. Attack at daylight anyway, and I will make an effort to get the road this side of Adams’ house, and if I do, you can cap¬ ture the whole of them. Any force moving down the road I am holding, or on the White Oak road, will be in the enemy’s rear, and in all probability get any force that may escape you by a flank attack. Do not fear my leaving here. If the enemy remain I shall fight at daylight.” 2 The Court of Inquiry which was appointed by the President, at the request of General Warren, to investigate this and other matters, say of this : “Notwithstanding that dispositions suitable for the contingency of Sheridan’s falling back from Dinwiddie might well have occupied and perplexed General Warren’s mind during the night, the court is of the opinion that he should have moved the two divisions by the Crump road in obedience to the orders and expec¬ tations of his commander, upon whom alone rested the responsibility of the con¬ sequences. “ It appears from the despatches and General Warren’s testimony, that neither Generals Meade, Sheridan, nor Warren expressed an intention of having this col¬ umn attack before daylight. “ The court is further of the opinion that General Warren should have started with two divisions, as directed by General Meade’s despatch (civ., heretofore quoted), as early after its receipt at 10.50 p.m., as he could be assured of the prospect of Ayres’s departure down the Boydton plank-road, and should have ad¬ vanced on the Crump road as far as directed in that despatch, or as far as might be practicable or necessary' to fulfil General Meade’s intentions ; whereas the evi¬ dence shows that he did not start until between five and six o’clock on the morn¬ ing of the 1st of April, and did not reach J. Boisseau’s with the head of the col¬ umn till about seven o’clock in the morning. “ The despatches show that Generals Meade and Warren anticipated a with¬ drawal during the night of the enemy’s forces fronting General Sheridan, which was rendered highly probable from the known position in their rear of a portion 342 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’04 AND ’65. General Bartlett had moved with his brigade from the vi¬ cinity of W. Dabney’s on the White Oak road, at five o’clock in the afternoon of the 31st, by a wood-road toward the sound of firing near Dinwiddie Court House. This brought him to Dr. Boisseau’s, on the most direct road from the White Oak road to the Court House, where his skirmishers met those of the enemy, and drove them across Gravelly Bun on that road and at Crump’s. A picket line was then established by Bartlett along the run. It was dark before this was accomplished. The presence of General Bartlett’s brigade along the main branch of Gravelly Bun, at the crossing of these roads, became known to General Pickett about ten o’clock at night. Its subsequent withdrawal, near midnight, was not known to the enemy. General Fitz Lee says that General Pickett believing it to be the advance of the Fifth Corps, determined to withdraw to Five Forks during the night. Accordingly the ambulance and ammunition trains and the artillery began to move back about midnight, followed by the infantry, which took the most direct road to Five Forks, the last brigade, Corse’s, getting off just before, or about, daylight. Munford’s division followed on the route of the infantry about daylight. W. H. F. Lee’s and Bosser’s divisions at the same time crossed Chamberlain’s Bed, and returned to Five Forks by way of Little Five Forks.*

## five-forks

1 Having reported of the Fifth Corps (Bartlett’s brigade) at G. Boisseau’s, [Dr. Boisseau’s is meant. — A. A. H.J and the event justified the anticipation.” — Proceedings , Findings , cnid Opinions of Court of Inquiry in Case of Gen. G. K. Warren , pp. 1558-9. 1 General Fitz Lee says, in his testimony before the Warren Court of Inquiry, that in consultation with General Pickett, when they learnt, about ten o’clock at night, that our infantry was moving against them, it was decided to withdraw, and that nearly all the artillery, ammunition, and ambulance trains which pre¬ ceded the troops got off by midnight. He further says that W. H. F. Lee’s and Rosser’s divisions were ordered by him to withdraw at four o’clock in the morning, and that Munford's division with¬ drew at daylight, following the infantry. General W. H. F. Lee states in his testimony that he began his withdrawal a little before day ; that his impression was that the infantry withdrew about mid- THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 343 this action by telegraph to General Lee, General Pickett was directed to maintain the position of Five Forks, in order to cover the South Side Railroad and the wagon-roads south of the Appomattox, which Lee intended to use in abandoning Petersburg and Richmond, and moving toward Danville or Lynchburg. He at once intrenched as much as practicable. At 5 a.m. General Griffin moved from the White Oak road across the country to Crump’s, and thence to the forks of the road at J. Boisseau’s, where, about seven o’clock in the morn¬ ing, he met General Devin with his cavalry division, and re¬ ported to General Sheridan. General Crawford followed him. General Warren was directed by General Sheridan to remain at J. Boisseau’s, refresh his men, and be ready to move to the front when required ; and General Mackenzie, who had re¬ ported with his cavalry, was directed to rest at Dinwiddie Court House until further orders. At daylight General Merritt, with the First and Third Cav¬ alry Divisions moved forward toward Five Forks, pressing the rear of the enemy ; Custer’s division, dismounted, on the left (the country being impracticable for mounted men), night or after midnight ; that the news came to him about midnight that the infantry would retire. The despatch of his Adjutant-General to General Beale was shown to him, dated 2 a.m., April 1, 1865, saying, “ General Lee wishes you to withdraw your command to this side of the creek when General Pickett’s infantry has withdrawn, at 4 a.m. You will bivouac on this side.” This despatch shows that it was expected that the infantry would have been out of the way by four o’clock, which conforms to General Corse’s statement that his brigade, the rear of the infantry, withdrew or started to retire about daylight, perhaps a little before ; it was very early dawn, just about the dawn of day. Colonel Walter Harrison, Adjutant and Inspector-General of Pickett’s division, says Pickett’s command started back toward Five Forks about two o’clock in the morning of April 1st. Colonel Mayo, commanding Terry’s brigade, says he began to withdraw at 2 A.M., as had been agreed upon by the brigade commander to whom General Pickett left the arrangements for the withdrawal. General Pickett states in his report that, ascertaining that General Sheridan was being reinforced with infantry, he was “induced to fall back, at daylight in the morning, to the Five Forks.” 344 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’05. Devin on tlie right. Custer’s left moved along Chamberlain’s Run. General Crook was held in support. General Pickett had, in the meanwhile, intrenched his in¬ fantry along the White Oak road, extending about a mile west of Five Forks, and about three-quarters of a mile east of it, with a short return about one hundred yards long at his left. General W. H. F. Lee’s cavalry division was on his right, along the west line of the Gilliam field, then followed in succession Corse’s brigade (whose line lay along the north edge of the Gilliam field), Terry’s, Steuart’s, Ransom’s, and Wallace’s brigades, with Pegram’s battalion of artillery on the line, three guns on Corse’s right, and three at the Five Forks, with McGregor’s battery of four guns on the left. Munford’s cavalry division, dismounted, was posted on the left so as to cover the ground between Wallace’s left and Hatcher’s Eun. It connected with Roberts’s brigade, which picketed toward the right of their main line of intrenchments, covering the Claiborne road. General Rosser guarded the trains on the north side of Hatcher’s Run, near the Ford road. General Merritt pressed close up to Pickett’s intrench¬ ments. General Sheridan’s plan of attack was to make a feint of turning the enemy’s right flank with Merritt’s cavalry, while he assaulted their left flank with the Fifth Corps, Merritt’s cavalry to attack the intrenchments in his front as soon as he heard the firing of the Fifth Corps attack. If this attack proved to be successful Pickett’s troops would be cut off from the rest of Lee’s forces and driven westward. At one o’clock General Sheridan directed General Warren to bring up the Fifth Corps and form it on the right of Devin, between 600 and 800 yards south of the White Oak road. The ground where the Fifth Corps formed had been previously examined by Captain Gillespie, an Engineer of¬ ficer on General Sheridan’s staff, and is known in this opera- THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 345 tion as the ground about Gravelly Run Church. General Warren’s statement as to the information and instructions he received from General Sheridan, besides the general plan of the battle, was “that the enemy was in line of battle along the White Oak road, their left resting about where the road that I wTas to turn off on crossed the White Oak road ; 1 and that he wanted me to form my line so that I should strike with the right centre on the angle of the works and let the left engage the front, and place one division be¬ hind the right to support the attack on the angle where we thought the fight would be the heaviest ; and to so place the men oblique to the road as to bring this heaviest force of mine on the angle of the works — give it a direction whose obliquity to the road would correspond with that supposed position of the enemy and his works. We talked that over until I understood it, I think ; and he was convinced that I understood him.” See General Warren’s diagram and instructions herewith (taken from Record of Court of Inquiry) : April 1, 3 p.m. The following is the movement now about to be executed ; i The road General Warren turned off from was the Dinwiddie Court House and Five Forks road, The road he got on by turning off was the Gravelly llun Church road. 15* 346 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. The line will move forward as formed till it reaches the White Oak road, when it will swing round to the left, perpendicular to the White Oak road. General Merritt’s and General Custer’s cavalry will charge the enemy’s line as soon as the infantry get engaged. The cavalry is on the left of the infantry, except Mackenzie’s, which is moving up the White Oak road from the right. The divisions came upon the ground in the order of Craw¬ ford, Griffin, and Ayres. General Crawford’s division was placed on the right of the Gravelly Run Church road, so that his centre would strike the angle and be the first to en¬ counter the works ; General Griffin’s division was placed behind Crawford’s. These were the largest divisions. Gen¬ eral Ayres’s division, the smallest, was placed on the left of the road, as General Warren supposed, from the position of the enemy as stated to him, that General Crawford’s centre would fall right on the angle of their line, and that if he was not able to carry it, General Griffin would be there to sus¬ tain him and to take advantage of any success. General Ayres was to engage the enemy’s front and prevent reinforce¬ ments being sent to the angle. A copy of the diagram with the instructions on it was given to each division commander, and the jfian was explained to them verbally besides. The line was to move forward until it reached the White Oak road, when it was to swing round to the left, perpendicular to the White Oak road. General Sheridan states that he gave General Warren in¬ structions about engaging the enemy after he had ordered him to bring up his corps ; that he gave him orders for the for¬ mation of his troops and method of attack while his troops were coming up and forming ; that he talked several times with General Warren as to what was to be done ; that the order of General Warren (referring to the diagram and directions on it) conformed substantially to the orders he gave him ; that ‘ ‘ there was a good deal of conversation THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 347 explanatory of that, "but that embodies about it gener¬ ally.” General Mackenzie had been sent from Dinwiddie Court House to get possession of the "White Oak road at a point about three miles east of Five Forks, which he accomplished, having a sharp skirmish with some of the enemy’s cavalry there, and moved down to the right of the Fifth Corps. He was directed to move in conjunction with that corps on its right, and come in on the flank and rear of the enemy and hold the Ford road crossing of Gravelly Hun to intercept the enemy’s retreat. As soon as Ayres’s division was formed (which was about four o’clock) the order was given to the Fifth Corps to attack. Advancing and receiving only a skirmish fire in its front on crossing the White Oak road, his right crossing the road sooner than his left, General Warren thought it probable that the enemy’s line of battle was in the edge of the wood, about 300 yards north of the road, and continued to advance in the direction in which his line had started, until very soon after crossing that road General Ayres received a musketry and artillery fire on his left, which evidently came from the en¬ emy’s intrenchment at the return, showing that their retrench¬ ment did not extend to the near vicinity of the Gravelly Run Church road. The return was, in fact, according to the map before the Warren Court of Inquiry, seven or eight hundred yards west of that road.1 General Ayres understanding the 1 In his testimony before the Warren Court of Inquiry, Colonel Gillespie stated that he had made no reeonnoissance of the enemy’s works before the attack ; that the cavalry had moved directly up the road and gradually pressed the enemy be¬ hind his works ; that he did not know that there was a return, nor did he know its direction from the position where the Fifth Corps was formed ; that he was instructed by General Sheridan to select ground which would hold General War¬ ren’s corps close under the right flank of Devin’s command and beyond the obser¬ vation of the enemy, as he wanted to put General Warren in as a turning column. Apparently no attempt was made to ascertain with precision the position of the enemy’s left, lest the attempt might put them on their guard and betray the plan of attack. 348 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. meaning of this fire immediately changed front and faced the return, bringing up Winthrop’s brigade (which was in reserve) in double-quick on the left of the new line, and then advanced against the return under a heavy fire, his right overlapping it, and finally carried the works, the key to the position, capturing a large number of prisoners and many battle-flags. When the fire on General Ayres’s left opened, General Warren, perceiving that the fight at the angle of the return would fall on Ayres and not on Crawford, as planned, at once directed General Winthrop to form on Ayres’s left so as to connect with Devin, sent orders to General Griffin to come in as quickly as he could to support Ayres on the right, and to General Crawford to change direction to the left, at right angles to the line he was following. A large part of Craw¬ ford’s and Griffin’s divisions had already entered the woods north of the open space along the White Oak road. General Sheridan, who accompanied General Ayres’s divi¬ sion throughout the greater part of the battle, immediately upon its receiving the flank fire, sent orders to General Griffin and General Crawford to come in on Ayres’s right. After sending the orders mentioned, General Warren di¬ rected Colonel Kellogg to form his brigade (Crawford’s left) at right angles to its former direction, and to hold it there for the division to form on ; then he directed Coulter’s bri¬ gade (following in reserve) to form on Kellogg. Not finding General Crawford, for the wood was dense, General Warren sent renewed orders to him to change direction to the left, and keep closed on Kellogg in advancing against the rear of the enemy. Returning to Kellogg’s position, General War¬ ren found it vacant, for a staff officer of General Sheridan had endeavored to take it against the rear of the enemy. Every staff officer of General Warren had now been sent to bring Griffin and Crawford against the rear of Pickett’s in- THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 349 trencliments. Many of General Sheridan’s had been sent for the same purpose. The country was thickly wooded, and troops moving rapidly through it could not be readily over¬ taken, but the direction of both Griffin’s and Crawford’s di¬ visions had soon been changed to the left, for both entered the open ground of the Sydnor farm at its northern end about 800 yards from the enemy’s intrencliments near the return. There General Warren found General Griffin with his divi¬ sion, moving southwest against the rear of the enemy’s in- trenchments, and directed him to attack a body of the enemy’s infantry, composed of Ransom’s brigade and some of Wallace’s, that had formed a new line, with slight intrench- rnent connected with and at right angles to their main line of intrenchment, in order to oppose the further progress of the Fifth Corps, for General Ayres had by this time carried the return. Griffin at once set about doing what General Warren directed, but found the resistance stubborn ; the enemy’s fire was quick, sharp, decisive, and lasted about half an hour,1 though Griffin was finally successful. General Gwyn’s brigade of Ayres’s division, and Coulter’s of Craw¬ ford’s, joined him in the latter part of the encounter. While this was going on, General Warren rode to General Ayres, and found that he had carried the return and was re¬ forming his troops at right angles to the enemy’s intrench- ments. He now endeavored to find General Crawford, who had entered the Sydnor field before General Griffin, and had passed through it, driving General Munford’s division of 1 A singular circumstance connected with this battle is the fact that General Pickett was all this time, and until near the close of the action, on the north side of Hatcher’s Run, where he had heard no sound of the engagement, nor had he received any information concerning it. There was no Confederate commander on the field ; otherwise Terry’s (Mayo’s) brigade would probably have been brought into action with Ransom’s and Wallace’s brigades when General Ransom formed his new line, or earlier still, when Ayres was moving to attack the return. 350 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’61 AND ’65. dismounted cavalry westward before him Following in Crawford’s track from the Sydnor field, marked by his killed and wounded, General Warren found him in the Young- Boisseau farm (through which the Ford road runs) with his division in good order, facing west. Kellogg’s brigade had now joined its division. Changing the direction of the di¬ vision to the south, General Warren led it along the Ford road toward the rear of the enemy’s intrenchments, meeting at the edge of the wood, on the south side of the farm, a sharp fire from the enemy, who had formed a line across the Ford road. General Pickett finding his left had been captured, and that the Fifth Corps was moving westward along the line of his intrenchments, and coming in on his rear, had drawn Terry’s brigade (Colonel Mayo commanding) out of the in¬ trenchments between Corse and Steuart, and had brought them to this point to make head, if he could, against the rear attack. Some of Ransom’s force, just dislodged by Griffin from the southwest comer of the Sydnor field, joined Mayo. McGregor’s battery of four guns, that had been at the return with Ransom’s and Wallace’s brigades, was also here ; but the resistance was brief, and the four guns were captured. Part of Bartlett’s brigade joined Crawford in this field, but neither Griffin nor Ayres had yet reached this point. Colonel Mayo, finding that he could not withstand Crawford’s attack, fell back with a part of his brigade to¬ ward Corse, moving along the Fork road to the Five Forks battery, and along the intrenchments to Corse, when he was ordered by General Pickett to get across the country to the South Side Railroad, which he succeeded in doing, though in great disorder. The guns at the Five Forks battery were still in position, and part of Steuart’s brigade still held on when Mayo passed there. General Devin’s division, as previously stated, was formed THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 351 in front of the enemy’s intrenchments, with its left on the road from Dinwiddie Court House to Five Forks, and when the Fifth Corps moved to attack, it dismounted and advanced against the intrenchments, keeping up a constant fire upon them, and receiving in reply the fire of the infantry and of the three guns at the Five Forks battery. Custer’s division, on our left of the Five Forks battery, had but one brigade, Pennington’s, dismounted, which in open order kept up a constant fire upon the intrenchments held by Corse’s and Terry’s brigades. With his two other brigades General Custer made a charge upon General W. H. F. Lee’s right. One of Lee’s brigades was with Corse, dismounted. With the other General Lee advanced to meet Custer’s charge, when a brilliant encounter took place. Lee, how¬ ever, maintained his position on the right. When General Pickett saw that Mayo could not maintain himself upon the Ford road, he directed General Corse to form a line running along the west side of the Gilliam field at right angles to the main intrenchments, and extending into the woods north of it, so that the escape of the other infantry, the greater part of which was now pouring through the woods in complete disorder, could be in some measure covered. This was quickly effected, and a line of partial intrenchment prepared. Soon after Colonel Mayo passed the Five Forks battery, falling back upon Corse from the Young-Boisseau field, Colonel Fitzliugh’s brigade of Devin’s division charged the intrenchments and carried them, capturing the three guns, two battle -flags, and over a thousand of the enemy. General Warren, with Crawford’s division, pursuing the troops falling back toward Corse, came upon the Gilliam field, along the east side of which, in the edge of the woods, Crawford’s troops were formed, the right being north of the White Oak road in woods. There was some little hesitation 352 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. in Crawford’s line about advancing against the enemy’s in- trenchments on the west side of the field, from which a sharp fire was kept up, until Warren, riding forward with the Corps flag in his hands, led his troops across the field. Cus¬ ter, south of him, advanced at the same time, having sent him word by a staff-officer that he would do so. The fire close up was severe, but in a few minutes the intrencliment was carried and a large part of the force captured. It was now in the dusk of evening. General Warren says he continued the pur¬ suit west for half a mile, when no enemy being in sight, the command was halted. Some little skirmishing was still go¬ ing on in the woods north of the road, apparently with the enemy’s rear guard. General Custer passed General Warren at this time on his left hand. When General Pickett ordered General Corse to form his new line, he directed General W. H. F. Lee to withdraw from the field toward the South Side Railroad covering his dis¬ mounted brigade, which he effected along the W. Dabney Road, pressed close by Custer. The routed infantry moved in confusion through the woods. The pursuit by Griffin and Ayres was continued along the White Oak road until after dark, by which time the cavalry was out of sight and hearing of the infantry. When upon the Young-Boisseau farm, General Warren sent Colonel Spear to hold the Ford road crossing of Hatcher’s Run, where he became sharply engaged with Rosser’s cav¬ alry on the north side. General Mackenzie, moving on Crawford’s right, was pushed by his infantry to the right against Hatcher’s Run, which he crossed at one point, but the heavy firing being in a south or southwest direction from him he recrossed, and moving west came upon the Ford road north of the Young-Boisseau farm, which he had been directed to hold, and where his command remained. THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 353 When the battle began General Pickett and General Fitz Lee were on the north side of Hatcher’s Run. Owing to the density of the woods no sound of firing reached them, and when General Pickett was notified of the engagement going on he had barely time to ride rapidly down the Ford road to Five Forks, under the fire of General Crawford’s troops that were then close on the road approaching it. As soon as he got to his troops he ordered up Mayo’s brigade, as hereto¬ fore mentioned. Munford, after being driven across the Ford road, mounted his division and rode to the Confederate right, where he was ordered by General Pickett to witlidaw at once to the north side of Hatcher’s Run and join General Fitz Lee, who had been notified of the battle too late to cross to the south side of the run, Crawford’s troops having possession of the Ford road. General Sheridan’s success was complete. Pickett had been routed with a loss, according to the reports of the Fifth Corps and Cavalry, of not less than 4,500 prisoners, 13 colors, and 6 guns.1 His killed and wounded did not probably ex¬ ceed those of General Sheridan. The casualties of his cav¬ alry were not large. General Warren states that the Fifth Corps in this battle captured 3,244 men with their arms, 11 regimental colors, and 1 four-gun battery. The larger part of the prisoners were captured by Ayres’s and Griffin’s divisions. The corps 1 According to the statement furnished the Warren Court of Inquiry from the Adjutant-General’s Office, showing the number of Confederate prisoners captured at Five Forks, and as appeared from the records of military prisons on file in the Adjutant-General’s Office, the number was : Five Forks, April 1, 1865 . 2,063 Dinwiddie Court House, April 1, 1865 . 223 Hatcher’s Run, April 1, 1865 . 116 Five Forks, April 2, 1865 . 164 Dinwiddie Court House, April 2, 1865 . 33 Total . . 2,599 854 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. “lost in killed, wounded, and missing 634, of which 300 were in General Crawford’s division, 205 in General Ayres’s division, and 125 in General Griffin’s division.” Among the killed was General Fred. Wintlirop, commanding the First Brigade of Ayres’s division, who “was mortally wounded at the head of his command while making a successful as¬ sault.” The number of casualties in the cavalry was not large. I do not find it stated for this battle separate from the whole number in the campaign. The proportion of cavalry officers killed and wounded was large. Two divisions of the Fifth Corps were jmsted for the night across the White Oak road near Gravelly Run Church, and one on the Ford road. The cavalry were at and near Five Forks, except Mackenzie’s division, which remained at the Ford road crossing of Hatcher’s Run. General W. H. F. Lee’s and General Munford’s divisions after crossing Hatcher’s Run united with General Fitz Lee at the Ford road crossing of that stream, and their cavalry w7as then withdrawn to the South Side Railroad, where the Ford road crosses it. There they ’were joined during the night, first by Hunton’s brigade of Pickett’s division, then, later, by General Johnson writh Wise’s, Gracie’s, and Fulton’s brigades, all under the command of General R. H. Anderson. They marched by routes north of Hatcher’s Run. These troops were sent by General R. E. Lee to cover the collection of Pickett’s disorganized command, and wTitli it to take up a position at Sutherland Station, to close, if possible, that avenue of approach to Petersburg. With intrenchments, and some assistance from Longstreet, this might have been possible, but it was not possible for Lee to send sufficient troops to overmatch the force with General Sheridan, and at the same time maintain the Petersburg and Richmond lines. He had lost possession of the South Side THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 355 Railroad, but the Danville Railroad and its connections with the Lynchburg (or South Side) Railroad still remained, with the rolling stock of both roads, and it was rolling stock they most needed. So long as his intrencliments remained intact he might still defer his movement to Danville until the wagon-roads were passable. These troops sent to cover the reassembling of Pickett’s scattered forces were drawn from General Lee’s right at the Claiborne road crossing of Hatcher’s Run, where they had been concentrated on the 30th of March. Their withdrawal left in their intrenchments from the Claiborne road to Burgess’s mill on the south side of Hatcher’s Run, McGow¬ an’s, McRae’s, Scales’s, and Cook’s brigades of Hill’s corps. Pickett’s infantry, after wading across Hatcher’s Run, got into the W. Dabney road, and assembled in some shape near the South Side Railroad, when General Pickett moved them in the direction of Exeter mills at the mouth of Whip- ponock Creek, as he intended to cross the Appomattox there and rejoin the army, but early next morning he received orders to unite with General R. H. Anderson at Sutherland Station. It has always seemed to me to have been a grave mistake to require General Pickett to fight at Five Forks. There he was isolated. Had he moved at once with his infantry to Sutherland Station, when he fell back from Dinwiddie Court House, leaving his cavalry to maintain the crossings of Hat¬ cher’s Run as long as practicable, he could have been rein¬ forced from Lee’s right with the infantry sent to him in the night of the 1st of April, and with some of Longstreet’s force, and slight intrenchments extending on his right to the Ap¬ pomattox, and on his left to the Claiborne road crossing of Hatcher’s Run, he would have fought under conditions much more favorable to him. General Warren states that after the last of the enemy had 356 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’04 AND ’65. been captured at Five Forks, lie received at 7 p.m. an order from Major-General Sheridan relieving him from duty, and directing him to report for orders to Lieutenant-General Grant. This action of General Sheridan was taken under an authority sent him by General Grant some time in the morn¬ ing of the 1st of April, “ to relieve General Warren if, in his judgment, it was for the best interests of the service for him to do so.” 1 In his report of this battle, dated May 16, 1865, General Sheridan states that in bringing up and forming his corps at Gravelly Run Church, “ General Warren did not exert him¬ self to get up his corps as rapidly as he might have done, and his manner gave me the impression that he wished the sun to go down before dispositions for the attack 1 The circumstances under which this authority was sent are narrated by Capt. E. R. Warner, 3d U. S. Artillery, at the time of the battle on the staff of General Hunt, Chief of Artillery. He was sent by General Hunt on some artillery duty to the old headquarters camp of the Fifth Corps, on the morning of the 1st of April, where General Warren had, early in the morning, left several of his staff officers sleeping, among them Colonel Locke, Adjutant-General. Captain Warner was directed by General Rawlins to ascertain where the Fifth Corps was. Captain Warner saw Colonel Locke, and some other Fifth Corps staff officers, about nine o’clock, and in reply to his inquiry Colonel Locke told him that a portion of the Fifth Corps, when he last heard from them, had halted to bridge a stream (Gen¬ eral Warren had insisted upon his staff getting some sleep during the night, and this statement of Colonel Locke merely means that he went to sleep before the bridge was built, and slept until after General Warren and the staff officers, who had been up during the latter part of the night, had left the camp). Upon returning to Headquarters about ten o’clock, Captain Warner stated to General Rawlins that the Fifth Corps, or a portion of it, when last heard from, was delayed building a bridge, and that they were then still delayed. At times, during the campaign beginning in May, there had been misunder¬ standings between General Meade and General Warren, the latter sometimes modifying the plan of operations prescribed by the orders of the day for the Fifth Corps, so as to make them accord with his own judgment, as the day went on, modifications which General Meade sometimes did not approve, and hence some¬ thing like controversy grew up occasionally in the despatches that passed between them. It appears to be probable that General Grant apprehended that something of this kind might occur between -General Sheridan and General Warren, and considering the time to be a critical one, sent the message mentioned to General Sheridan. THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 357 could be completed.” Further he states: ‘‘During this attack [that of the Fifth Corps and the Cavalry upon Pickett’s intrenched position] I again became dissatisfied with General Warren. During the engagement portions of his lines gave way when not exposed to a heavy fire, and simply for want of confidence on the part of the troops, which General Warren did not exert himself to inspire. I there¬ fore relieved him from the command of the Fifth Corps, au¬ thority for the action having been sent to me, before the battle, unsolicited.” These are very grave accusations or imputations, and of such serious character that no officer could rest under them. Any officer against whom they were made would be entitled, whatever his rank might be, to an investigation of them be¬ fore a proper court. A Court of Inquiry was finally appointed by the President, after General Warren had repeatedly requested it. Before that court, which entered into an extended and minute in¬ vestigation of the circumstances attending the battle of Five Forks, many Confederate as well as United States officers en¬ gaged in the battle appeared. General Sheridan explained further to that court that, though his troops were victorious at Five Forks, they were isolated from the Army of the Potomac, and that the extreme left of that army had been thrown back to the Boydton road, while the enemy held strongly at the intersection of the White Oak and Claiborne roads, and directly in his rear, and distant from Five Forks only three and a half miles, and might march down the White Oak road that night or early the next morning, and take his command in rear ; that General Warren having disappointed him in the movement of his corps, and in its management in the battle, he deemed it to be for the best interests of the service to relieve him, and did so. (In point of fact, how¬ ever, the White Oak road, close to the enemy’s intrench- 358 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. ments at the intersection of the Claiborne road, was, by direction of Generals Grant and Meade, held strongly by the Second Corps at the time of the close of the battle of Five Forks. Still, General Sheridan’s force would have been ex¬ posed to attack if General Lee had had a sufficient number of troops to admit of it without abandoning his intrench- ments, which he had not.) Respecting the giving way of portions of General Warren’s troops, it appears from the testimony that the skirmish line of Ayres’s division, when it entered the woods north of the open ground on the north side of the White Oak road, fell back, lay down, and began to fire in the air, and that they were made to go forward by General Sheridan and General Ayres and their staff ; and it further appears that when Gen¬ eral Ayres changed front, General Gwyn’s brigade on his right, or part of it, fell into some disorder and confusion, which made General Sheridan doubt if he would be success¬ ful, and that this confusion was remedied by General Sheri¬ dan and General Ayres and their staff. But General Ayres in his testimony does not appear to have considered this disorder as serious. General Warren was at that time en¬ deavoring to rectify the position and direction of movement of Griffin’s and Crawford’s divisions. In such cases of dis¬ order or confusion, or want of steadiness and ardor, com¬ manders of very high rank usually act in accordance with their temperaments, whatever their command may be. The report and opinion of the court upon the first quoted imputation or accusation are as follows : Third Imputation. The third imputation is found in an extract from General Sheri¬ dan’s report of May 16, 1865 (see Record, pp. 21 and 48), as follows *. “ ... General Warren did not exert himself to get up his corps as rapidly as he might have done, and his manner gave me the THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 359 impression that he wished the sun to go down before dispositions for the attack could he completed.” On the afternoon of April 1st the Fifth Corps was massed as fol¬ lows : Crawford’s and Griffin’s divisions at the forks of the Crump road and the main road from Dinwiddie Court House to Five Forks, and Ayres’s division on the Brooke’s road, about one-fourth of a mile east from the forks of that road and the road to Five Forks. The distance from the position of Griffin and Crawford to the place of formation of the Fifth Corps, near Gravelly Run Church, was about two and a half miles, and the length of the corps, when spread out in column of route, would be about two and three-eighths miles. The last file of the column required as much time to reach the place of forma¬ tion as it would have taken to march about five miles. General Warren received his orders near Gravelly Run Church to move up his corps at 1 P.M., and it took some time to communicate those orders to the divisions and for the movement to begin. The route to the place of formation was along a narrow road, very muddy and slippery, somewhat encumbered with wagons and led horses of the Cavalry Corps, and the men were fatigued. The testi¬ mony of the brigade and division commanders is to the effect that the corps in line of march was well closed up, and that no unnecessary de¬ lay was incurred. The corps reached its destination, and was formed ready to advance against the enemy at 4 p.m. It is in evidence that General Warren remained near Gravelly Run Church, directing the formation, explaining the mode of attack to the division and brigade commanders, with sketches prepared for the pur¬ pose. General Warren also repeatedly sent out staff officers to the division commanders in order to expedite the march. Opinion. The Court is of the opinion that there was no unnecessary delay in this march of the Fifth Corps, and that General Warren took the usual methods of a corps commander to prevent delay. The question regarding General Warren’s manner appears to be too intangible and the evidence on it too contradictory for the Court to de¬ cide, separate from the context, that he appeared to wish “the sun to go down before dispositions for the attack could be completed ; ” but 360 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. his actions, as shown by the evidence, do not appear to have corre¬ sponded with such wish, if ever he entertained it.1 Respecting the second quoted imputation, the report and opinion of the Court are : Fourth Imputation. The fourth imputation is found in an extract from General Sheri¬ dan’s report of May 16, 1865 (see Record, pp. 22 and 48), as follows : “During this attack I again became dissatisfied with General Warren. During the engagement portions of his line gave way when not exposed to a heavy fire, and simply from want of confidence on the part of the troops, which General Warren did not exert himself to inspire.” When the Fifth Corps moved up to the attack, General Sheridan said to General Ayres, “I will ride with you.” General Warren was on the left of Crawford’s division, between Crawford and Ayres. When General Ayres’s command struck the White Oak road it re¬ ceived a fire in flank from the enemy’s “ return ” nearly at right angles to the road. He changed front immediately at right angles and faced the “return,” his right receiving a fire from Munford’s Confederate division of dismounted cavalry distributed along the edge of the woods to the north of the White Oak road. There was some confusion, which was immediately checked by the exertions of General Sheridan, General Ayres, and other officers. The evidence shows that General Warren was observant of Ayres, be¬ cause he sent orders to Winthrop’s reserve brigade to form on the left of Ayres’s new line. 1 Respecting the impression that General Warren’s manner made upon General Sheridan, it is to be said that General Sheridan knew but little of him. General Chamberlain, after the war Governor of Maine, who served in the Fifth Corps during all the time General Warren commanded it, says, in his evidence before the Court, that he noticed no apathy or indifference of manner in General Warren at the battle of Five Forks ; that he was not apathetic that morning, but ener¬ getic. He said further, that those who did not know General Warren’s tempera¬ ment might think him to be negative when he was deeply intent. Instead of showing excitement he generally showed an intense concentration, and those who did not know him might take his deep concentrated thought and purpose for apathy. A stranger looking at him and not seeing indications of excitement and resolution on his face, might judge him to be apathetic, when in fact that con¬ clusion might be far from the truth. THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. 361 This necessary change of front of Ayres increased the interval be¬ tween him and Crawford on his right ; the latter was marching without change of direction until, as he expressed it, he would clear the right of Ayres, when he was also to change front to the left. At this moment Warren, who saw that Crawford, with Griffin fol¬ lowing, was disappearing in the woods to the north of the White Oak road, sent a staff-officer to Griffin to come as quickly as he could to sustain Ayres ; went himself to the left brigade of Crawford and caused a line to be marked out, facing to the west, directing the brigade commander to form on it ; then went into the woods and gave orders to the right brigade of Crawford to form on the same line. When he re¬ turned to the open ground the brigade he had directed to change front had disappeared, as appears by the evidence, in consequence of orders given by an officer of General Sheridan’s staff. General Warren sent repeated orders by staff-officers to both Griffin and Crawford to change direction, and went himself to both ; and finally by these means cor¬ rected, as far as was possible under the circumstances, the divergence of these two divisions. It appears from evidence that these two divisions were operating in the woods and over a difficult country, and received a fire in their front from the dismounted cavalry of Munford posted in the woods to the north of the White Oak road, which led to the belief, for some time, that the enemy had a line of battle in front ; and this may furnish one reason why it was so difficult at first to change their direction to the proper one. Opinion. General Warren’s attention appears to have been drawn, almost im¬ mediately after Ayres received the flank fire from the “return” and his consequent change of front, to the probability of Crawford with Griffin diverging too much from and being separated from Ayres, ar.d by continuous exertions of himself and staff substantially remedied matters ; and the Court thinks that this was for him the essential point to be attended to, which also exacted his whole efforts to accomplish.1 These are the reports and opinions of a court composed of officers of high character and great exjierience, formed under the sanctity of an oath to examine and inquire into the mat- 1 Warren Court of Inquiry, Part II., pp. 1559-1561. XII.— 16 362 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. ter according to the evidence, without partiality, favor, affec¬ tion, prejudice, or hope of reward.

## petersburg-april-2

At half-past five in the afternoon of the 1st of April, Gen¬ eral Grant having learnt that General Sheridan was about to assault at Five Forks (at the time the staff officer carrying the information left General Sheridan’s command), directed that the left of the Second Corps should be thrown forward, so as to hold the White Oak road and prevent the enemy from sending any force against General Sheridan by that road. This was done at once, and the road was held strongly by Miles’s division. By nine o’clock General Grant had re¬ ceived intelligence of the defeat and rout of Pickett at Five Forks, and apprehending that General Lee might hastily abandon his lines and fall upon General Sheridan, ordered that. General Humphreys should at once feel for a vulnerable point in the enemy’s intrencliments, and, if one was found, to assault immediately, and if successful to push on at once after the enemy. If he could not carry their lines by mid¬ night, then he must send General Miles’s division to General Sheridan. The artillery of the corps was opened, and both Miles and Mott attacked at once, drove in the enemy’s pick¬ ets and got up close to the slashings of the intrencliments, but could not carry them. The enemy was vigilant and ac¬ tive, and opened heavily with his artillery. As the lines were not vulnerable, General Miles was sent down the White Oak road to General Sheridan shortly after midnight, com¬ munication with his cavalry along the road having been pre¬ viously opened. The left of Mott was then thrown back, but he kept up constant attacks throughout the night, both he and General Hays feeling the enemy closely and holding their divisions ready to take advantage of any weakening on liis part and assault. A general bombardment of the Con¬ federate lines was earned on throughout the night. General Ord, General Wright, and General Parke had, LEE’S INTRENCHMENTS CARRIED. 363 during the three days of their quiet, been carefully examin¬ ing the enemy’s works and ground in their front, and plan¬ ning and arranging for the assault which they were now or¬ dered to make at four o’clock in the morning of the 2d of April. Upon carrying the works they were to move toward Petersburg. The Second Corps was to be thrown forward in the same direction. General Sheridan was to start at day¬ light and sweep up the White Oak road and all north of it to Petersburg. The Confederate intrenchments in front of General Ord’s and General Wright’s commands were held by four brigades of Hill’s corps, under the command of General Wilcox, Da¬ vis’s, McComb’s, Lane’s, and Thomas’s, numbering, accord¬ ing to the return of February 20tli, about 4,000 enlisted men. The intrenchments in front of General Parke’s command were held by General Gordon’s corps, numbering, according to the same return, about 7,600 enlisted men. The account that General Wright gives of his assault on the morning of the 2d of April, by which the enemy’s in¬ trenchments were carried and General Lee forced to abandon t his lines, is so clear and so instructive that I shall use his own language in the narrative as far as I can. He says : As early as the evening of the 30th of March he was in¬ structed to be prepared to assault the enemy’s works in his front. On the evening of the 1st of April he was directed to make the attack at 4 a.m. next day. The works to be at¬ tacked were those extending from the Jones house to a point opposite the left of the Sixth Corps. The point chosen for assault was selected after the most careful consideration, based upon personal examination and the reports of a large number of officers who had scanned the works for a long time. It was in front of Forts Fisher and Welch. The ground to be passed over was perfectly cleared of trees, and offered few natural obstacles except the 364 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. marshes with which the front of the enemy’s line was inter¬ sected. The point was near the left of the corps line ; on its right was an inundation which was impracticable, while still further to the right, before reaching the Ninth Corps, were the strong original defensive works, in the vicinity of the Lead Works ; after-observation showed that the selection was the best that could have been made. The parapets had high relief and deep ditches, preceded (it wTas found) by two lines of abatis, well constructed, with a fraise between them. Every few hundred yards were batteries well supplied with artillery. But for the capture of the enemy’s intrenched picket line on the 25th of March, the attack of the 2d of April could not have succeeded. The position then gained was indispensable to the operations on the main lines, by af¬ fording a place for assembling the assaulting columns within striking distance of the enemy’s main intrenchments. The troops were drawn out of the intrenchments, leaving the smallest garrison possible in the forts and very few men in the connecting lines. The three divisions were formed for the assault just in rear of the picket line ; the First Division on the right ; the Second in the centre ; the Third on the left ; the centre division being in advance of the others. All were formed by brigade with regiment-front. Every pre¬ caution was taken to ensure success. There were pioneers in front, and artillerymen provided with implements so that captured guns might be turned on the enemy were with the columns. Careful instructions were given to guide the movement of the troops when they captured the works. There wras not light enough to see until 4.40 a.m.; then the men could see to step, though nothing could be distinguished at the distance of a few yards. Then the signal, the firing of a gun at Fort Fisher, was given. The columns moved promjfily at the sig¬ nal, broke over the enemy’s picket line, meeting little resist- LEE’S RETRENCHMENTS CARRIED. 365 ance, and poured in masses over the main defenses, under a musketry fire from the parapets and a heavy artillery fire from the batteries. Abatis were cut away, and through the open¬ ings thus made, and through those made by the enemy for his convenience of access to the front , the works were gained. A brief but sharp conflict occurred, which soon resulted in giv¬ ing us possession of the whole front of attack.1 In the ardor of the attack some troops from each division crossed the Boydton road and reached the South Side Railroad.2 Re¬ forming the lines, the troops moved down the works to Hatcher’s Run, capturing all the artillery and a very large number of prisoners. A brigade of the Sixth Corps was left to hold the captured works and gain more to the right, which it did, but it was temporarily unable to hold a part of those gained against an attempt to recover them made by General Wilcox, until reinforced by Foster’s division and two brigades of Turner’s division of General Gibbon’s corps. About 7 a.m. Harris’s brigade of Turner’s division carried the enemy’s line near Hatcher’s Run, and met the Sixth Corps there sweeping everything before it. On reaching Hatcher’s Run the Sixth Corps faced about and moved toward Petersburg. At the request of General Gibbon, commanding the Twenty-fourth Corps, he was allowed to pass the Sixth, which followed on his right and left, and halted in front of the enemy’s lines, closing on the Appomattox near the Whitworth house. General Wright’s troops were so exhausted, having been eighteen hours under arms, that it was considered unad- visable to attack until the next morning. 1 General Wright told me that this was the weakest part of all the line he saw, and the only point where it could have been carried. His loss in killed and wounded was 1,100, all of which occurred in the space of fifteen minutes. — A. A. H. 2 It is probable that General A. P. Hill was killed by one of these parties. He was shot west of the Boydton Road early in the action of the day. He had served with distinction in the Army of Northern Virginia from the beginning of the war. 366 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. General Parke kept np the fire of all his artillery until I a.m. of the 2d of April, reopening it at four o’clock, when General Willcox made a demonstration against the enemy’s works opposite Fort Stedman. For the assault General Parke concentrated Hartranft’s division on the right of Fort Sedgwick, and massed Potter’s on its left. The columns of assault (columns of regiments) were formed between his intrenchments and his picket line at 3 a.m., storming pioneer parties, carrying axes, being placed in front. At half-past four o’clock the assaulting columns went forward ; the pioneers cut awTay abatis and chevaux-de-frise, and under a heavy musketry, gun, and mortar fire the enemy’s works were captured, with 12 guns, some colors, and 800 prisoners. Turning to the right, Mil¬ ler’s salient was captured ; turning to the left, the intrench- ment was found to be heavily traversed, and the fighting went on from traverse to traverse. But a rear line of works remained in possession of the enemy, which General Parke endeavored to carry, but unsuc¬ cessfully. His loss in officers was severe. Among the wounded was General Potter. The position gained by General Parke extended 400 yards on each side of the Jerusalem plank-road, and included several forts and redans. Frequent attempts were made by General Gordon during the day to retake the works, but without success. The firing continued all day and into the night.

## sutherland-station

During the night of the 1st and 2d of April, General Humphreys was directed not to attack the Crow house re¬ doubts in consequence of the absence of one of his divisions, but about 6 a.m., being informed by General Meade that both Generals Parke and Wright had carried and held positions of the enemy’s lines, General Humphreys directed General Hays to assault the redoubts, preparations for which had LEE’S INTRENCHMENT8 CARRIED. 367 been made in the night. The attack was successful, the works, their artillery, and the greater part of the garrison being captured. About half-past seven General Mott cap¬ tured the intrenched picket line at the Burgess’s mill works under severe artillery and musketry fire, and about} half-past eight the enemy were moving rapidly out of their intrench- ments by their right flank, attacked sharply by Mott. At nine o’clock, receiving intelligence from General Miles that he was on his return, being, when he sent word, on the White Oak road about two miles west of the enemy’s' intrencli- ments at the Claiborne road junction, General Humphreys directed General Miles, General Mott, and General Hays to pursue the enemy by the Claiborne road toward Sutherland Station. He expected by this movement to close in on the rear of all the enemy’s force, which General Wright, by penetrating their works, had cut off from Petersburg, while General Sheridan would probably strike their flank and front. This force consisted of McGowan’s, McRae’s, Scales’s, and Cook’s brigades of Hill’s corps under General Heth, and An¬ derson’s command, consisting of Johnson’s and Pickett’s di¬ visions and Fitz Lee’s cavalrv. General Meade was at once advised of this, as it was not in accordance with his orders, and as he did not approve of this movement the orders to the division commanders were changed. Mott and Hays were ordered to move on the Boydton road toward Petersburg and connect on the right with General Wright, and Miles to move toward Petersburg by the first road met after crossing Hatcher’s Run. Overtaking Miles’s division near Sutherland Station on the South Side Railroad, General Humphreys found that it had just come up with the brigades under General Heth, which were forced to halt and give battle. General Heth selected a position foy them on the summit of a smooth open ridge, at the foot of which, some six or eight hundred yards in front 368 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. of the crest, was a small stream. The ground then rose again to the same height, the slope being covered with oak and pine wood. The Confederate position was intrenched hastily as well as time admitted. Finding that General Miles was satisfied that he could defeat the force before him, General Humphreys left him to accomplish it and rejoined his two other divisions, that in the meantime were moving toward Petersburg, in front of which they were formed on the left of Wright. As soon ’as General Miles examined the position of General Cook, who now commanded the force opposed to him (Gen¬ eral Hetli having been called to Petersburg to take command of Hill’s corps), he attacked impetuously with the brigades of Nugent and Madill, and was repulsed, Madill being severely wounded. About half-past twelve General Miles attacked the Con¬ federate left with Madill’s brigade, General McDougall com¬ manding, but notwithstanding the gallant manner in which the attack was made, aided by the artillery of the division, it was repulsed, General McDougall being among the wounded. About three o’clock General Miles, having enveloped the enemy’s right with a strong skirmish line, attacked his left with Ramsey’s brigade with complete success, sweeping down inside the breastworks, capturing 600 . prisoners, one battle- flag, and two guns. The enemy retreated in confusion toward the Appomattox, some crossing to the north side at Exeter mills ; but the body of them moved up the river in disorder toward Amelia Court House, where they arrived at noon of the 4th. About half-past two General Meade, having learned that General Miles needed support, directed General Humphreys to take one of his divisions toward Sutherland Station for that purpose. Arriving there by the Coxe road, General Hum- •d phreys found that General Miles’s last attack had been com- LEE’S ENTRENCHMENTS CARRIED. 369 pletely successful. Probably the whole force would have been captured in the morning had the Second Corps con¬ tinued its march toward Sutherland Station.

## fort-gregg-and-evacuation

The main line of the Confederate intrenchments closing upon the Appomattox west of Petersburg ran along the east bank of Old Town or Indian Town Creek. In front of this line on the opposite side of the creek, about 1,000 yards dis¬ tant, were some advanced works, the most important of which were F orts Gregg and Whitworth, the former enclosed at the rear with a ditch eight or ten feet deep, of about the same width, and the parapet of corresponding height and thick¬ ness. Fort Whitworth was of similar dimensions, but open at the gorge. Field’s division of Longstreet’s corps, two brigades of Gor¬ don’s, and some of Wilcox’s troops were placed in the main line of works. General Wilcox says, the 200 infantry in Fort Gregg was composed of detachments from Thomas’s and Lane’s brigades of Hill’s corps, and Harris’s of Gordon’s corps. There were two guns in Gregg, three in Whitworth ; General Harris’s brigade formed the garrison of the latter work. As soon as General Ord’s and General Wright’s commands arrived before these works, Foster’s division of Gibbon’s Corps was ordered to charge them, and moved forward steadily under artillery and musketry fire, to find Fort Gregg surrounded by a deep, wide ditch partially filled with water, and flanked by fire on the right and left. Turner’s First and Second brigades were now pushed up as supports, while his Third Brigade, General Harris’s, assailed Fort Whitworth. The enemy, General Gibbon says, made a desperate resis¬ tance, and it was not until Fort Gregg was nearly surrounded, and his men had succeeded in climbing upon the parapet under a murderous fire, that the place was finally taken by the last of several determined dashes with the bayonet. General Harris and a portion of the First Division, he says, 16* 370 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND '65. carried Fort Whitworth at the same time. General Wilcox says the troops were ordered to retire from this work to pre¬ vent further sacrifice. General Gibbon says, of the assault upon Fort Gregg, that it was one of the most desperate of the war, that fifty-five of the enemy were found dead inside the fort, whilst his own loss during the day, most of which occurred around these two works, was 10 officers and 112 enlisted men killed, and 27 officers and 565 enlisted men wounded, making a total loss of 714. Two guns (in Fort Gregg), several colors, and about 300 officers and men were captured. When the Confederate lines were carried, General Ander¬ son was directed to move up along the Appomattox River toward Amelia Court House, on the road to which he was joined by such force as General Pickett had, and by the troops of Hill’s corps under General Cook. His rear was covered by General Fitz Lee. General Sheridan’s cavalry, General Merrit leading, moved northward, crossing the South Side Railroad midway between Ford’s and Sutherland’s depots, near Ford’s Meeting House, pushing the enemy’s cavalry, who resisted their advance up to the crossing of Namozine Creek, where, General Merritt says, a spirited fight took place with the enemy’s infantry. General Sheridan moved the Fifth Corps up the White Oak road two miles toward the Claiborne road, when it re¬ turned to Five Forks and moved across Hatcher’s Run on the Ford road, and across the South Side Railroad to the Coxe road, driving out of the way some dismounted cavalry, then moved eastward along the Coxe road toward Suther¬ land Station, but turned off on the Namozine road, and halted for the night near Williamson’s, at the intersection of the Namozine by the River road. General Crawford’s divi¬ sion was sent forward to General Merritt at the crossing of Namozine Creek. LEE RETREATS TOWARD DANVILLE. 371 "When the Confederate intrencliments were carried by the Sixth Corps on the morning of the 2d, General Lee at once notified Mr. Jefferson Davis that he would be compelled to abandon his lines during the following night, and that he would endeavor to reach Danville. Mr. Davis at once took measures to withdraw the personnel and the archives of the Confederate Government from Richmond by the Danville Railroad. 1 At three o’clock in the afternoon, General Lee gave the final orders for the retreat, which commenced at eight o’clock, at night, the artillery preceding the infantry, the wagon trains keeping as much as possible upon roads where there were to be no troops. The trains and troops crossed to the north side of the Appomattox by the ponton, Pocahontas and rail¬ road bridges. The point of assemblage was Amelia Court House. General Longstreet, with Field’s division, and Heth’s and Wilcox’s divisions of Hill’s corps, led the column, moving on the River road, intending to recross the river at Bevil’s bridge, but that being out of order, used the ponton bridge laid at Goode’s bridge. General Gordon, taking the Hickory road, recrossed the Appomattox at Goode’s bridge, following Longstreet, and Mahone’s division, passing through Chesterfield Court House, also crossed at Goode’s bridge, following Gordon. General Ewell’s command, composed of General Kershaw’s and General Custis Lee’s divisions, crossed the James River at and below Richmond, and taking the Genito road, fol¬ lowed by Gary’s cavalry, crossed the Appomattox by the Danville Railroad bridge. The larger part of General An¬ derson’s command, composed of Pickett’s and Bushrod John¬ son’s divisions, moved up along the south bank of the 1 Had General Lee abandoned his lines on the night of the 1st of April to at¬ tack General Sheridan, there would have been only six or seven hours of night for this withdrawal, too short a time to effect it. They now had twenty hours. 372 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. • Appomattox, General Fitz Lee, with his cavalry, bringing np the rear. Orders were given by General Grant for the assault of the Petersburg and Richmond lines early on the morning of the 3d, but at three o’clock in the morning it was discovered that General Lee had abandoned all his intrenchments. Peters¬ burg was taken possession of by General Willcox with his division, his troops and those at City Point being placed under the command of General "Warren. The formal surrender of Richmond was made to General Weitzel at the City Hall, at 8.15 a.m.1 1 The United States flag was raised on the Capitol at Richmond by Lieutenant Johnston L. de Peyster, and Captain Loomis L. Langdon, U. S. Artillery, Chief of Artillery, both of General Weitzel’s staff. The former, the son cf Major- General J. Watts de Peyster, a youth of eighteen, had carried the flag upon the pommel of his saddle, with this object in view, for several days, expecting to assault.

## namozine-and-amelia-springs

It was well understood that General Lee would move either to Danville or to Lynchburg, and General Grant’s directions for the march of the armies were such as to intercept his re¬ treat, whichever route he might take. General Sheridan, with his cavalry and the Fifth Corps were to move in a west¬ erly direction, south of and near to the Appomattox River, so as to feel Lee’s army constantly, and at the same time to strike the Danville Railroad between its crossing of the Appo¬ mattox and its crossing of the Lynchburg Railroad at Burke’s Junction. General Meade, with the Second and Sixth Corps, was to follow General Sheridan, moving westward in the gen¬ eral direction of Amelia Old Court House, with similar gen¬ eral objects in view. General Ord, with the Twenty-fourth Corps and Birney’s colored troops, followed by the Ninth Corps, was to move along the South Side Railroad to Burke’s Junction. 374 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. The pursuit of Lee was taken up early on the 3d, the lead¬ ing brigade of Custer’s division, commanded by Colonel Welles, overtaking near Namozine Church the rear of Fitz Lee’s cavalry, Barringer’s brigade, which suffered severely in the contest, the commander and many others being cap¬ tured. At Deep Creek General Fitz Lee placed his com¬ mand in a strong defensive position, Wise’s and Hunton’s brigades forming part of the rear guard. A sharp engage¬ ment took place about dark, Merritt’s troops attacking. The cavalry halted here for the night, the Fifth, Second, and Sixth Corps well closed up. General Sheridan having ascertained that General Lee was probably concentrating at Amelia Court House, ordered Gen¬ eral Crook, on the 4th, to strike the Danville Railroad be¬ tween Burke’s Junction and Jetersville, and then move to¬ ward the latter place, and General Griffin to march direct to Jetersville. Both commands reached there late in the after¬ noon, when General Sheridan learnt that General Lee’s army was at Amelia Court House, about eight miles northeast from Jetersville. General Mackenzie’s division at the same time had got to within a few miles of the Court House, on the south approach to it. The Fifth Corps intrenched so as to hold the position until Meade’s troops could be got up. Gen¬ eral Sheridan at once sent the information he had obtained to General Meade and General Grant. The Second and Sixth Corps had followed the Fifth Corps closely until about eleven o’clock in the morning of the 4th, when Merritt’s cavalry, coming in from the right, and having precedence necessarily delayed the progress of the infantry, so that it was night by the time it reached Deep Creek. General Meade, upon receiving the information sent him by General Sheridan, directed the Second Corps to march for Jetersville at one o’clock in the morning of the 5th and the Sixth Corps to follow ; but a short distance beyond LEE AT AMELIA COURT HOUSE. 375 Deep Creek, General Merritt's cavalry, which had been to the vicinity of Bevil’s bridge, on the Appomattox, again came into the road from the right on its way to Jetersville, so that it was lialf-past two in the afternoon of the 5th, when the Second Corps began to arrive at Jetersville, followed by the Sixth Corps. Both went into position, the Second Corps on the left, the Sixth on the right of the Fifth Corps.1 But, in fact, Lee’s army was not concentrated at Amelia Court House by the night of the 4th. Longstreet’s com¬ mand was there on the afternoon of the 4th ; Gordon’s, if not there, was not more than four or five miles distant. Ma- hone’s division was near Goode’s bridge, ten or twelve miles off. Ewell’s command did not arrive at the Court House be¬ fore midday of the 5th.2 Anderson’s command, the rear brought up by Fitz Lee’s cavalry, arrived on the morning of the 5th. General Mahone’s division was now assigned to General Longstreet’s command. General Ewell retained the troops that had marched with him, the Navy battalion com¬ manded by Commodore Tucker being attached to General Custis Lee’s division. General Anderson retained Pickett’s and Bushrod Johnson’s divisions, and General Gordon his own corps. Rations were obtained here by a part of Lee’s army, but some of his troops were already suffering for the want of food, want of sleep, and from excessive fatigue. The roads were very heavy owing to the copious rains, *and in fact were nearly impassable for wagon trains. On the 5th General Lee sent forward his spare artillery (under General Lindsey Walker) and his trains by roads on 1 Large working parties from the Second and Sixth Corps were at work on th& * roads during the 3d, 4th, and 5th, for they were nearly impassable for wagon trains. 2 Custis Lee’s division had its subsistence and baggage wagons destroyed by Mackenzie. 376 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. tlie right flank of those his troops would take in moving toward Danville, or Lynchburg, and in the afternoon ad¬ vanced toward Jetersville, with a view to attacking if no heavy force of infantry had reinforced Sheridan’s command ; but his cavalry, General W. H. F. Lee’s division, advising him that Sheridan had been heavily reinforced, he turned his column northward toward a bridge across Flat Creek, some five miles from the position now held by Sheridan and Meade in force. Flat Creek, a tributary of the Appomattox, is eighty or one hundred feet wide, and so deep (in its shal¬ lowest places coming up to the armpits of infantry) that bridges are essential to its passage by an army. Just after sunset the head of Lee’s column, Longstreet’s corps, had crossed the creek, and had arrived at Amelia Sulphur Springs, which is on the creek near the bridge over that stream on the road from the springs to Jetersville. General Lee still hoped, by a well-conducted night march westward, to get so far in advance that he might certainly reach Lynch¬ burg by passing through Deatonsville, Lice’s Station, and Farmville, and possibly might reach Danville. On the morning of the 5th General Sheridan sent General Davies’s brigade of Crook’s division to make a reconnoissance to Paine’s Cross-Roads (Paineville), about five miles north of Amelia Springs, to ascertain if the enemy were making any movement toward that flank to escape. At Paineville Davies found a wagon train moving westward, escorted by Gary’s cavalry brigade ; it attacked, drove off the escort (taking some prisoners), burned the wagons, and captured five pieces of artillery, probably part of those in General Walker’s charge. It is said that the papers of General Robert L. Lee’s Headquarters, containing many valuable reports, copies of but few of which are now to be found, were destroyed by the burning of these 'wagons. General Fitz Lee says that his own Headquarters’ wagons were LEE CONTINUES TO RETREAT. 377 among those destroyed. General Fitz Lee, with Mnnford’s and Rosser’s divisions, was sent against Davies, whom he followed closely, attacking him at Amelia Springs about sunset, just before he recrossed Flat Creek, by which time he was supported by General Crook, with Gregg’s and Smith’s brigades.

## sailors-creek-and-rices-station

The march of the army of Northern Virginia was continued throughout the night, the head of Longstreet’s column ar¬ riving at Rice’s Station, on the Lynchburg Railroad, about sunrise of the 6th, where it was joined by General Lee in the course of the morning. There Longstreet was to wait the coming up of the rest of Lee’s army. Anderson followed Longstreet, Ewell, Anderson. Ewell was at Amelia Springs about eight o’clock in the morning. Gordon formed the rear guard. At daylight of the 6th, Fitz Lee with his cavalry, which had halted for the night at Amelia Springs, marched toward Rice’s Station, where he joined Longstreet. The trains, which were long, kept on the roads on the right flank of the troops and were to cross Sailor’s Creek at Perkinson’s mill, near its mouth in the Appomattox. The troops were to cross it two or three miles higher up, on the road to Rice’s Station. The bridges over Flat Creek, by which Lee’s troops and trains crossed, as well as that at Amelia Springs, were destroyed. At eight o’clock on the night of the 5th, General Meade, in his despatch to General Grant, who had not yet arrived at Jeters ville, informed him that as the Sixth Corps could not get up until about six o’clock, he was unable to attack that night, but that he would attack Lee at six o’clock on the morning of the 6th with the Second, Fifth, and Sixth Corps, in conjunction with General Sheridan. In accordance with that despatch, he directed those corps to advance the next morning at that hour on the enemy at Amelia Court House, and attack him, the Fifth Corps to move along the rail- 378 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. road, the Second Corps on its left, the Sixth Corps on its right. General Ord, with Gibbon’s Twenty-fourth Corps troops, arrived at Burke’s Junction late at night on the 5th, having marched fifty-two miles since the morning of the 3d. Bir- ney’s colored troops were left at Blacks and Whites Station. On the evening of the 5th, General Ord learned from General Sheridan that he was at Jetersville with his cavalry and the Fifth Corps, and that Lee’s army was at Amelia Court House. Before arriving at Burke’s Junction, General Ord received directions from General Grant to destroy High Bridge and the other bridges in Lee’s front, in order to interrupt his movement toward Danville or Lynchburg. Before daylight of the 6th, General Ord sent two small regiments of infantry, together only 500 strong, and his Headquarters cavalry, 80 in number, under Colonel Washburn, of the Fifth Massachu¬ setts, General Theodore Read of his staff conducting the party, to burn High Bridge and the bridges at Farmville, if not too well guarded. On the morning of the 6th General Meade began to ad¬ vance toward Amelia Court House, but at half-past eight, when the troops were about four miles out, General Hum¬ phreys discovered a strong column of the enemy’s infantry on the north bank of Flat Creek, moving westward (a part of the column had already entered the woods in their front), and directing General Mott to send a brigade across the creek, to attack and develop the force, halted the rest of his com¬ mand, communicated the information to General Meade, and began preparations to cross the creek. General Miles mean¬ while brought some guns to the bank of the creek and opened upon the column. This, even if not effective (which it was), would give notice that the enemy had been come up with. Axrparently it was the rear of Lee’s army. A short time before this took x>lace, Meade’s signal officers LEE ATTACKED OK THE MARCH. 379 had discovered trains several miles distant in a northwest direction near Deatonsville, with cavalry escorting them, moving west. General Griffin, at Hill’s Shop, received un¬ doubted information that Lee had left Amelia Court House and had moved west. At half-past nine General Meade’s signal officers discovered an infantry column three or four miles distant in a straight line, in a northwest direction, and another six or seven miles distant, both moving quickly. All this information left no doubt that General Lee had been passing our left during the night, and General Meade at once faced his army about, and directed the Second Corps to move on Deatonsville, the Fifth Corps through Paineville on the right of the Second, and the Sixth Corps to move through Jetersville and take position on the left of the Second. The Second Corps at once began crossing Flat Creek, some of the troops wading across with the water up to their arm- pits, while bridges were built in an incredibly short space of time for the passage of the rest of the infantry and of the artillery and ambulances. A sharp running fight commenced at once with Gordon’s corps, which was continued over a distance of fourteen miles, during wThich several partially intrenched positions were car¬ ried. The country was broken, consisting of woods with dense undergrowth and swamps, alternating with open fields, through and over which the lines of battle followed closely on the skirmish line, with a rapidity and good order that is believed to be unexampled. Artillery moved with our skirmish line. General Anderson halted some time in the morning at a poidt about three miles west of Deatonsville, at J. Hott’s house, where the road from Deatonsville forks, one branch turning abruptly to the right and running down Sailor’s Creek at about a mile’s distance from it ; the other branch of the fork is the road to Bice’s Station, and does not change 380 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. its direction. The ground at this fork is high, declining in an even slope of clear ground to Sailor’s Creek, about a mile off. Early on the morning of the 6th, General Sheridan directed General Crook to move to Deatonsville, and General Merritt to follow him. Moving on the Pride’s Church road, General Crook ascertained that the enemy were passing through Deatonsville, their trains on the Jamestown road. These he endeavored, about midday, to cut off at the forks of the road near Hott’s, but found them strongly guarded by Anderson, who repelled the attempt. The head of Ewell’s troops was about a mile in rear of Anderson at this time, coming up, and after its arrival took part in repulsing a second attempt of Crook, aided by Merritt, upon the trains at this point. Pickett had crossed Sailor’s Creek, and when the head of Gordon’s corps began to arrive at the forks of the road, An¬ derson crossed the creek with Johnson’s division, and, with Pickett, formed across the road to Rice’s Station on high ground, where they made some temporary breastworks. Ewell followed Anderson across the creek, halting upon it. General Merritt and General Crook moved parallel with the enemy’s line of march, on its left flank, impeding the movement of the column wherever practicable, and crossing Sailor’s Creek. General Custer, when south of the creek, succeeded in striking the column at a weak point, destroying a large number of wagons and capturing Huger’s part of three batteries (12 guns). Stagg’s brigade of Devin’s division remained near the forks of the road and subsequently united with the Sixth Corps in its attack on Ewell. Gordon, after the passage of the main trains of Lee’s army, took the right- hand fork, covering them, the Second Corps close upon him. Upon arriving at the forks near Hott’s at about half-past four o’clock, General Humphreys perceived Ewell’s troops, or part of them, apparently forming line of battle along the BATTLES OF SAILOR’S CREEK. 381 north side of Sailor’s Creek. They appeared to be about two brigades strong. Knowing that General Sheridan’s cavalry were close upon the enemy on the Rice’s Station road, though not aware that Anderson’s command was across that road on the crest beyond Ewell, and seeing the whole of the Sixth Corps near at hand (a brigade of Seymour’s division was tem¬ porarily mixed with the Second Corps near Hott’s), General Humphreys continued his pursuit of Gordon’s corps, which had turned down the creek on the right-hand fork of the road. The running contest with Gordon’s corps continued for three miles further, the road for many miles being strewn with tents, camp equipage, baggage, battery-forges, limbers, and wagons. Its last attempted stand was near Perkinson’s mills on Sailor’s Creek, where just before dark a short, sharp contest gave us 13 flags, 3 guns, several hundred prisoners, and a large part of the main trains of Lee’s army, which were huddled together in a confused mass at the crossing of the creek. Gordon attempted to form on the high ground on the opposite side of the creek, but fell back quickly from it as our troops crossed. Night put a stop to the pursuit until daylight of the 7th, for the country and roads were unknown to us. General Gordon reached High Bridge that night. The captures of the corps were 13 flags, 4 guns, and 1,700 prisoners. The enemy’s killed and wounded prob¬ ably exceeded our own, and their total loss could not have been less than 2,000. The destruction of the wagon trains must have caused much additional suffering in Lee’s army. Our own killed and wounded were 311 of the First and Second divisions, General Mott being among the wounded. When at the Amelia Springs in the morning General Humphreys was informed that there was a column of the enemy moving along the Paineville road, and therefore directed General Barlow, who commanded the Second Div¬ ision (having just reported for duty in the morning), to 382 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF *64 AND ’65. move on the extreme right of the corps ; hut the informa¬ tion having been altogether erroneous, that division did not become engaged. The Fifth Corps, forming the right of the army, moved on the Paineville road to Ligontown Ferry, a distance of thirty-two miles, but encountered none of the enemy. General Crook moving to the left found General Andersbn strongly posted on high ground with temporary breastworks running across the Rice’s Station road, and sent Gregg, dismounted, to take possession of and form across the road. General Smith, his brigade dismounted, formed on Gregg’s right ; Davies, mounted, was formed in front of Anderson’s works. General Merritt formed Devin and Custer on the right of Crook. As soon as Seymour’s and Wheaton’s divisions of the Sixth Corps arrived, General Wright formed them for attack on the north side of Sailor’s Creek, on the open slope de¬ scending from Hott’s to the creek, Seymour’s division on the right of the road, his left resting on it, Wheaton’s divi¬ sion on Seymour’s left. Wright’s artillery at short distance opened with a destructive tire without receiving any response from Ewell, showing that he had no artillery with him, which in fact neither he nor Anderson had. General Ewell had formed his troops in a good position some little distance from the creek on a crest, in front of which was a thicket of young pines, beyond* or in front of which was the creek. Facing north to meet the Sixth Corps, General Kershaw was on the right of the road, General Cus- tis Lee on the left. The Navy battalion was in rear of his right as a reserve. When General Ewell learnt from General Anderson that the cavalry held the road in his front, he proposed that they should strike through the woods to their right and reach a road further west that led to Farmville, or unite and attack BATTLES OF SAILOR’S CREEK. 383 tlie cavalry in Anderson’s front ; but before they could ar¬ range for either attempt the Sixth Corps was forming close to them. Seymour’s and Wheaton’s divisions now charged Ewell’s position and carried it handsomely, except, General Wright says, at a point on the right of the road, where the Navy battalion made a countercharge upon that part of his line. These troops, he says, were surrounded by Seymour’s and Wheaton’s divisions on their flanks, the artillery, sup¬ ported by Getty’s division, in their front, and the cavalry in their rear ; he had ceased firing supposing them to be prisoners, but at once opened again the artillery and infantry fire upon them, when they surrendered. General Stagg with his brigade of cavalry, directed by General Sheridan, struck Ewell’s right flank. As soon as General Wright’s artillery was in position, Gen¬ eral Sheridan ordered General Crook and General Merritt to attack, when a general assault was made by them, Crook’s two dismounted brigades on the left turning and going over Anderson’s works, while Davies, General Crook says, ‘ ‘ made one of the finest charges of the wTar, riding over and captur¬ ing the works and their defenders. The enemy on the right who were thus cut off from retreat surrendered, and were taken by different parties.” General Ewell says that he held on until Anderson was broken, and until the Sixth Corps line came round his left and indeed was already in his rear, his right also completely enveloped, when he surrendered. The whole of Ewell’s com¬ mand was either killed, wounded, or captured, except 250 of Kershaw’s division. According to the most reliable information I have been able to obtain, General Ewell had about 3,600 men on the ground, General Anderson about 6,300, making a total force of about 10,000. General Ewell lost about 3,400, General Anderson about 2,600, making the total loss of both com- 384 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. mands about 6,000 in killed, wounded, and prisoners. Among tlie prisoners were Generals Ewell, Kershaw, Custis Lee, and Dubose, of Ewell’s command, and Generals Hunton and Corse, of Pickett’s division.1 The total loss to Lee’s army to-day in its actions with the Cavalry and Sixth Corps and with the Second Corps was not less than 8,000. I have no means of stating the number of the killed and wounded in the Cavalry. The loss of the Sixth Corps in killed and wounded was 442. General Devin advanced with his cavalry as far as one of the main branches of Sailor’s Creek, where he halted for the night. Malione’s division was on the opposite bank, having been sent back by General Longstreet from Rice’s Station to cover the escape of the fugitives. 1 General Ewell states that his command numbered only about 3.000, having lost half its numbers since leaving Richmond by the fatigue of four days’ and nights’ almost constant marching, the last two days with nothing to eat. General Kershaw states that he had 2,000 men on the ground. General Custis Lee's troops being unaccustomed to marching or the hardships of the field, un¬ doubtedly suffered much more than General Kershaw’s. It appears probable, according to a paper of Captain McHenry Howard, of Gen¬ eral Custis Lee’s staff, published in the Southern Historical Society Transactions, 1874-75, that he had about 1,000 men on the ground ; 250 of Kershaw’s escaped capture and formed a battalion. The loss of Ewell according to these figures was about 3,400. General Bushrod Johnson, whose division numbered about 3,800, says that his loss was small; that Wise’s and Wallace’s brigades remained to him, 25J of Moody’s, but only 80 of Ransom’s. He probably lost some 1,100. Of Pick¬ ett’s division, that numbered about 2,500, about 1,000 escaped capture, making the loss of Anderson’s command 2,600 ; the loss of both commands, Ewell's and Ander¬ son’s, 6,000. The disorder in which those brigades of Johnson’s and Pickett's divisions that were engaged at Five Forks got away from the field on the night of the 1st of April, and the disorder with which the four brigades of Hill’s troops retreated from Miles at Sunderland Station on the 2d, as well as the disorder of those bri¬ gades along the lines carried by General Wright, doubtless scattered them to such an extent that many being without rations did not rejoin their commands. In the movement to Amelia Court House, and- from that point to Sailor’s Creek, Farmville, and Appomattox Court House, having but scanty supplies and being exhausted by want of sleep and food and overcome with fatigue, many men fell out or wandered in search of food. BATTLES OF SAILOR’S CREEK. 385 General Getty advanced two miles beyond the battlefield, the two other divisions of the Sixth Corps closing up on him. General Ord, having been notified by General Sheridan, on the 6th, that General Lee was apparently moving toward Burke’s Junction, at first prepared to meet him there, but subsequently, with a view to intercept him, moved along the Lynchburg Railroad with Gibbon’s two divisions (orders to that effect also having been sent him by General Grant), and after marching eight or ten miles came upon Longstreet, intrenched at Rice’s Station ; it was night, however, before his troops got into position. General Ord endeavored to warn General Read of the movement of Lee’s army, but un¬ successfully, and that officer passing through Farmville was within two miles of High Bridge when he was encountered about midday by General Rosser with his own and Munford’s division of cavalry. Read’s force, General Ord says, con¬ sisted of 80 cavalry and 500 infantry. A most gallant fight ensued, in which General Read, Colonel Washburn, and all the cavalry officers were killed. After heavy loss the rest of the force surrendered. General Dearing, Colonel Boston, and Major Thompson of Rosser’s command were among the killed. It has been seen that General Longstreet remained halted at Rice’s Station all day waiting for Anderson, Ewell, and Gordon to unite with him. They were covering the trains, but notwithstanding their efforts the greater part of them were destroyed. Ewell’s whole force was lost, together with nearly half of Anderson’s and a large part of Gordon’s, all in a useless effort to save the trains. When Mr. Davis and General Lee determined to abandon the Richmond intrenchments as soon as the roads ceased to be impassable, had preparations then been made for aban¬ doning all surplus artillery and discarding all camp equi¬ page, baggage, etc., except that which could be earned with- XII.— 17 386 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. out encumbrance on pack-animals, retaining heavy wagons only for ammunition and hospital supplies (with ambulances) and establishing temporary depots of supplies at railroad stations, Lee thus lightly equipped might have united with Johnston at Danville, or at least have reached the mountains near Lynchburg. But that would only have protracted the war for a brief period.

## high-bridge-and-farmville

As soon as night set in General Longstreet, with Field, Hetli, and Wilcox, marched for Farmville, crossed to the north bank of the Appomattox there, and on the morning of the 7tli began to move out on the road passing through Ap¬ pomattox Court House to Lynchburg. He retained some force on the river to delay our crossing. General Fitz Lee, with all his cavalry, followed Longstreet, crossing the river by a ford above the bridges, leaving some force in the vicinity of Farmville. At Farmville rations were distributed to Lee’s army, 80, 000 having been placed there to await its arrival. Many of the officers and men had had little else than parched or raw Indian corn on the 5tli and 6th. General Gordon, to whose command General Buslirod Johnson’s division had been attached, crossed to the north bank of the Appomattox at High Bridge, where there is a wagon-road bridge as well as a railroad bridge. General Malione’s division followed Gordon’s troops early in the morning of the 7tli. Early on the same morning General Ord, finding that General Longstreet had moved in the night toward Farm¬ ville, followed to that town. Birney's colored division had now joined him. General Sheridan sent Merritt’s cavalry toward Prince Ed¬ ward Court House to intercept any movement of the enemy toward Danville, and Crook’s to Farmville. General Meade directed Griffin to move to Prince Edward LEE NEAR FARMVILLE, APRIL 7th. 387 Court House, General Humphreys and General Wright to continue the direct pursuit as long as it promised success. General Wright moved to Farmville, following General Ord. By the time the head of Crook’s cavalry reached Farmville the enemy had crossed there and burnt the bridges. The cavalry ford was too deep for infantry. The Second Corps resumed the pursuit at half -past five in the morning of the 7th, keeping near to the river and taking routes which appeared to have been marched on by the largest bodies of infantry, and came upon High Bridge just as the enemy had blown up the redoubt that formed the bridge-head and had set fire to the railroad bridge 1 and were trying to burn the wagon-road bridge. But General Barlow, whose division wras in advance, promptly sent his leading men in double-quick to secure the wagon-road bridge, a matter of importance since the river was not ford¬ able for infantrv. There were but few of the enemy at the bridge, and those Barlow’s men drove off. Seeing their mistake, the enemy sent back a cloud of skirmishers to drive off the few men of the Second Corps that had as yet come up, but they being reinforced secured the bridge, and the Second Corps began crossing the river at once. Mahone’s division was drawn up on the high ground of the north bank, apparently to oppose the passage, his position being strengthened by two re¬ doubts, but moved off in a northwest direction, Gordon’s corps moving up the river along the railroad bed in the di¬ rection of Farmville. 1 The railroad bridge is called High Bridge because built upon piers about 60 feet high across the narrow river and the wide marshy low ground on the north bank. This railroad bridge was saved, with the loss of four spans at the north end, chiefly by the exertions of Colonel Livermore, of General Humphreys’s 6taff, whose party put out the fire while the enemy’s skirmishers were fighting under their feet. It was an open deck bridge. 388 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’6£L Believing that General Lee was moving toward Lynch¬ burg by the old stage-road north of the Appomattox River, General Humphreys moved with Miles and De Trobriand (the latter now commanding the Third Division) on a road running northwest, which intersects the stage-road about four miles north of Farmville, but lest he might be mistaken in the route Lee intended to pursue, he sent General Barlow to follow General Gordon along the railroad bed toward Farmville. Artillery could not accompany him. General Barlow found Farmville still in possession of a strong force of the enemy, who had set the bridges on fire and were covering a wagon-train on the north bank that was moving toward Lynchburg. The bridges were burnt and our troops concentrated about Farmville during the day, were, with the exception of Crook’s cavalry, prevented from crossing, as the river was not fordable for infantry, and barely for cavalry. General Barlow overtaking part of Gordon’s corps, at once attacked and cut off a large number of wagons, which were burnt. In this attack, Brigadier-General Smyth, command¬ ing the Third Brigade, a gallant and highly meritorious offi¬ cer, was mortally wounded. His fall led to the loss of some part of the skirmish line. General Humphreys, with Miles and De Trobriand, arrived near the Lynchburg stage-road about one o’clock, when he suddenly came in contact with the enemy, who opened on him with Poague’s sixteen guns ; dispositions were at once made for attack, and a heavy skirmish line was pressed close up against the enemy to develop his position. It was soon found, from the prisoners taken, that Lee’s whole army was present in a strong position covering the stage and plank roads to Lynchburg, which had been intrenched sufficiently for cover, and had artillery in place. It was on the crest of a long slope of open ground. Fitz Lee’s cavalry was covering LEE NEAR FARMVILLE, APRIL 7th. 389 their rear toward Farmville, supported by Heth’s infantry. A heavy skirmish line was pressed against the enemy, and an attack threatened with the two divisions, both of which were now up, and an unsuccessful attempt was made to take them in flank. Barlow was now sent for,1 and General Meade in¬ formed that Lee’s whole remaining force, probably about 18,000 infantry, had been come up with, and suggesting that a corps should attack Lee from the direction of Farmville at the same time that the Second Corps attacked from the oppo¬ site direction. Upon this General Meade sent directions for General Gibbon, with the Twenty-fourth Corps, and General "Wright, with the Sixth Corps, both of which were then at or near Farmville, to cross the river there and attack jointly with the Second Corps. But neither General Meade nor General Humphreys was aware that the river at Farmville was impassable, and that there was no ponton bridge available, and that it would be night before the Sixth Corps, which had arrived at Farmville by two o’clock, could get across after building a foot bridge and a ponton bridge. While General Humpheys, fully expecting that an attack from the direction of Farmville would be made, was waiting the arrival of Barlow, the enemy was observed, at half-past four, to shorten his right flank, and some firing being heard in the direction of Farmville, which was supposed to be the Sixth Corps advancing, General Humphreys contracted his left, and extended his right to envelop the enemy’s left flank. While this was being done General Miles thought he saw an opportunity for attack, and at once made it with a part of his First Brigade, which was, however, repulsed with consider¬ able loss. The ground was rough and the position and the intrenchments strong. The attack fell on Mahone’s division, 1 The information received from Headquarters in the morning was that Lee was probably moving toward Danville, and for that reason Barlow had been sent to¬ ward Farmville. 390 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. which was on the Confederate left, supported by Anderson’s brigade of Field’s division. Poague’s artillery was on Ma- lione’s right, then Gordon’s corps, with Longstreet’s troops on its right. The firing in the direction of Farmville, which was light and ceased very soon, came from an encounter with Crook’s cavalry division, which had crossed the river with great difficulty, by wading, at Farmville. Moving for¬ ward by the Plank-road, General Gregg’s brigade, which was leading, was attacked by General Fitz Lee, General Munford in front, General Rosser in flank, General Heth supporting. General Gregg was captured with other prisoners, and his brigade driven back. General Crook was now recalled to Farmville, and directed to move to Prospect Station on the Lynchburg Railroad, 10 or 12 miles from Farmville, which station he reached about midnight. General Barlow rejoined his corps about sunset, but it was dark before he could be put in position. 1 The loss of the Second Corps to-day was five hundred and seventy-one officers and men killed, wounded, and missing. Nothing could have been finer than the spirit and prompt¬ ness of the officers and men.2 "Without it the wagon-road bridge at High Bridge could not have been secured, and no infantry could have crossed and detained Lee from midday to night at Farmville heights. Among the enemy’s loss was Brigadier-General Lewis of 1 The following quotation from “ McGowan’s South Carolina Brigade,” upon what took place where two divisions of the Second Corps overtook Lee’s force on the 7th, may serve as an example of what is meant by pressing up against an enemy without serious fighting. “The enemy seemed ubiquitous. We were instructed to be prepared to fight on either flank. On our right flank firing was pretty steadily kept up ; in our front a regular battle was going on. Mahone’s division was engaged, and a por¬ tion of Field’s. . . . The firing increased in rapidity and extent until three sides were at once set upon by the enemy. ... I never was so bewildered as on this occasion. . . .” 2 All commanding officers were at the head of their commands, literally leading them, as they should in a pursuit. LEE NEAR FARMYILLE, APRIL 7th. 391 Walker’s division, Gordon’s Corps, who was severely wound¬ ed, and fell into our hands with other wounded officers. It was anticipated that General Lee would move off in the night, which he did, General Fitz Lee, who brought up the rear, leaving the ground about midnight. By the detention until night at this place, General Lee lost invaluable time, which he could not regain by night¬ marching, lost the supplies awaiting him at Appomattox Station, and gave time to Sheridan with his cavalry, and Ord with the Fifth and Twenty-fourth Corps, to post them¬ selves across his path at Appomattox Court House. If no infantry had crossed the Appomattox on the 7th he could have reached New Store that night, Appomattox Station on the afternoon of the 8th, obtained the rations there, and moved that evening toward Lynchburg. A march the next day, the 9th, would have brought him to Lynchburg. Ord’s two infantry corps did not reach Appomattox Court House until ten o’clock in the morning of the 9th of April.

## appomattox

About half-past eight o’clock in the evening, when still in contact with Lee as described, General Seth Williams, Adjutant-General, brought General Humphreys General Grant’s first letter to General Lee, asking the surrender of his army, which letter General Humphreys was requested to have delivered to General Lee. He sent it at once through his picket-line, at the same time authorizing a truce for an hour at that point to enable the enemy to gather up their wounded, that were lying between the lines, an authority which they had informally asked for. The opposing troops were only a few hundred yards apart. General Lee’s answer was brought back within an hour, and General Williams set out at once to return to General Grant at Farmville, by the circuitous route of High Bridge. The letter of General Grant and the reply of General Lee are marked Nos. 1 and 2 in Appendix M. 392 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’05. Tlie pursuit was resumed by tlie Second Corps, followed by the Sixth Corps, at half -past five on the morning of the 8th, on the road to Lynchburg. In the morning, while on the march, General Williams brought to General Humphreys General Grant’s second letter to General Lee, which was sent to him through Fitz Lee’s cavalry rear guard close in General Humphreys’s front. General Lee’s answer to this second letter of General Grant was received by General Humphreys at dusk, when he had halted for two or three hours to rest his troops some two miles beyond New Store, after a march of twenty miles. See Letters Nos. 2 and 3 in Appendix M. General Humphreys at once sent the reply of General Lee by his Adjutant-General, Colonel Whittier, to General Grant, who received it about midnight, he and General Meade hav¬ ing halted for the night at Curdsville, about ten miles back. After some two or three hours’ rest, in view of despatches received from Headquarters, though somewhat against Gen¬ eral Humphreys’ judgment, he resumed the march with the object of coming up with the main force of the enemy, but finding the men dropping out of the ranks from exhaustion, owing to want of food, and to fatigue, halted the head of his column at midnight, after a march of twenty-six miles, Long- street’s troops about three miles in front. The supply-train with two days’ rations was just in rear, and got up in the morning of the 9th. On the morning of the 9th, General Humphreys received from General Grant his third letter to General Lee, written that morning at Curdsville [see No. 5, Appendix M], which letter General Humphreys sent forward by Colonel Whittier, who, after riding a few miles, met, first, one of Lee’s cou¬ riers, and immediately afterward, Colonel Marshall of Gen¬ eral Lee’s staff. The latter conducted him to General Lee, to whom General Grant’s letter was delivered. General Lee dictated his answer to General Grant Colonel, PURSUIT— SURRENDER CORRESPONDENCE. 393 Marshall writing it. (While doing so artillery firing in the direction of Appomattox Court House was heard, and a Con¬ federate officer rode up with some apparently important com¬ munication to General Lee.) The letter was signed by Lee, and delivered to Colonel Whittier by Colonel Marshall, with verbal messages to General Grant from General Lee expres¬ sive of regret at not having met him. This letter was written about nine o’clock in the morning. Mr. Jefferson Davis, in his “ Rise and Fall of the Confed¬ erate Government,” mentions as a matter of some interest the following incident in connection with the surrender-cor¬ respondence : “ On the next morning [the morning of the 9th of April], before daylight, Lee sent Colonel Venable, one of his staff, to Gordon, commanding the advance, to learn his opinion as to the chances of a successful attack, to which Gordon replied, ‘ My old corps is reduced to a frazzle, and unless I am sup¬ ported by Longstreet heavily, I do not think we can do any¬ thing more.’ When Colonel Venable returned with this answer to General Lee, he said, ‘ Then there is nothing left me but to go and see General Grant.’ ” 1 This interview General Lee sought after a consultation with his principal and most highly esteemed officers — a con¬ sultation necessarily of a very painful kind, but, controlled by motives of an exalted character, General Lee submitted with dignity to a necessity that was inevitable. Passing through General Longstreet’s lines, General Lee was met by Colonel Whittier, received General Grant’s letter and replied to it as already described. See No. 6, of Ap¬ pendix M. This letter was sent to General Grant by the hands of Col- 1 Colonel Venable stated substantially the same thing at the Lee Memorial meet¬ ing in Richmond, on the 3d of November, 1870. 394 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF '64 AND ’65. onel Whittier, who delivered it to General Meade at about ten o’clock. It was forwarded by him to General Grant, who, near New Store, had left the route followed by the Second and Sixth Corps, and had taken a cross-road to get into the road south of the Appomattox River, which also led to the Court House and along or near the routes of Sheridan and Ord. Lieutenant Pease carried this letter, as well as one from General Meade, to General Grant, and after a ride of twelve or fourteen miles from the vicinity of New Store, delivered it to him at 11.50 a.m., at which time General Grant was about eight miles from Appomattox Court House. General Grant’s letter to General Lee, acknowledging the receipt of his letter of the morning of the 9th, was undoubtedly sent to General Lee through General Sheridan’s and General Ord’s lines. For the letter see No. 7, Appendix M. Had General Grant remained on the route of the Second and Sixth Corps, the surrender would have taken place be¬ fore mid-day. About half-past ten the troops of the Second Corps, closely followed by the Sixth Corps, began to over¬ take General Longstreet’s, when General Humphreys re¬ ceived two earnest verbal requests from General Lee by a staff officer (Colonel Marshall or Colonel Taylor) with a flag of truce, not to press forward upon him, but to halt, as negotiations were going on for a surrender. General Hum¬ phreys did not feel himself authorized to comply with these requests, since he had not received such information and authority from General Meade or General Grant as would sanction it, and so replied to General Lee, and continued to press forward. In fact, with the letters from General Grant for General Lee, General Humphreys had been notified that this corre¬ spondence was in no way to interfere with his operations ; and although this message did not accompany the last letter FLANK PURSUIT. 395 received from General Grant, the previous messages were evidently designed to govern General Humphreys’ actions. General Humphreys notified General Meade of these mes¬ sages from General Lee and of his replies. When the request by General Lee’s staff officer was made the last time (the Second Corps was then close on General Longstreet) he was very urgent — so urgent that General Humphreys had to send him word twice that the request could not be complied with, and that he must withdraw from the ground at once. He was in full sight on the road, not a hundred yards distant from the head of the Second Corps. About half a mile beyond this, at eleven o’clock, the Second Corps had come up with Longstreet’s command, in¬ trenched in the vicinity of Appomattox Court House. It was at once formed for attack, the Sixth Corps formed on the right, which, at the moment when it was about to begin, was suspended by the arrival of General Meade, who sent a written communication to General Lee granting a truce on his (Meade’s) line for an hour, in view of the negotiations for a surrender. General Meade had read General Lee’s letter of nine o’clock before sending it on to General Grant. ‘ General Meade’s despatch to General Grant at ten o’clock that morning stated that he (Meade) had just written to General Lee. The communication just mentioned granting a truce is the letter Meade referred to. It was sent through the lines by General Humphreys, and delivered to a Con¬ federate officer by Colonel Whittier, and was received by General Lee between eleven and twelve o’clock. Lee halted for the night of the 8tli at and in the vicinity of Appomattox Court House. General Merritt marching early in the morning of the 7th toward Prince Edward Court House, on the flank of the in¬ fantry, halted for the night beyond it on Spring Creek, and resuming the march early the next morning toward Ap- 396 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’04 AND ’65. pomattox Station, reached that vicinity during the early part of the night, Custer, in advance, capturing Walker’s train of artillery and wagons, and three trains of cars with subsis¬ tence sent back from Farmville by Lee. Merritt then moved np to the vicinity of the Court House and formed across the road the enemy were moving on. General Crook, General Mackenzie following him, reached Appomattox Station on the evening of the 8tli, having burned subsistence trains at Pamphlin’s Station on the way. From the station he sent Smith’s brigade to the vicinity of Appo¬ mattox Court House to hold the road from that place to Lynchburg. General Griffin halted for the night of the 7th at Prince Edward Court House, and resuming the march early on the 8th, joined the Twenty-fourth Corps at Prospect Station, coming then under the command of General Ord. Continuing the march for twenty-nine miles toward Appo¬ mattox Court House, General Ord halted for three hours’ rest between midnight and the morning of the 9tli. Resuming the march, he says he arrived near the Court House about ten o’clock in the morning of the 9th, when he deployed his two corps across Lee’s route just as his advance was pushing out of it. General Fitz Lee says that on the evening of the 8 th his cavalry, which had formed the rear guard, was moved to the front ; that the corps commanders were called to Headquar¬ ters, where General Lee explained the situation fully, and sub¬ mitted the correspondence he had had with General Grant to them. It was decided that Fitz Lee, supported by Gordon, should attack Sheridan’s cavalry at daylight, and in case nothing but cavalry was found, they were to open a way for the remaining troops ; but in case the cavalry was supported by heavy bodies of infantiy, the Commanding General must be at once notified. APPOMATTOX COURT HOUSE. 397 At daybreak on the 9th Gordon’s command was formed in line of battle half a mile west of the Court House on the Lynchburg road. The cavalry was posted on his right, W. H. F. Lee’s division next to the infantry, Rosser’s in the centre, Munford’s on the right, making, General Fitz Lee says, a mounted force of about 2,400 men. “Our attack,” he con¬ tinues, “was made about sunrise, and the enemy’s cavalry quickly driven out of the way, with a loss of two guns and a number of prisoners. The arrival at this time of two corps of their infantry necessitated the retiring of our lines.” 1 General Crook says : “ At about 9 a.m. the enemy made a strong attack on my front and flanks with a large force of in¬ fantry, while their cavalry attacked my rear. Mackenzie and Smith were forced to retire by overwhelming numbers until relieved by the infantry, when we reorganized and were get- ing ready to go to the front when an order for the cessation of hostilities reached me.” General Merritt says the enemy advanced against Crook in heavy force. The cavalry was forced back. Custer was brought up and the cavalry retired slowly, but of necessity. Soon the Twenty-fourth Corps took up Crook’s line on the left of Devin, and the Fifth Corps deployed in rear of him. As soon as the columns of the enemy discovered we had infantry in position, they retired precipitately toward the Valley. The cavalry was thrown out rapidly to the right, taking possession of the high ground on the enemy’s left, and opened artillery. General Ord states that he was barely in time on the morn¬ ing of the 9th, “for in spite of General Sheridan’s attempts the cavalry was falling back in confusion before Lee’s infan¬ try ; but, ” he says, ‘ ‘ we soon deployed and went in, Gibbon on the left, at double-quick, with Foster’s and Turner’s 1 General Fitz Lee, seeing that immediate surrender was inevitable, withdrew at onre toward Lynchburg, that road, he says, being clear, where and in the vicinity of which he and his command surrendered shortly after. 398 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. divisions, in beautiful style, and the colored troops also at the double-quick under these commanders, with the Fifth Corps under Griffin, when a white flag met” him “at the Fifth Corps front with a request for a cessation of arms until General Lee could meet General Grant and confer on the terms. ” General Ord continues : ‘ ‘As I knew that a surrender had been called for and terms asked for and made known, I knew this second request meant acceptance, and the bugles were sounded to halt.” General Sheridan says : “A white flag was presented to General Custer, who had the advance, and who sent the in¬ formation to me at once that the enemy desired to surrender. “Riding over to the left at Appomattox Court House,1 2 I met Major-General Gordon, of the rebel service, and Major- General Wilcox. General Gordon requested a suspension of hostilities pending negotiations for a surrender then being held between Lieutenant-General Grant and General Lee. I notified him that I desired to prevent the unnecessary effu¬ sion of blood, but as there was nothing definitely settled in the correspondence, and as an attack had been made on my lines with a view to escape under the impression that our force was only cavalry, I must have some assurance of an intended surrender. This General Gordon gave by saying that there was no doubt of the surrender of General Lee’s army. I then separated from him, with an agreement to meet those officers again in half an hour at Appomattox Court House. At the specified time, in company with General Ord, who commanded the infantry, I again met this officer, and also Lieutenant-General Longstreet, and received from them the same assurance, and hostilities ceased until the arrival of Lieutenant-General Grant.” 3 1 Appomattox Court House was between the picket lines of the opposing forces. 2 The author of “ With General Sheridan in Lee’s Last Campaign, by a Staff Officer,” states that General Longstreet bore a despatch from General Lee to SURRENDER OF LEE’S ARMY. 399 General Grant arrived at Appomattox Court House about one o’clock, when the meeting between himself and General Lee took place. After a brief conference the two letters of General Grant and General Lee [Nos. 8 and 9, Appendix M], respectively presenting and accepting the terms of surrender, having been written in each other’s presence, were exchanged. At about four o’clock the surrender of the Army of North¬ ern Virginia was announced to the Army of the Potomac. The surrender of General Johnston’s army took place on the 25th of April, and that of the other Confederate forces soon followed. According to the Records of the War Department, the num¬ ber of officers and enlisted men of the Army of Northern Vir¬ ginia paroled on the 9th of April, 1865, was : Officers. Enlisted men. Aggre¬ gate. Genei’al Lee and Staff. . 15 15 Longstreet’ s Corps . Gordon’s Corps . 1,521 13,312 14,833 695 6,505 7,200 Ewell’s Corps . 19 268 287 Total Infantry . 2,250 20,085 22,335 Cavalry Corps . 132 1,654 1,786 Artillery Corps . 192 2,394 2,586 Total Infantry, Cavalry, and Artillery . 2,574 24,133 26,707 Detachments 1 . 288 1,361 1,649 Grand Total . 2,862 25,494 28,356 General Grant, and gives a copy of the despatch. It is a copy or duplicate of the despatch written by General Lee at nine o’clock in the morning, and delivered to General Humphreys’ staff officer, Colonel Whittier, and placed in General Grant’s hands by Lieutenant Pease, of General Meade’s staff, at 11.55 a.m., when General Grant was still eight miles from Appomattox Court House, and at about the hour when General Longstreet delivered the duplicate to General Sheridan and General Ord. 1 Detachments consisted of some of the Navy Battalion, the Provost Guard, Headquarters Cavalry escort, some odds and ends of troops, and civilian employes. 400 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. It has been stated that of the troops surrendered, only 8, 000 had arms. If, indeed, that is correct, then the greater part of those men who had no arms must have thrown them away when they found that they must surrender. This was not difficult to do unobserved by their officers. The country was thickly wooded and open to them on the west and northwest. A walk of half an hour would bring them to ground that neither their officers nor ours would pass over during their brief stay in the vicinity of the Court House. Our casualties in these closing operations from the 29th of March to the 9th of April were 8,268 officers and enlisted men killed and wounded, and 1,676 missing, making a total loss of 9, 944. They were distributed as shown below. 1 The Army of the Potomac marched to Washington, w7as re¬ viewed by the President and his Cabinet, and was disbanded by the 30th of June following. It has not seemed to me necessary to attempt a eulogy upon the Army of the Potomac or the Army of Northern Virginia. 1 Cavalry, 1,151 officers and enlisted men killed and wounded, 339 missing. 2d Corps, 1,394 44 4. 44 44 44 630 44 5th “ 1,919 a 44 44 44 44 546 * 4 6th “ 1,542 u (4 44 44 44 • • • 44 9th “ 1,548 u 44 44 44 44 161 44 24th “ 714 44 44 44 44 44 • • • 44 Total, 8,268 4 4 44 44 44 44 1,676 44 Missing, 1,676 Total, 9,944

## appendix-l-returns

APPENDIX L The Morning Report of March 31, 1865, gives for the numbers of the Army of the Potomac 3,064 officers and 68,956 enlisted men of infantry, 147 officers and 5,715 enlisted men of artillery, with 243 guns, present for duty, equipped. Morning Report , March 31, 1865, Army of the Potomac. Artillery. Officers. Enlisted men. Officers. Enlisted men. Guns. Provost Guard . 35 1,568 Engineers . 71 2,588 Reserve Artillerv . 35 1,127 47 1 Post of City Point — Collis . 88 1,855 Second Corps . 960 18,507 S3 1,667 70 2 Fifth Corps . 632 15.341 25 1,075 36 Sixth Corp3 . 705 16,576 33 1.070 54 Ninth Corps . 679 16,677 21 776 36 Total, exclusive of Pro- vost Guard and Engi- neers . 3,064 68,956 147 5,715 243 For the Army of the James, the Morning Report of the Twenty-fourth Corps of March 31st. Major-General Gibbon commanding, gives for its numbers 841 offi¬ cers and 19,772 enlisted men of infantry ; 56 officers and 2,045 enlisted men of artillery, with 70 guns, present for duty, equipped. The Morning Report of the Twenty-fifth Corps, of March 31st, does not com¬ prise General William Bimey’s division. That of February 28th does, and gives for the numbers of the Corps 417 officers and 12,237 enlisted men of infantry, and 30 officers and 946 enlisted men of artillery, with 56 guns, present for duty, equipped. 1 And some mortars. 2 And four mortars. APPENDIX L. 433 Morning Report , March 31, 18G5, Twenty -fourth Corps , General Gibbon Commanding. Infantry. Artillery. Officers. Enlisted men. Officers. Enlisted men. Guns. Foster’s — First Division. . . Ames’s— Second Division.. Devens’s — Third Division . Turner’s Independent . 249 169 275 148 5,488 4.397 6,096 3,791 Total . 841 19,772 56 .2,045 70 Morning Report, February 23, 1865, Twenty-fifth Corps, General Weitzel Commanding. Twenty -fifth Corps . 417 12,237 30 940 56 The cavalry of the Army of the James, General Mackenzie commanding, accord¬ ing to the Morning Report of March 31st, had 68 officers and 1,734 enlisted men present for duty. The Army of the James, therefore, had present for duty 1,258 officers and 32,009 enlisted men of infantry, with 86 officers and 2,991 enlisted men of artillery, with 126 guns. Of this force General Ord took with him on the 27th of March 10,000 infantry of Gibbon’s Corps, about 4,000 of Weitzel’s, and all Mackenzie’s cavalry, 1,700. When General Sheridan united with the Armies of the Potomac and the James Gregg’s cavalry division was assigned to him. The cavalry was an independent command, and consisted of Custer’s and Thomas C. Devin’s divisions, under the command of General Merritt, and General George Crook’s division, formerly Gregg’s. The Morning Reports of March 31st give for the numbers of these divisions pres¬ ent for duty 611 officers and 13,209 enlisted men. Morninq Report, March 31, 1865, Cavalry present for duty, not present for duty , equipped. Officers. Enlisted men. Custer’s — Third Division . 209 4,355 3,439 Thomas C. Devin’s — First Division . 192 George Crook’s — Second Division (Gregg’s old division) . .. 210 5,415 Total . 611 13,209 The siege artillery is not included in the preceding. The return of Lee’s army of February 20, 1865, the last to be found among the Confederate archives in the War Department, gives the following for the number of officers and enlisted men present for duty : XII.— 19 434 THE VIRGINIA. CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Morning Report of February 30, 1865, Army of Northern Virginia. Officers. Enlisted men. Longstreet’s — First ) Corps . f 851 12,164 Gordon’s — Second ( Corps . J 458 1 7,623 Hill’s — Third Corps.. 805 13,567 \ Anderson's Corps _ 431 6,505 2,605 39,859 Cavalry — W. H. F.Lee 185 3,935 “ FitzLee... 90 1,825 281 5,760 Field Art. — Pendleton 244 5,155 Officers. Enlisted men. f Pickett’s Division .. 304 4,761 Field’s Division . . 341 4,436 - Kershaw’s Division. 206 2, <67 L Total . 851 12,164 f Evans’s Division.. . 2,309 Terry’s Brigade. York’s Brigade. Evans's Brigade. Grimes’s Division . . 3,022 Cox’s Brigade. Grimes’s Brigade. - Doles’s Brigade. Battle's Brigade. Walker’s Division.. 2,292 Toon’s Brigade. Lewis’s Brigade. Lilly’s Brigade. 1 Total . 458 7,623 f Mahone’s Division. . 3,880 Heth’s Division. . . . 4.324 - Wilcox’s Division. . . .... 5,383 Total . 865 13.567 Johnson’s Division. . . 431 6,505 This evidently does not include Wise’s brigade, which we know was present on the 29th of March, and was probably 2,000 strong. Besides this force there was that of the Department of Richmond, commanded by General Ewell, consisting of General Custis Lee's command, whose effective force of infantry was 2,700, according to the return of March 20, 1805 ; Walker's brigade of Richmond and Danville Railroad defences, which on the return of February 20th is given at 1,414 enlisted men : the heavy artillery troops, the naval forces, and finally the local troops, which, although taking part in the defence of the intrenchments, would form no part of the army in the field. Rosser’s cavalry division took part in the defence of Petersburg, but does not appear to be included in the return of February 20th. Whether Gary’s cavalry brigade. 1,100 strong, was included is not stated. It appears, then, that on the 20th of February, and probably on the 25th of March, General Lee had an effective force of infantry of not less than 44,500, ex¬ clusive of Walker’s brigade ; of field artillery not less than 5,000, and of cavalry 0,000, a total of not less than 55,500. There were, besides, the heavy artillery, the local troops, and the naval forces.
