Return  this  book  on  or  before  the 
Latest  Date  stamped  below. 


I 


University  of  Illinois  Library 


> 


L161— H41 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/warofrebellion06unit 


THE 

WAR  OF  THE  REBELLION; 


A COMPILATION  OF  THE 

OFFIOIA^L,  feoorfs 


OF  THE 


UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


PREPARED  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR,  BY  BYT.  LIEUT. 
COL.  ROBERT  N.  SCOTT,  THIRD  U.  S.  ARTILLERY, 

AND 

PUBLISHED  PURSUANT  TO  ACT  OF  CONGRESS  APPROVED  JUNE  16,  1880. 


SERIES  I— VOLUME  VI. 


WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE, 

1882. 


r /4 


■Vi 


.*  ' '-i 


■ 7 


PREFACE 


7 ’ • 


By  an  act  approved  June  23,  1874,  Congress  made  an  appropriation 

to  enable  the  Secretary  of  War  to  begin  the  publication  of  the  Official 
Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  both  of  the  Union  and  Confed- 
erate Armies,”  and  directed  him  ‘‘  to  have  copied  for  the  Public  Printer 
all  reports,  letters,  telegrams,  and  general  orders  not  heretofore  copied 
or  printed,  and  properly  arranged  in  chronological  order.” 

Appropriations  for  continuing  such  preparation  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time,  and  the  act  approved  June  16,  1880,  has  provided  “for 
the  printing  and  binding,  under  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of 

10.000  copies  of  a compilation  of  the  Official  Records  (Union  and  Con- 
federate) of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  so  far  as  the  same  may  be  ready 
for  publication,  during  the  fiscal  year”^  and  that  “ of  said  number, 

7.000  copies  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  2,000 
copies  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  and  1,000  copies  for  the  use  of  the 
Executive  Departments.”* 

This  compilation  will  be  the  first  general  publication  of  the  military 
records  of  the  war,  and  will  embrace  all  official  documents  that  can  be 
obtained  by  the  compiler,  and  that  appear  to  be  of  any  historical  value. 

•Volume  I to  V distributed  under  act  approved  June  16,  1880.  The  act  approved 
August  7,  1882,  provides  that — 

“The  volumes  of  the  official  records  of  the  war  of  the  rebellion  shall  be  distributed 
as  /ollows : One  thousand  copies  to  the  executive  departments,  as  now  provided  by 
law.  One  thousand  copies  for  distribution  by  the  Secretary  of  War  among  officers  of 
the  Army  and  contributors  to  the  work.  Eight  thousand  three  hundred  copies  shall 
be  sent  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  such  libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals  as 
may  be  designated  by  the  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Congress  Each  Senator  shall  designate  not  exceeding  twenty-six,  and  each 
Representative  and  Delegate  not  exceeding  twenty-one  of  such  addresses,  and  the 
volumes  shall  be  sent  thereto  from  time  to  time  as  they  are  published,  until  the  pub- 
lication is  completed.  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  shall  inform  the 
Secretary  of  War  in  each  case  how  many  volumes  of  those  heretofore  published  they 
have  forwarded  to  such  addresses.  The  remaining  copies  of  the  eleven  thousand  to 
be  published,  and  all  sets  that  may  not  be  ordered  to  be  distributed  as  provided 
herein,  shall  be  sold  by  the  Secretary  of  War  for  cost  of  publication  with  ten  per 
cent,  added  thereto,  and  the  proceeds  of  such  sale* shall  be  covered  into  the  Treasury. 
If  two  or  more  sets  of  said  volumes  are  ordered  to  the  same  address  the  Secretary  of 
War  shall  inform  the  Senators,  Representatives  or  Delegates,  who  have  designated 
the  same,  who  thereupon  may  designate  other  libraries,  organizations,  or  individuals. 
The  Secretary  of  War  shall  report  to  the  first  session  of  the  Forty-eighth  Congress 
what  volumes  of  the  series  heretofore  published  have  not  been  furnished  to  such 
libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals.  He  shall  also  inform  distributees  at  whose 
instance  the  volumes  are  sent.” 


"b 0^ 


III 


IV 


PREFACE. 


The  publication  will  present  the  records  in  the  following  order  of 
arrangement: 

The  1st  Series  will  embrace  the  formal  reports,  both  Union  and  Con- 
federate, of  the  first  seizures  of  United  States  property  in  the  Southern 
States,  and  of  all  military  operations  in  the  field,  with  the  correspond- 
ence, orders,  and  returns  relating  specially  thereto,  and,  as  proposed, 
is  to  be  accompanied  by  an  Atlas. 

In  this  series  the  reports  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  campaigns 
and  several  theaters  of  operations  (in  the  chronological  order  of  the 
events),  and  the  Union  reports  of  any  event  will,  as  a rule,  be  imme- 
diately followed  by  the  Confederate  accounts.  The  correspondence,  &c.,, 
not  embraced  in  the  ‘‘reports”  proper  will  follow  (first  Union  and  next 
Confederate)  in  chronological  order. 

The  2d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns.  Union  and  Confederate,  relating  to  prisoners  of  war,  and  (so 
far  as  the  military  authorities  were  concerned)  to  State  or  political 
prisoners. 

The  3d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Union  authorities  (embracing  their  correspondence  with 
the  Confederate  officials)  not  relating  specially  to  the  subjects  of  the 
first  and  second  series.  It  will  set  forth  the  annual  and  special  reports 
of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  the  General-in  Chief,  and  of  the  chiefs  of 
the  several  staff  corps  and  departments ; the  calls  for  troops,  and  the 
correspondence  between  the  National  and  the  several  State  authorities. 

The  4th  Series  will  exhibit  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  similar  to  that  indicated  for  the 
Union  officials,  as  of  the  third  series,  but  excluding  the  correspondence 
between  the  Union  and  confederate  authorities  given  in  that  series. 

ROBERT  N.  SCOTT, 

Major,  Third  Art.,  and  Bvt.  Lieut.  Col. 

War  Department,  August  23,  1880. 


Approved : 


ALEX.  RAMSEY, 

Secretary  of  War. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East 
Florida.  August  21,  18G1-April  11,  1862 1-435 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Alabama,  Southern  Mississippi,  and 
Louisiana.  September  1,  1861-May  12,  1862 436-894 


V 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOIiUME  I. 


CHAPTER  I.  Page. 

Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  South 
Carolina.  December  20,  1860-April  14, 

1861 1-317 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  secession  of  Georgia.  January  3-26, 

1861  318-325 

CHAPTER  in. 

The  secession  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

January  4-20, 1861  326-330 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Operations  in  Elorida.  January  6-August 
31, 1861  331-473 


CHAPTER  V.  Page. 

The  secession  of  North  Carolina.  Jan- 
uary 9-May  20, 1861 474-488 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  secession  of  Louisiana.  January  10- 

February  19, 1861 489-501 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Operations  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

February  1-June  11, 1861  502-636 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Operations  in  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, and  Missouri.  February  7-May  9, 

1861  637-G91 


VOLUME  II. 


CHAPTER  IX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  April  16-July  31, 1861 . . 1-1012 

VOLUME  III. 

CHAPTER  X.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  May  10-November  19, 1861.  1-749 

VOLUME  IV. 


CHAPTER  XL  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  June  11, 1861-February  1,1862.  1-174 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee. 

July  1-Nov  ember  19, 1861 175-565  I 

VOLUME  A . 

CHAPTER  XIV.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Northern  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  August  1, 18Cl-March  17,  1862.  1-1106 


CHAPTER  XIII.  Page. 

Operations  in  North  C.arolina  and  South- 
eastern Virginia.  August  1, 1861-Jan- 
uary  II,  1862 566-721 


VI— VOL.  VI 


HEMOTE  aT'CR/'.GE 


V u ® ’ O ’t  ’ ' 

CHAPTER  XV. 

OPERATIONS  ON  THE  COASTS  OF  SOITH  CAROLINA, 
GEORGIA,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLORIDA. 


August  21,  1861-April  11,  1862. 


SUMMARY  OF  THE  TEIIS^CIPAE  EYEjS'TS. 

Ang.  21,  1861. — Brig.  Gen.  Eoswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of 
the  Department  of  South  Carolina.* 

Brig.  Gen.  John  B.  Grayson,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of 
the  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

Oct.  10,  1861. — Brig.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of 
the  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida.  (Revoked.) 

21,  1861. — The  expedition  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

U.  S.  Army,  sails  from  Annapolis,  Md.,  for  the  South  Carolina 
coast. 

22,  1861. — Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Trapier,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of 

the  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

26,  1861.— Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  R.  Lawton,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command 
of  the  Department  of  Georgia.! 

29,  1861. — The  Sherman  expedition  sails  from  Hampton  Roads,  Va. 

Nov.  5,  1861. — The  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  East  Florida,  consti- 
tuted a department,  under  command  of  General  Robert  E.  Lee, 
C.  S.  Army. 

7,  1861. — Forts  Beauregard  and  Walker,  Port  Royal  Bay,  S.  C.,  captured  by 

U.  S.  Navy. 

8,  1861. — General  Robert  E.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the  De- 

l^artment  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  East  Florida. 
Reconnaissance  on  Hilton  Head  Island,  S.  C. 

10-11,  1861. — Expedition  from  Hilton  Head  to  Braddock’s  Point,  S.  C. 

16,  1861. — Capt.  D.  N.  Ingraham,  C.  S.  Navy,  assigned  to  duty  in  Charleston 

Harbor,  S.  C. 

24,  1861. — Union  forces  occupy  Tybee  Island,  Ga. 

Dec.  6-  7,  1861. — Expedition  to  Port  Royal  Ferry  and  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

17,  1861. — Evacuation  of  Rockville,  S.  C.,  by  the  Confederate  forces. 

Skirmish  on  Chisolm’s  Island,  S.  C. 

20,  1861. — Stone  fleet  sunk  at  the  entrance  to  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

Jan.  1,  1882. — Engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  Coosaw  River,  S.  C. 

^ 11,  1862. — The  Department  of  Key  West,  Fla.,  constituted,  under  command 

of  Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Brannan,  U.  S.  Army. 

* On  the  27th  of  May,  1861,  Brig.  Gen.  G.  T.  Beauregard,  being  relieved  from  duty 
in  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  relinquished  to  Governor  Pickens  the  command  of  the 
State  volunteer  forces,  and  transferred  to  Col.  R.  H.  Anderson  the  command  of  the 
Confederate  forces  in  Charleston  Harbor  and  its  vicinity.  See  Beauregard  to  Pickens, 
May  27,  1861,  Vol.  I,  Series  IV. 

t He  had  been  commanding  the  District  of  Savannah,  Ga.,  since  April  17,  1861. 

1 R R — VOL.  VI 


2 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Jan.  16,'  ISCS'i— Naval  ‘.iescent  upon  Cedar  Keys,  Fla. 

20^  1862.— Second  ^tone  fleet  sunk  at  the  entrance  to  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 
[12-25;  18G2.‘— Expedh  ihn;  fl)  Ldisto  Island,  S.  C. 

^ 26-28,  1862.^-l:tecGnnp^Vsanc^' to  Wilmington  Narrows,  Ga. ; naval  engagement. 
Feb.  6,  1862, — Reconnaissance  to  Wright  River,  S.  C. 

10,‘1362’A-Sktrmkkb  bn  BaruwelFs  Island,  S.  C. 

‘ 11,  1832.'-^Edisto  island,  S.  C.,  occnj)ied  by  Union  forces. 

15,  1862. — Action  at  Venus  Point,  Ga. 

23-26,  1862. — Reconnaissance  on  Bull  River  and  Schooner  Channel,  S.  C. 

28,  1862. — Florida  exi3edition  sails  from  Warsaw  Sound. 

March  3,  1862. — General  Robert  E.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army,  called  to  Richmond,  Va. 

3,  1862. — Amelia  Island,  Fla.,  evacuated  by  the  Confederate  forces. 

4,  1862. — Amelia  Island,  Fla.,  occupied  by  the  Union  forces. 

4,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 
the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  East  Florida. 
7-11,  1862. — Reconnaissance  up  the  Savannah  River  and  to  Elba  Island. 

12,  1862. — Jacksonville,  Fla.,  occupied  by  the  Union  forces. 

13,  1862. — General  Robert  E.  Lee  charged  with  the  conduct  of  military 

operations  in  the  armies  of  the  Confederacy. 

14,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,, assigned  to  command  of 

the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  II.  Trapier,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command 
of  the  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

15,  1862. — The  States  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida  constituted 

the  Department  of  the  South,  to  he  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen. 
David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army. 

19,  1862. — Col.  W.  S.  Dilworth,  Florida,  assigned  to  the  command  of  tho 
Department  of  Florida,  vice  Trapier,  ordered  to  Alabama. 

19- 24,  1862. — Reconnaissance  on  May  River,  S.  C. 

20- 24,  1862. — Operations  near  Bluffton,  S.  C.,  including  affairs  at  Buckingham 

and  Hunting  Island. 

23,  1862. — Affair  at  Smyrna,  Fla.  ' 

28-,  1862. — Reconnaissance  near  the  mouth  of  Saint  Augustine  Creek,  Ga. 

29,  1862. — Affair  on  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

30-31,  1862. — Affairs  on  Wilmington  and  Whitemarsh  Islands,  Ga. 

31,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 
Department  of  the  South. 

April  5,  1862. — Occupation  of  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,hy  the  Union  forces. 

7,  1862. — Major-General  Pemberton’s  command  extended  over  Middle  and 

Eastern  Florida. 

8,  1862. — Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of 

the  Department  of  Middle  and  Eastern  Florida. 

9,  1862. — Jacksonville,  Fla.,  evacuated  by  the  Union  forces. 

10,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Fernandina,  Fla. 

10-11,  1862. — Bombardment  and  cai)ture  of  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga. 

NOVEMBER  7,  1861. — Capture  of  Forts  Beauregard  and  Walker,  Port 
Royal  Bay,  S.  C.,  by  the  United  States  Navy. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  Avith  proclamation. 

2.— Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton,  C.  S.  Army,  of  the  bombardment  of  Forts 
Walker  and  Beauregard. 

No.  3.— Col.  John  A.  Wagener,  First  Artillery,  South  Carolina  Militia,  of  the  homhard- 
meut  of  Fort  Walker. 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


o 

ij 


No.  4. — Col.  William  C.  Heyward,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry,  of  the  homhard- 
ment  of  Fort  Walker. 

No.  5. — Col.  W.  D.  De  Saussure,  Fifteenth  South  Carolina  Infantry,  of  the  homhard- 
ment  of  Fort  Walker. 

No.  6. — Maj.  Francis  D.  Lee,  South  Carolina  Engineers. 

No.  7. — Capt.  Josiah  Bedon,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry,  of  the  hombardment 
of  Fort  Walker. 

No.  8. — Capt.  D.  S.  Canaday,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry,  of  the  bombardment 
of  Fort  Walker. 

No.  9. — Capt.  C.  D.  Owens,  Assistant  Commissary  of  Subsistence  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  10. — Mr.  H.  T.  Baya,  clerk  in  Confederate  Subsistence  Department. 

No.  11. — Col.  R.  G.  M.  Dunovant,  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Infantry,  of  the  bombard- 
ment of  Fort  Beauregard. 

No.  12. — Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  Beaufort  Artillery,  of  the  bombardment  of  Fort 
Beauregard. 

No.  13. — Statement  of  Messrs.  John  Tuomey  and  Henry  C.  Robertson  of  occurrences 
at  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  November  7 and  8,  18G1. 


No.  1. 

Beports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman.,  TJ.  S.  A.,  tviih  proclamation. 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royal.,  S.  C.,  November  8,  18G1. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  force  under  my  command 
embarked  at  Annapolis,  Md.,  on  the  21st  October,  and  arrived  at  Hamil- 
ton Eoads,  Ya.,  on  the  22d.  In  consequence  of  the  delay  in  the  arrival 
of  some  of  our  transports  and  the  unfavorable  state  of  the*  weather 
the  fleet  was  unable  to  set  out  for  the  Southern  coast  until  the  29th, 
when,  under  convoy  of  a naval  squadron,  in  command  of  Commodore 
DuPont,  and  after  the  most  mature  cousideration  of  the  objects  of  the 
expedition  by  that  flag-officer  and  myself,  it  was  agreed  to  lirst  reduce 
any  works  that  might  be  fouud  at  Port  Eoyal,  S.  C.,  and  thus  open  the 
finest  harbor  on  the  coast  that  exists  south  of  Hatteras.  It  was  calcu- 
lated to  reach  Port  Eoyal  in  five  days  at  most,  but  in  consequence  of 
adverse  winds  and  a perilous  storm  on  the  day  and  night  of  the  1st 
November  the  fleet  arrived  at  Port  Eoyal  bar  not  till  the  4th,  and  then 
but  in  part,  for  it  had  been  almost  entirely  dispersed  by  the  gale,  and  the 
vessels  have  been  straggling  in  up  to  this  date.  The  transport  steamers 
Union,  Belvidere,  Osceola,  and  Peerless  have  not  arrived.  Two  of  them 
are  known  to  be  lost,  and  it  is  probable  that  all  are.  It  is  gratifying, 
however,  to  say  that  none  of  the  troop  transports  connected  with  the 
land  forces  were  lost,  though  the  Winfield  Scott  had  to  sacrifice  her 
whole  cargo  and  the  Eoanoke  a portion  of  her  cargo  to  save  the  lives 
of  the  regiments  on  board.  The  former  will  be  unable  to  again  put  to 
sea.  The  vessels  connected  with  the  naval  portion  of  the  fleet  have  also, 
suffered  much  and  some  have  been  lost. 

After  a careful  reconnaissance  of  Port  Eoyal  Bay  it  was  ascertained 
that  the  rebels  had  three  field  works  of  remarkable  strength,  strongly 
garrisoned,  and  covered  by  a fleet  of  three  gunboats,  under  Captain 
Tatnall,  late  of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  besides  strong  land  forces,  which  the 
rebels  were  concentrating  from  Charleston  and  Savannah.  The  troops 
of  the  rebels  were  afterwards  ascertained  to  have  been  commanded  by 
General  Drayton.  One  of  the  forts,  and  probably  the  strongest,  was 


4 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.j  GA.j  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CiiAr.  XV. 


situated  on  Hilton  H eacl,  and  the  other  two  on  Phillip’s  Island.  It  was 
deemed  proper  to  first  rednee  the  fort  on  Hilton  Head,  though  to  do  this 
a greater  or  less  fire  might  have  to  be  met  from  the  batteries  on  Bay 
Point  at  the  same  time.  Our  original  plan  of  co-operation  of  the  land 
forces  in  this  attack  had  to  be  set  aside,  in  consequence  of  the  loss, 
during  the  voyage,  of  a greater  portion  of  our  means  of  d’sembarkment, 
together  with  the  fact  that  the  only  point  where  the  troops  should  have 
landed  was  from  5 to  6 miles  (measuring  around  the  intervening  shoal) 
from  the  anchoring  place  of  our  transports — altogether  too  great  a dis- 
tance for  successful  debarkation  with  our  limited  means.  It  was  there- 
fore agreed  that  the  place  should  be  reduced  by  the  naval  force  alone. 

In  consequence  of  the  shattered  condition  of  the  fleet  and  the  delay 
in  the  arrival  of  vessels  that  were  indispensable  for  the  attack  it  had 
to  be  postponed  until  the  7th  instant.  I was  a mere  spectator  of  the 
combat,  and  it  is  not  my  province  to  render  any  report  of  this  action, 
but  I deem  it  an  imperative  duty  to  say  that  the  flring  and  maneuvering 
of  our  fleet  against  that  of  the  rebels  and  their  formidable  land  batteries 
was  a master-piece  of  activity  and  prolessional  skill  that  must  have 
elicited  the  applause  of  the  rebels  themselves  as  a tactical  operation. 
I think  that  too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  to  the  science  and  skill 
exhibited  by  the  flag-officer  of  the  naval  squadron  and  the  officers  con- 
nected with  his  ships.  I deem  the  i)erformance  a masterly  one,  and 
ought  to  have  been  seen  to  be  fully  appreciated.  After  the  works  were 
reduced  I took  i)ossession  of  them  with  the  land  forces.  The  beautifully 
constructed  work  on  Hilton  Head  was  severely  crippled  and  many  of 
the  guns  dismounted.  Much  slaughter  had  evidently  been  made  there, 
many  bodies  having  been  buried  in  the  fort,  and  some  20  or  30  were 
found  some  half  a mile  distant. 

The  island  for  many  miles  was  found  strewed  with  arms  and  accou- 
terments and  baggage  of  the  rebels,  which  they  threw  away  in  their 
hasty  retreat.  We  have  also  come  into  possession  of  about  forty  pieces 
of  ordnance,  most  of  which  is  of  the  heaviest  caliber  and  the  most 
approved  models,  and  a large  quantity  of  ammunition  and  camp  equi- 
page. 

It  is  my  duty  to  report  the  valuable  services  of  Mr.  Boutelle,  [0.  A.]  as- 
sistant in  the  Coast  Survey,  assisting  me  with  his  accurate  and  extensive 
knowledge  of  this  countrj^  His  services  are  invaluable  to  the  Army  as 
well  as  to  the  ilavy,  and  I earnestly  recommend  that  important  notice 
be  taken  of  this  very  able  and  scientific  officer  by  the  War  Department. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAK 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Adjutant- General  IT.  S.  Army, 

Washington^  J).  C. 


[Inclosure.] 

PROCLAMATION. 

To  the  People  of  South  Carolina  : 

In  obedience  to  the  orders  of  the  President  of  these  United  States  of 
America  I have  landed  on  your  shores  with  a small  force  of  national 
trooi)S.  The  dictates  of  a duty  which,  under  these  circumstances,  I 
owe  to  a great  sovereign  State,  and  to  a proud  and  hospitable  people, 
among  whom  I have  passed  some  of  the  pleasantest  days  of  my  life, 
prompt  me  to  proclaim  that  we  have  come  amongst  you  with  no  feel- 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


O 


iugs  of  personal  animosity ; no  desire  to  barm  your  citizens,  destroy 
yoVir  property,  or  interfere  with  any  of  your  lawful  rights  or  your  social 
and  local  institutions,  beyond  what  the  causes  herein  brieiiy  alluded  to 
may  render  unavoidable. 

Citizens  of  South  Carolina,  the  civilized  world  stands  appalled  at  the 
course  you  are  pursuing;  appalled  at  the  crime  you  are  committing 
against  your  own  mother — the  best,  the  most  enlightened,  and  hereto- 
fore the  most  prosperous  of  nations.  You  are  in  a state  of  active  re- 
bellion against  the  laws  of  your  country.  You  have  lawlessly  seized  upon 
the  forts,  arseuals,  and  other  property  belonging  to  our  common  country 
and  within  your  borders.  With  this  property  you  are  in  arms  and  wag- 
ing a ruthless  war  against  your  constitutional  Government,  and  thus 
threatening  the  existence  of  a Government  which  you  are  bound  by  the 
terms  of  a solemn  compact  to  live  under  and  faithfully  sup[)ort.  In  do- 
ing this  you  are  not  only  undermining  and  preparing  the  way  for  totally 
ignoring  your  own  political  and  social  existence,  but  you  are  threaten- 
iug  the  civilized  world  with  the  odious  sentiment  that  self-government 
is  impossible  with  civilized  man. 

Fellow-citizens,  I imiilore  you  to  pause  and  reflect  upon  the  tenor  and 
the  consequences  of  your  acts.  If  the  awful  sacriflces  made  by  the  dev- 
astation of  our  property,  the  shedding  of  fraternal  blood  in  battle,  the 
mourning  and  wailing  of  widows  and  orphans  throughout  our  land,  are 
insufScient  to  deter  you  from  further  pursuing  this  unholy  war,  then 
ponder,  I beseech  you,  upon  the  ultimate  but  not  less  certain  results 
which  its  much  further  progress  must  necessarily  and  naturally  entail 
upon  your  once  happy  and  prosperous  Stafe.  Indeed,  can  you  pursue 
this  fratricidal  war  and  continue  to  imbrue  your  hands  in  the  loyal  blood 
of  your  countrymen,  your  friends,  your  kinsmen,  for  no  other  object  than 
to  unlawfully  disrupt  the  confederacy  of  a great  people — a confederacy 
established  by  your  own  hands — in  order  to  set  up,  were  it  possible,  an 
independent  government,  under  which  you  can  never  live  in  peace,  pros- 
perity, or  quietness? 

Carolinians,  we  have  come  among  you  as  loyal  men,  fully  impressed 
with  our  constitutional  obligations  to  the  citizens  of  your  State.  Those 
obligations  shall  be  performed  as  far  as  in  our  power.  But  be  not  de- 
ceived. The  obligation  of  suppressing  armed  combinations  against  the 
constitutional  authorities  is  ])aramouut  to  all  others.  If  in  the  perform- 
ance of  this  duty  other  minor  but  important  obligations  should  be  in  any 
way  neglected,  it  must  be  attributed  to  necessities  of  the  case,  because 
riglits  dependent  on  the  laws  of  the  State  must  be  necessarily  subordi- 
nate to  military  exigencies  created  by  insurrection  and  rebellion. 

T.  W.  SHERMAY, 

• Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Eogal,  8.  C’.,  November  8,  1861. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Rilton  Read,  8.  0.,  November  11,  1861. 

Sir  : In  addition  to  my  report  of  the  8th  instant,  and  after  a more  per- 
fect examination  into  details,  I have  to  state  that  the  number  of  pieces 
of  ordnance  which  have  fallen  into  our  hands  is  fifty -two,  the  bulk  of 
which  is  of  the  largest  caliber,  all  with  flue  carriages,  &c.,  except  eight 
or  nine,  that  were  ruined  by  our  fire,  which  dismounted  their  pieces.  A 


G COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

complete  inventory  of  tlie  amount  of  public  property  captured  is  being 
l)repared  and  will  be  duly  furnished.  Besides  the  wreck  of  suiall-arms, 
<S:c.,  thrown  away  by  the  rebels  in  their  hasty  retreat,  as  stated  in  my 
last,  a light  battery  of  two  hue  12-pounder  howitzers  has  been  found  to  have 
been  abandoned  near  the  ferry,  about  6 miles  distant.  I have  also  ascer- 
tained by  examination  that  the  flight  of  the  rebels  extended  to  Brad- 
dock’s  Point,  at  the  south  end  of  the  island,  and  about  15  miles  distant, 
the  fort  at  that  point  being  deserted  and  its  guns  spiked.  It  has  one 
10-inch  columbiad  and  two  5J-inch  guns. 

On  clearing  out  the  fort  at  Hilton  Head  the  dead  body  of  Dr.  Buist, 
formerly  an  assistant  surgeon  in  the  Army,  was  found  in  one  of  the  gal- 
leries leading  from  the  terre-plein  to  a caponiere,  behaving  been  killed 
by  the  exidosion  of  a shell  and  buried  by  the  falling  in  of  a i)arapet. 
He  was  the  principal  surgeon  of  this  fort. 

The  effect  of  this  victory  is  startling.  Every  white  inhabitant  has 
left  the  island.  The  wealthy  islands  of  Saint  Helena,  Ladies,  and  most 
of  Port  Eoyal  are  abandoned  by  the  whites,  and  the  beautiful  estates 
of  the  planters,  with  all  their  immense  property,  left  to  the  pillage  of 
hordes  of  apparently  disaffected  blacks,  and  the  indications  are  that  the 
panic  has  extended  to  the  fort  on  the  north  end  of  Eeynolds’  Island, 
commanding  the  fine  anchorage  of  Saint  Helena  Sound.  Of  this,  how- 
ever, I shall  have  satisfactory  information  in  a few  days.  I am  now  in 
the  occupation  of  the  forts  at  Hilton  Head,  the  two  on  Phillip’s  Island, 
and  the  one  at  Braddock’s  Point.  The  task  of  unloading  our  vessels  will 
be  a very  slow  and  difficult  operation,  in  consequence  of  the  extended 
shallow  shores,  until  wharves  can  be  constructed;  nevertheless  it  is 
expected  to  be  able  to  leave  here  with  a large  force  as  soon  as  our  de- 
fenses are  fully  under  way,  to  further  carry  out  the  grand  objects  of 
the  expedition. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

The  Adjutant-General  IT.  S.  Army, 

WashiyigUn^  D.  G. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton.,  C.  S.  Army,  of  the  bom- 
bardment of  Forts  Walker  and  Beauregard. 

Hdqrs.  Prov.  Porces,  Third  Mil.  Dist.;  Dept.  S.  0., 

Camp  Lee,  Hardeeville,  Noveynber  24,  18G1. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  of  presenting  my  official  report  of  the  engage- 
ment on  the  7th  instant  between  the  Eederal  fleet,  numbering  fifteen 
war  steamers  and  gunboats,  and  Ports  Walker  and  Beauregard,  upon 
Hilton  Head  and  Bay  Point,  at  the  entrance  of  Port  Eoyal  Sound.  The 
fleet  was  commanded  by  Gapt.  S.  P.  DuPont,  flag-officer  of  the  South 
Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron,  and  the  troops  on  board  the  transports 
by  Brigadier-General  [T.  W.]  Sherman.  The  distance  between  the  forts 
is  by  Coast  Survey  two  and  five-eighths  miles. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  had  been  collecting  in  our  waters  since  the  morning 
of  the  4th  instant,  and  had  increased  in  the  afternoon  to  thirty-two  war 
steamers  and  transports.  On  receiving  a dispatch  to  this  effect  from 
Col.  William  C.  Heyward,  commanding  the  troops  at  Camp  Walker,  I 


Chap.  XY.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


7 


left  my  headquarters  in  Beaufort  and  repaired  by  steamer  to  Bay  Point, 
which  I reached  at  u ]).  m.,  passing  on  the  way  the  ever- watchful  little 
fleet  of  Plag-Officer  [Josiah]  Tatnall,  0.  S.  Navy. 

After  remaining  in  consultation  until  1.30  a.  m.  with  Col.  B.  G.  M. 
Dunovant,  commandant  of  the  post,  I took  my  departure,  leaving  him 
such  general  instruction  as  the  uncertain  mode  and  direction  from  which 
an  attack  might  be  expected  would  permit.  I then  visited  Commodore 
Tatnall,  and  after  an  interchange  of  views  took  leave,  crossed  over  to 
Hilton  Head  Island,  landed  there  at  daylight  on  the  5th,  and  immedi- 
ately dispatched  a courier  to  Braddock’s  Point,  south  end  of  the  island, 
orderiug  Captain  StuarUs  company,  of  Ninth  Eegiment,  to  march  on 
Port  Walker,  and  embark  thence  to  strengthen  Captain  Elliott’s  gun- 
ners in  Fort  Beauregard.  This  company  did  not  leave  on  the  Gth,  as 
proposed,  as  Captain  Sapard,  of  the  steamer  Edith,  failed  to  comply  with 
his  orders  to  carry  it  across  early  in  the  morning.  They  were  dispatched, 
however,  by  the  first  steamer  at  my  disposal  on  the  7th,  and  belore 
they  had  reached  half  way  across  the  bay  they  were  cut  oft'  from  Bay 
Point  by  the  advancing  fleet  of  the  enemj",  and  obliged  to  seek  shelter 
in  Skull  Creek,  where  Captain  Stuart  disembarked  his  whole  command 
in  safety. 

On  inspecting  Fort  Walker  shortly  after  my  arrival  I found  twenty 
guns,  of  various  caliber,  mounted  upon  the  ramparts,  thirteen  of  which 
were  on  the  channel  battery,  viz,  one  10-inch  columbiad  in  the  center, 
flanked  to  the  right  by  five  32-pounders  and  one  9-inch  Dahlgren  rifled 
cannon,  and  to  the  left  by  six  other  cannon  in  the  following  order  : One 
32-pounder,  one  8-inch  columbiad,  three  42-pounders,  and  one  rifled  24- 
pounder  ; north  bastion,  one  32-pounder ; south  bastion,  one  32-pounder, 
one  8-inch  howitzer,  and  one  long  12-x)ounder ; south  flank  of  bastion, 
one  navy  32-pounder;  demi-lune,  two  24-pounders;  redan,  one  navy 
8-inch  howitzer.  Of  these  eight  guns  one  in  the  north  bastion  and  two  in 
the  south  flank  could  occasionally  be  used  against  the  ships  of  war.  The 
rest  were  for  the  land  defense. 

To  man  the  guns  within  the  fort  and  for  an  infantry  reserve  outside 
we  had,  until  re-enforcements  came  from  Savannah  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  Gth,  two  companies  of  Colonel  Wagener’s  First  Eegiment  Artillery, 
South  Carolina  Militia,  numbering  152  men ; three  companies  of  Colonel 
Hejwvard’s  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  210 
men;  four  companies  of  Col.  E.  G.  M.  Dunovant’s  Twelfth  Eegiment 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  Major  Jones,  2G0  men.  Total,  G22 
men. 

There  were  stationed  on  the  beach  at  Camp  Lookout,  G miles  oif, 
Capt.  I.  H.  Screven’s  Mounted  Guerrillas,  numbering  G5,  who  acted  as 
scouts  and  couriers.  * 

About  9 o’clock  a.  m.  of  the  5th,  Commodore  Tatnall,  who  had  boldly 
attacked  the  enemy’s  gunboats  on  the  previous  daj^,  again  gallantly 
steamed  out  to  exchange  shots  with  them,  but  he  was  met  by  too  large 
a force,  and  therefore  retired  slowly  behind  our  forts.  The  enemy  fol- 
lowed, and  engaged  both  batteries  for  about  forty-five  minutes,  with  no 
other  injury  than  3 men  slightly  burned  in  Fort  Beauregard  from  the 
explosion  of  a caisson  struck  by  a rifle  shell. 

On  the  Gth  instant  the  fleet  and  transports,  which  had  increased  to 
about  forty-five  sail,  would  probably  have  attacked  us  had  not  the  weather 
been  very  boisterous.  In  the  afternoon  about  4 o’clock  we  received  our 
first  re-enforcements  from  Georgia,  450  infantry,  under  command  of  Cap- 
tain Berry,  C.  S.  Army,  and  Captain  Bead’s  battery  of  two  12-pounder 
howitzers  and  50  men. 


8 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


I have  reason  for  supposing  that  this  assistance  would  have  arrived 
sooner,  for  General  A.  E.  Lawton,  commanding  provisional  forces  in 
Georgia,  wrote  from  Savannah  to  Col.  W.  0.  Heyward  on  the  4th  instant, 
8.30  p.  m.,  as  follows:  ‘‘From  a dispatch  received  to-day  from  General 
Eipley  1 infer  that  you  (Col.  W.  C.  Heyward)  have  been  sufficiently  re- 
enforced from  his  command  until  the  plans  of  the  enemy  shall  be  more 
fully  developed.” 

Two  hours  after  the  gallant  Georgians  came  to  the  rescue  I received 
the  welcome  intelligence  that  Colonel  He  Saussure’s  Fifteenth  Eegiment 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  650  strong,  had  landed  at  Seabrook’s  Wharf, 
upon  Skull  Creek,  and  were  close  at  hand. 

At  last  the  memorable  7th  dawned  upon  us  bright  and  serene,  not  a 
ripple  upon  the  broad  expanse  of  water  to  disturb  the  accuracy  of  fire 
from  the  broad  decks  of  that  magnificent  armada  about  advancing  in 
battle  array  to  vomit  forth  its  iron  hail  with  all  the  spiteful  energy  of  long- 
suppressed  rage  and  conscious  strength.  At  9.25  a.  m.  one  9-inch  Hahl- 

gren  gun  opened  fire  upon  the gun  steamship  Wabash,  flag-ship  of 

Capt.  S.  F.  DuPont,  which  led  the  van,  closely  succeeded  by  fourteen 
other  large  steamers  and  gunboats. 

The  shell  from  the  Dahlgren  exploded  near  the  muzzle,  and  was  harm- 
less. Other  shots  followed  from  both  forts,  and  soon  the  fire  became 
general  on  land  and  water.  In  spite  of  our  fire,  directed  with  delib- 
eration and  coolness,  the  fleet  soon  passed  both  batteries  apparently 
unharmed,  and  then  returning  delivered  in  their  changing  rounds  a 
terrific  shower  of  shot  and  shell  in  flank  and  front. 

Besides  this  moving  battery,  the  fort  was  enfiladed  by  two  gunboats 
anchored  to  the  north  oft*  the  mouth  of  Fish  Hall  Creek,  and  another 
at  a point  on  the  edge  of  the  shoals  to  the  south.  This  enfilading  fire 
on  so  still  a sea  annoyed  and  damaged  us  excessively,  particularly  as 
we  had  no  gun  on  either  flank  of  the  bastion  to  reply  with,  for  the 
32-pounder  on  the  right  flank  was  shattered  very  early  by  a round  shot, 
and  on  the  north  flank  for  want  of  a carriage  no  gun  had  been  mounted. 
After  the  fourth  fire  the  10-inch  columbiad  bounded  over  the  limber 
and  became  useless.  The  24-pouuder  rifled  cannon  was  choked  while 
ramming  down  a shell,  and  lay  idle  during  nearlj^  the  whole  engagement. 
The  shells  for  the  9-inch  Dahlgren  were  also  too  large.  The  fourth 
shill  attempted  to  be  rammed  home  could  not  be  driven  below  the 
trunnions,  and  was  then  at  great  risk  discharged. 

Thus  far  the  fire  of  the  enemy  had  been  endured  and  replied  to  with 
the  unruffled  courage  of  veterans.  At  10.30  our  gunners  became  so 
fatigued  that  I left  the  fort,  accompanied  by  one  of  my  volunteer  aides, 
Capt.  H.  Eose,  and  went  back  to  Captain  Head’s  battery  (one  and  three- 
quarter  miles  in  the  rear  of  the  fort)  and  brought  the  greater  part  of  his 
men  back  to  take  the  places  of  our  exhausted  men  inside  the  fort.  It 
was  while  thus  engaged  with  Captain  Head’s  company  that  Col.  W.  H. 
Stiles  rode  up  and  reported  his  regiment  about  2 miles  off.  I instantly 
directed  my  aide.  Lieutenant  Drayton,  to  accompany  Colonel  Stiles  to  the 
road  along  which  his  regiment  was  advancing,  and  to  station  it  in  posi- 
tion by  the  side  of  the  other  Georgia  troops.  On  entering  the  fort  with 
Captain  Head’s  company  they  were  cordially  greeted  by  both  officers 
and  men. 

The  vigorous  attack  from  the  fleet  continued  unabated,  with  still  no 
decided  damage  to  any  of  their  ships.  About  12.30  p.  m.  I again  went 
out  of  the  fort  with  my  assistant  adjutant-general.  Captain  Young,  for 
the  purpose  of  mustering  together  the  infantry  and  reserves,  and  have 
them  in  readiness  for  any  eventuality.  Before  leaving,  however,  I turned 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  BEAUREGARD  AND  WALKER. 


9 


over  tlie  command  to  Colonel  Heyward,  with  directions  to  hold  out  as 
long  as  any  effective  fire  could  be  returned. 

Having  mounted  our  horses,  we  rejoined  the  troops  near  Hospital  Xo. 
2.  I received  information  through  one  of  the  vedettes  that  a steamer 
and  small  boats  were  sounding  close  to  the  beach.  I detached  Cai)tain 
Berry,  with  three  companies  of  his  battalion,  under  the  guidance  of  Capt. 
Ephraim  Barnard,  volunteer  aide,  to  watch  the  enemy,  beat  them  back 
if  they  attemx)ted  to  land,  and  give  notice  if  he  wanted  support.  I then, 
with  some  of  my  staff*,  rode  to  collect  together  the  other  troops,  who, 
through  ignorance  of  our  island  roads,  had  lost  their  Avay  and  had  not 
yet  come  up. 

On  the  road  leading  to  wharf  on  Skull  Creek,  about  one  and  one-fourth 
miles  from  Fort  Walker,  I unexpectedly  met  General  Itipley  and  staff*. 
Saluting  him,  I inquired  if  he  visited  the  island  to  assume  command, 
and  whether  he  wished  to  go  back  with  me  into  the  fort.  He  said  no, 
but  that  he  would  return  to  Coosawhatchie  to  collect  and  bring  back 
two  or  three  regiments  to  my  support.  We  then  moved  from  under 
the  fire  of  the  ships  to  the  shelter  ol*  some  myrtles,  where  we  could  not 
be  seen.  I then  stated  to  him  the  incidents  of  the  morning  5 how  the  men 
had  fought,  that  the  day  was  going  against  us,  and  I was  then  collect- 
ing my  forces  for  any  emergency  that  might  arise;  and,  if  compelled  to 
defend  tbe  island,  it  should  by  retained  to  the  last  extremity.  We  then 
parted,  he  taking  the  road  toward  the  ferry  and  I in  i)ursuit  of  the  pur- 
poses which  brought  me  out  of  the  fort. 

On  reaching  my  reserves  at  Hospital  No.  2 I learned  that  the  enemy 
had  ceased  making  soundings  and  had  gone  back  to  sea,  whereupon  I 
dispatched  Captain  Bead  to  order  Captain  Berry  to  return  from  the 
beach. 

Two  o’clock  had  now  arrived,  when  I noticed  our  men  coming  out  of 
the  fort,  which  they  had  bravely  defended  for  four  and  a half  hours 
against  fearful  odds,  and  then  only  retiring  when  all  but  three  of  the 
guns  on  the  waterfront  had  been  disabled,  and  only  500  pounds  of 
powder  in  the  magazine,  commencing  the  action  with'  220  men  inside 
the  fort,  afterwards  increased  to  255  by  the  accession  from  Bead’s 
battery.  These  heroic  men  retired  slowly  and  sadly  from  their  well- 
fought  guns,  which  to  have  defended  longer  would  have  exhibited  the 
energy  of  despair  rather  than  the  manly  pluck  of  the  true  soldier. 

The  defense  of  this  post  involved  a twofold  preijaration : first  to 
repel  the  attack  from  the  fleet,  and  secondly  an  assault  by  the  beach 
from  the  troops  upon  the  transports.  By  the  beach  we  had  to  provide 
against  an  attack  from  the  north  under  cover  of  the  bluif  south  of  Fish 
Hall  Creek,  and  from  the  south  by  the  beach  under  cover  of  the  woods, 
between  where  a picket  of  25  men  were  posted,  under  Capt.  Paul  H. 
Seabrook,  and  lastly  by  the  road  leading  from  the  beach  to  the  second 
hospital.  To  guard,  against  surprise  either  by  Fish  Hall  Creek  or  by 
the  beach,  when  I was  returning  to  the  fort  with  a portion  of  Captain 
Bead’s  company,  1 at  the  same  time  led  up  Colonel  He  Saussure’s  regi- 
ment to  the  hollow  west  of  the  road  and  directed  them  to  lie  down. 
They  were  perfectly  masked  from  the  fire  of  the  fort,  but  not  from  that 
of  the  fleet,  for  the  watchmen  at  the  mast-heads  gave  notice  of  their 
position,  compelling  Colonel  He  Saussure  after  a short  time  to  fall  back 
under  a heavy  fire  to  a less  dangerous  locality. 

Had  the  intrenched  camp,  with  store-houses  and  magazines,  been 
made  in  time  several  lives  and  large  quantities  of  i)ublic  property 
might  have  been  saved  ; but  it  was  impossible  to  have  made  this  within 
the  short  time  and  with  the  diminutive  force  at  my  disposal,  for  on  my 


10  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  xVND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

arrival  at  beatlqnarters  in  Beaufort,  on  tlie  niglit  of  the  ITtli  October, 
the  number  of  troops  at  Camp  Walker  was  but  362,  afterward  increased 
on  the  24th  to  622  by  the  accession  of  four  companies  under  Major 
Jones,  of  Twelfth  Begiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  To  this  may 
be  added  the  engineer  force  of  some  60  men,  who,  with  the  soldiers, 
w'orked  incessantly  day  and  night.  As  for  evidence  of  what  they  accom- 
plished : The  8-inch  columbiad  on  the  water  front  was  only  mounted  on 
the  1st  November,  one  8-inch  howitzer  in  the  salient  of  the  south  bas- 
tion, mounted  on  the  4th  ; one  32-pounder  on  the  right  flank  of  bastion, 
mounted  on  the  5th ; one  8-inch  howitzer  mounted  on  a ship  carriage ; 
embrasure  cut  through  parapet  of  demi-luue  on  the  night  of  the  5th ; 
covered  way  and  hot-shot  furnace  for  42-x)ounders,  constructed  of  earth 
and  dry  masonry,  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  together  with  wads  of 
moss  and  hay  lor  same ; splinter-proof,  occui)ying  only  one-half  terre- 
])lein  behind  the  principal  traverse,  was  finished  on  the  morning  of  the 
engagement  (7th  instant),  the  material  not  having  arrived  before  the 
4th  instant. 

The  retreat  was  commenced  about  3 p.  m.  toward  Ferry  Point,  about 
6 miles  oft.  Colonel  De  Saussure’s  regiment  and  Capt.  I.  Eead^s  com- 
l)any  of  artillery  bringing  up  the  rear.  At  1.30  a.  m.,  by  the  aid  of 
Commodore  Tatnalfs  fleet,  the  steamers  St.  Johns  and  Edisto,  and  three 
large  flats,  capable  of  holding  150  men  each,  the  troops  were  all  safely 
embarked  without  provisions,  no  ammunition  but  what  was  contained  in 
the  cartridge-boxes  (the  100,000  cartridges  I had  made  requisition  for, 
and  been  anxiously  expecting,  not  having  reached  us  until  after  the 
battle),  and  fearing  that  our  retreat  would  be  cut  off  by  the  enemy^s 
gunboats  at  Skull  Creek,  no  other  alternative  was  left  but  to  leave  the 
island  and  concentrate  upon  the  main  land,  where  we  would  be  enabled 
to  fight  the  enemy  on  more  equal  terms  should  he  venture  beyond  the 
l)rotection  of  his  fleet  and  attack  us  there. 

The  muskets  captured  by  the  enemy,  with  the  exception  of  some  ten 
or  fifteen,  were  those  left  in  the  fort,  shattered  by  shot  and  shell,  others 
left  in  camp  belonging  to  men  on  sick  leave,  or  to  those  engaged  in 
heating  hot-shot  furnaces  two  days  before  the  tight,  and  some  boxes  of 
arms  which  had  been  left  on  the  wharf  the  night  before  the  battle, 
belonging  to  the  sick  men  of  Colonel  De  Saussure’s  regiment,  who  had 
been  left  behind  at  Lightwood  Knot,  and  which  could  have  been  saved, 
with  a box  of  swords,  if  the  captains  of  the  steamers  Edisto  and  St. 
Johns  had  not  refused  to  take  them  on  board  when  directed  to  do  so. 

To  Captain  Tatnall,  flag-officer  C.  S.  Navy,  and  the  officers  and  men 
of  his  little  fleet,  I cannot  too  highly  express  my  admiration  of  their 
intrepidity  and  hardihood  in  attacking  the  enemy’s  gunboats  on  the  4th 
and  5th  instants.  These  encounters,  by  interrupting  their  soundings 
and  the  location  of  their  buoys,  no  doubt  prevented  our  being  attacked 
on  Tuesday,  the  5th  instant,  before  our  re-enforcements  reached  us.  I 
must  also  acknowledge  the  assistance  extended  to  us  bj^  the  gallant 
commodore  with  his  boats  on  the  night  of  our  retreat  from  the  island. 

FORT  BEAUREGARD. 

The  attack  upon  the  fort,  though  not  so  concentrated  and  heavy  as 
that  upon  Walker,  was  nevertheless  very  severe.  Its  armament  was 
nineteen  guns,  of  which  the  following,  viz,  one  8-inch  Eodman,  bored 
to  24-pounder  and  rifled  5 two  42-i30unders ; one  10-inch  columbiad  j two 
42-pounders,  reamed  to  eight  inches,  and  one  32-pounder  in  hot-shot 
battery,  were  the  only  guns  capable  of  being  used  against  the  fleet. 

The  force  on  Bay  Point  was  640  men,  commanded  by  Col.  E.  G.  M. 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


11 


Dunovaiit,  Twelfth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Yolnnteers.  Of  the  above, 
149  garrisoned  Fort  Beauregard,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Oapt. 
Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  Beaufort  Yoluntecr  Artillery,  Company  A,  Ninth 
Regiment  South  Carolina  Yolunteers.  The  infantry  force  of  Colonel 
Dunovant'S  regiment  was  intrusted  with  the  protection  of  the  eastern 
l)art  of  the  island,  and  of  the  defense  of  the  bastion  line  at  the  Island 
Narrows,  where  an  attack  was  expected  from  the  enemy. 

Knowing  how  small  a force  Captain  Elliott  had  to  command  his  bat- 
teries, I orden^d,  as  soon  as  1 reached  Hilton  Head,  on  the  5th  instant. 
Captain  Stuart’s  company  (Hamilton  Guards!,  Ninth  [Company  E., 
Eleventh]  Regiment  South  Carolina  Yolunteers,  to  march  uj)on  Fort 
Yvhilker  from  Braddock’s  Point,  and  take  thence  the  steamer  Edith  for 
Bay  Point,  but  the  failure  of  Captain  Sapard,  of  the  Edith,  to  fullill 
his  appointment  at  the  hour  designated,  i^revented  me  from  sup{)orting 
Captain  Elliott  as  I desired.  But  on  Thursday  morning,  7th  instant, 
having  obtained  the  sRamer  Emma,  I dispatched  Captain  Stuart’s  com- 
])any  in  her  to  Fort  Beauregard.  The  rapid  advance  of  the  enemy’s 
fleet,  however,  to  the  attack  on  the  batteries  cut  ofl*  and  compelled  her, 
at  the  risk  of  being  intercepted,  to  turn  back  and  seek  shelter  in  Skull 
Creek,  on  the  shores  of  which  Captain  Stuart’s  company  safely  disem- 
barked and  joined  me  in  the  afternoon  j and  here  again  was  exhibited 
another  act  of  heroism  on  the  part  of  our  veteran  commodore,  who  to 
save  the  Emma  interposed  his  own  frail  flag-steamer  between  her  and 
the  advancing  flag  ship  of  Commodore  DuPont,  drawing  upon  himself 
her  entire  broadside,  and  thus  diverting  this  huge  leviathan  temporarily 
from  her  course,  secured  the  safety  of  the  Emma  at  the  peril  of  his  own 
vessel. 

The  non-arrival  of  any  re-enforcements  at  Camp  Walker  until  the  niglit 
of  the  Cth  instant  also  prevented  me  from  sending  the  four  companies 
of  the  Twelfth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Yolunteers^  under  Major  Jones, 
to  the  support  of  the  other  six  companies  of  the  regiment  at  Bay  Point. 

For  the  details  of  the  engagement  at  this  post,  the  notable  examples 
of  bravery,  the  general  good  conduct,  their  well-timed  retreat  in  the 
direction  indicated  by  the  dotted  red  lines  on  the  map  appended,*  I beg 
leave  to  refer  you  to  the  official  reports  of  Colonel  Dunovant  and  Cap- 
tain Elliott.  But  among  the  many  officers  and  men  honorably  noticed 
on  this  occasion  in  the  official  report  of  Colonel  Dunovant,  none  of  them 
are  so  justly  entitled  to  well-merited  encomium  as  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott, 
the  commander  of  the  fort.  Others  may  have  exhibited  an  equal  amoun  t 
of  cool  bravery  in  front  of  the  foe,  but  his  opportunities  enabled  him  to 
surpass  all  his  brother  officers  in  the  skillful  arrangement  of  Jiis  defenses, 
superb  condition  of  his  batteries,  and  in  the  high  discipline  which  he  had 
imparted  to  his  model  comi)any,  the  creature  of  his  own  indefatigable 
exertions. 

The  delays  and  dangers  incident  to  the  manner  in  which  troops  and 
su])plies  of  all  kinds  were  landed  at  the  forts  of  Port  Royal  and  the 
absence  of  all  means  of  retreat  in  case  of  disaster  had  attracted  my 
most  serious  attention  immediately  after  I assumed  command  at  Beau- 
fort, on  the  evening  of  the  7th  instant.  I immediately  took  steps  for 
remedying  the  first  and  providing  for  the  last. 

With  the  double  object  of  landing  supplies  in  all  weather  at  Bay 
Point,  and  at  the  same  time  of  furnishing  the  means  of  retreat  beyond 
the  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  I directed  one  of  my  volunteer  aides, 
Capt.  T.  R.  S.  Elliott,  to  make  an  examination  of  the  adjacent  creeks 


Not  found. 


12  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EASTFLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

to  the  north  of  the  fort.  He  reported  that  about  3 miles  from  the  mouth 
of  Moss  Creek  there  was  a deptli  of  water  sufiicieut  for  steamers  drawing 
7 feet  at  low  water,  and  that  from  thence  a causeway  of  300  yards  over 
the  marsh  might  easily  be  made,  and  furnish  a sure  means  of  transpor- 
tation, and  thus  avoid  the  losses  and  delays  which  had  previously  oc- 
curred in  landing  from  the  steamers  into  flats  upon  the  beach. 

From  the  point  above  indicated  in  Moss  Creek  flats  were  to  have 
been  iirovided  and  stationed  to  convey  the  soldiers  in  case  of  emergency 
across  the  creek,  thence  by  laud  to  Station  Creek,  where  other  flats  were 
to  be  placed  lor  the  same  object  as  at  Moss  Creek.  Landing  at  Saint 
Helena  the  transit  to  White  Hall  Ferry  opposite  Beaufort  was  compara- 
tively safe. 

On  Hilton  Head  I also  commenced  repairing  the  wharf  at  Seabrook’s 
Lauding,  on  Skull  Creek,  with  a view  of  transporting  stores  to  Fort 
Walker  wh(m  the  weather  was  too  boisterous  to  land  them  in  the  surf. 
The  completion  of  the  wharf  was  prevented,  however,  by  the  unexpected 
attack  of  the  enemy,  though  in  its  incomplete  state  it  had  already  been 
I3ut  to  successful  use. 

I succeeded,  however,  in  obtaining  from  Charleston  two  flats  and  two 
troop  boats,  and  from  Savannah  three  large  flats,  capable  of  containing 
150  men  each,  which  reached  Jenkins’  Island  Ferry  in  time  to  assist  in 
embarking  our  troops  on  the  night  of  the  retreat.  Three  other  smaller 
ones  were  sent  at  the  same  time  to  White  Hall  Ferry,  which  assisted  in 
performing  the  same  good  offices  for  Colonel  Dunovant’s  command. 
The  rest  of  the  scheme,  for  want  of  time  and  flats,  could  not  be  carried 
out  in  the  manner  I intended. 

For  the  purpose  of  sending  messages  between  Forts  Walker  and 
Beauregard,  and  thence  to  my  headquarters  at  Beaufort,  I had  prepared, 
by  the  assistance  of  Captain  Lynah,  another  of  my  aides,  a number  of 
signal  flags,  the  designs  of  which  had  already  been  ];>repared  and  painted, 
and  only  needed  a few  more  days  to  have  been  put  into  operation. 

In  alluding  as  I have  to  these  matters  I do  not  mean  to  reflect  upon 
any  person,  or  to  say  these  pressing  wants  could  have  been  supplied 
anterior  to  the  period  when  I entered  upon  my  new  duties.  My  design 
has  been  to  exhibit  the  condition  in  which  I found  my  command,  and 
to  show  that  I have  left  no  effort  untried  to  improve  it. 

Notwithstanding  the  prompt  measures  adopted  by  Colonel  Dunovant 
to  effect  his  retreat  in  the  direction  of  the  Narrows,  it  is  surprising  that, 
with  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the  enemy  (through  Mr.  Boutelle  and 
others  connected  with  the  Coast  Survey),  his  retreat  had  not  been  inter- 
cepted by  gunboats  passing  up  towards  Beaufort,  and  mine  by  other 
steamers  taking  the  passage  through  Skull  Creek  towards  the  ferry 
landing.  W^hy  they  did  not  adopt  this  course  must  be  left  to  time  to 
explain. 

Casualties. — The  following  is  a correct  list  of  killed,  wounded,  missing, 
and  prisoners : 


CuAP.  XV.l  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


13 


The  heads  of  the  quartermaster’s  and  commissary’s  departments, 
Alaj.  E.  Willis  and  Capt.  C.  D.  Owens,  have  discharged  lludr  several 
duties  with  economy  and  fidelity.  The  rei)orts  hereunto  ap])eiided  of 
these  officers  and  of  their  assistants  show  how  unwearied  and  earnest 
were  their  efforts  to  save  the  public  property  left  at  the  headquarters  in 
Beaufort.  I must  likewise  make  honorable  mention  of  Col.  W.  C.  Iley- 
ward,  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  who  com- 
manded in  Eort  Walker  and  its  vicinity,  and  who  during  the  battle 
made  the’best  use  of  the  means  at  his  disposal.  Col.  John  A.  Wagener, 
First  Regiment  Artillery  South  Carolina  Militia,  supported  by  Maj. 
Arthur  M.  Huger,  of  the  same  regiment,  was  placed  in  the  immediate 
command  of  all  the  batteries,  nine  of  which,  upon  the  water  front,  were 
manned  by  the  German  Artillery,  Companies  A and  B,  Capts.  TI.  Harms 
and  D.  Werner,  First  Regiment  Artillery  South  Carolina  Militia,  all  of 
whom  fought  under  the  flag  of  their  adopted  country  with  an  enthusi- 
asm which  could  not  have  been  surpassed  had  they  been  fighting  in 
defense  of  their  own  fatherland. 

The  remaining  four  batteries  on  the  left  flank  of  the  water  front  were 
under  the  direction  of  Capt.  Josiah  Bcdon,  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Regiment 
South  Carolina  Volunteers.  The  flanking  and  rear  guns  of  the  fort 
were  manned  by  detachments  from  Captain  Bedon’s,  Canaday’s,  and 
White’s  companies.  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers. Maj.  F.  D.  Lee,  South  Carolina  Engineers  and  constructing 
engineer  of  Fort  Walker,  not  only  fought  gallantly  at  the  batteries,  but 
afforded  valuable  assistance  at  other  points  in  the  work  during  the 
contest. 

Capt.  Joseph  A.  Yates,  Battalion  South  Carolina  Artillery,  and  acting 
ordnance  officer,  was  zealous  in  the  execution  of  all  the  duties  assigned 
to  him.  Toward  the  close  of  the  fight  he  was  severely  wounded,  but 
has  since  recovered,  and  is  again  ready  in  another  field  to  resist  all 
marauders  that  may  approach  our  shores.  Dr.  Ogier  and  his  able  as- 
sistants, Drs.  W.  C.  Ravenel,  and  William  Elliott,  a volunteer  from  Sa- 
vannah, Ga.,  were  present,  and  rendered  efficient  service  in  the  hospitals. 
I cannot  but  regret  the  painful  wound  which  has  been  the  cause  of  the 
resignation  of  Dr.  Ogier  as  medical  director  in  my  military  district. 

In  conclusion,  I cannot  but  express  my  high  appreciation  of  the  gal- 
lant behavior  of  my  aides,  Capt.  Henry  E.  Young  and  Lieut.  J.  E.  Dray- 
ton, as  also  that  of  the  gentlemen  comprising  my  volunteer  staff',  Capts. 
L.  Cheves,  H.  Rose,  E.  Lynah,  J.  E.  Eddings,  J.  I.  Middleton,  jr.,  and 
Joseph  A.  Huger.  The  names  of  the  officers  and  men  not  mentioned  in 
my  report  will  be  found  deservedly  mentioned  in  the  official  reports  of 
the  colonels  of  regiments,  commandants  of  batteries,  and  chiefs  of  the 
general  staff*. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  yours, 

• THOS.  F.  DRAYTON, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 

Capt.  L.  D.  Walker, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Charleston^  S.  C. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Dept.  South  Carolina, 

Charleston^  November  19,  1861. 

It  might  be  proper  to  remark  upon  the  within  report  and  some  prob- 
ably inadvertent  inaccuracies,  or  to  give  a report  of  movements  and 
orders  irom  these  headquarters  and  instructions  given  after  news  was 


14  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

received  that  the  enemy^s  fleet  was  intended  for  Port  Eoyal  and  how 
they  were  carried  out  and  followed.  I deem,  however,  that  no  good 
would  result  to  the  service  from  a discussion  of  these  points  at  this  time ; 
and  requesting  that,  should  it  be  thought  proper  to  publish  this  report, 
it  should  be  published  with  this  indorsement,  it  is  respectfully  forwarded. 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  John  A.  Wagener,  First  Artillery^  South  Carolina  Militia^ 
q/  the  homhardment  of  Fort  Walker. 

Charleston,  November  11, 1861. 

Sir:  In  consequence  of  our  fatiguing  retreat  from  the  island  of  Hilton 
Head  I am  only  now  able  to  render  you  my  official  report  of  that  disas- 
trous day,  together  with  the  returns,  in  part  only,  as  I have  not  been 
able  to  obtain  the  reports  of  Captains  Bedon,  Canaday,  and  White,  of 
Colonel  Heyward’s  regiment,  which  I would  beg  you  to  receive  through 
Colonel  Heyward. 

On  Thursday  morning,  the  7th  instant,  the  fleet  which  had  been  watch- 
ing us  for  days  began  to  move  in  such  a manner  that  I had  the  long  roll 
beat  immediately,  and  in  one  and  a half  minutes  every  cannoneer  was 
at  his  post.  The  armament  of  the  fort  was  divided  into  batteries  and 
served  as  follows,  viz  : 

Eight  channel  battery:  Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  5,  German  Artillery,  Com- 
pany B,  Capt.  H.  Harms.  Center  channel  battery:  Nos.  6,  7,  8,  and  9, 
German  Artillery,  Company  A,  Capt.  D.  Werner.  Left  channel  battery : 
Nos.  10,  11,  12,  and  13,  Company  C,  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Eegiment  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  Capt.  Josiah  Bedon.  These  were  the  front  batter- 
ies, all  under  command  of  Maj.  A.  M.  Huger,  First  Artillery,  South  Car- 
olina Militia. 

The  flanking  and  rear  guns  were  manned  by  detachments  from  Cap- 
tains Bedon’s,  Canaday’s,  and  White’s  companies.  Ninth  [Eleventh] 
Eegiment,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Canaday.  The  reserve  was 
under  charge  of  Captain  White.  The  first  gun  (32-pounder  rifle),  which 
was  loaded  with  a percussion  shell,  1 directed  myself,  but  unfortunately 
the  shell  exploded  directly  in  front  of  the  muzzle. 

The  battle  opened,  I think,  a few  minutes  before  9 o’clock  a.  m. 
The  enemy  had  chosen  a day  which  was  entirely  propitious  to  him.  The 
water  was  as  smooth  as  glass.  The  air  was  just  sufficient  to  blow  the 
smoke  of  his  guns  into  our  faces,  where  it  would  meet  the  column  of  our 
own  smoke  and  prevent  our  sight,  excepting  by  glimpses.  The  sailing 
vessels  of  our  opponents  were  towed  by  his  steamers,  and  thus  could 
maneuver  on  the  broad  expanse  of  Port  Eoyal  with  the  accuracy  of 
well-trained  battalions.  No  sooner  did  we  obtain  his  range  than  it  would 
be  changed,  and  time  after  time  rechanged,  while  the  deep  water  per- 
mitted him  to  choose  his  own  position,  and  fire  shot  after  shot  and  shell 
after  shell  with  the  precision  of  target  practice.  Most  unfortunate  for 
us  was  the  mistake  of  the  engineers,  which  I had  pointed  out  before  the 
battle,  of  having  failed  to  establish  a battery  on  the  blufl‘  which  com- 
manded our  flank.  The  enemy  having  taken  position  in  the  mouth  of 
the  creek  exposed  us  to  a raking  fire,  which  did  us  the  greatest  damage, 
dismounting  our  guns  and  killing  and  wounding  numbers  of  our  men. 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


15 


Major  ITuger  reports  to  me  as  follows,  viz : 

Up  to  some  minutes  after  9 o’clock  a.  m.  the  firing  Avas  very  slow,  tlie  range  being 
too  great.  About  that  time,  however,  the  enemy  reached  a y)Osition  in  front  of  the 
batteries  at  about  one  and  a quarter  miles  range  at  easy  speed,  delivering  a slow  but 
well-directed  fire,  and  evidencing  their  determination  to  pass  beyond,  which  I en- 
deavored by  a rapid  fire  of  shell  and  hot  shot  to  prevent,  but  the  long  range  and 
moving  objects  did  not  let  me  succeed.  In  a few  minutes  several  of  the  enemy’s  ships 
passed  well  beyond  us.  Three  of  them  took  position  to  enfilade  our  batteries  from 
our  northwest  flank,  while  others,  Avhich  had  not  yet  got  into  action,  assumed  direc- 
tion opposite  our  southeast  front,  and  their  largest  ship  (the  Minnesota)  returned  down 
our  front,  delivering  a beautifully  accurate  fire  at  short  range,  supported  at  rather 
longer  range  by  the  fire  of  two  other  large  ships  of  war.  So  soon  as  these  positions 
had  become  established  the  fort  was  fought  simply  as  a point  of  honor,  for  from  that 
moment  Ave  were  defeated,  excepting  perhaps  by  x)rovidential  interference. 

Our  guus  were  fought,  nevertheless,  with  determination  and  skill,  and 
did  a great  deal  of  damage  to  the  enemy.  About  11  o’clock  it  Avas  re- 
X)orted  to  me  that  the  Bay  Point  batteries  bad  been  silenced,  whereupon 
we  determined  that  we  would  have  to  fight  so  much  harder,  aud  I am 
Xiroud  to  say  our  men  were  equal  to  the  exigencies  of  the  occasion.  Be- 
tween 12  and  1 o’clock  I was  knocked  down  by  a piece  of  shell,  and  a 
good  deal  stunned.  I sent  for  Major  Huger  and  transferred  the  com- 
mand of  the  fort  to  him,  to  enable  me  to  get  a few  moments’  rest.  By 
a little  after  1 o’clock  Major  Huger  informed  Colonel  Heyward,  com- 
manding the  island,  that  the  ammunition  was  nearly  gone.  It  was 
thereupon  determined  by  the  order  of  the  general  commanding  to  evac- 
uate the  works.  Three  sections  of  the  German  Artillery,  under  Captain 
Harms,  Lieut.  F.  Melchers,  and  Orderly  Bischoff,  were  detailed  to  con- 
tinue a slow  fire  while  the  wounded  were  removed,  and  the  garrison  was 
ordered  to  retreat  by  dispersion.  Near  2 o’clock  Major  Huger  ordered 
the -last  detachment  from  their  guns. 

By  this  time  the  field  in  our  rear  was  covered  with  the  shells  of  the 
enemy,  and  it  is  by  the  intervention  of  God’s  providence  only  that  not 
more  were  lost.  The  fort  was  gone,  but  our  honor  was  saved.  Of  the 
channel  battery  only  three  guns  were  in  condition  to  have  continued 
the  fight,  Avhich  would  have  been  hopeless  under  any  circumstances.  A 
retreat  was  consequently  ordered.  On  reaching  BlulTton,  the  general 
commanding  was  kind  enough  to  order  our  battalion  here  with  expres- 
sions of  approval,  for  which  I respectfully  tender  him  my  thanks. 

I beg  leave  to  inclose  you  a return  of  our  killed  and  severely  wounded. 
The  slightly  wounded  have  not  been  mentioned,  for  they  are  very  numer- 
ous. The  general  conamanding  will  concur  with  me  that  this  has  been 
one  of  the  hardest-fought  fields  on  record,  and  I would  be  A^ery  grateful 
to  him  for  the  public  expression  of  his  opinion,  to  set  the  tongue  of  slan- 
der at  rest  aud  encourage  our  citizen  soldiery.  I beg  leave  also  respect- 
fully to  bring  to  his  notice  the  names  of  the  following  officers  and  men 
who  have  particular!}^  distinguished  themselves  by  acts  of  heroism,  viz  : 
Major  Huger,  the  bravest  of  the  brave ; Lieut.  [J.  E.]  Heape,  of  Captain 
Bedon’s  company,  whom  I saw  myself  save  a poor,  seA^erely-Avounded 
soldier  in  the  terrible  shell-fire  of  the  enemy  while  crossing  the  field  in 
retreat  j Mr.  Oarlsen,  of  the  German  Artillery,  who  replaced  the  Con- 
federate flag  on  the  rampart  in  a storm  of  shot  and  shelly  Private  Julius 
Wagener,  a boy  only  fifteen  years  of  age,  who  replanted  our  noble  Pal- 
metto banner  on  the  ramparts,  whence  it  had  been  shot  down — I Avould 
not  have  mentioned  his  name,  he  being  my  OAvn  son,  but  for  the  opinion 
that  he  may  hereafter  become  very  useful  to  his  country ; PrAate  Geil- 
fuss,  German  Artillery,  who  brought  away  the  Palmetto  flag,  and  Avas 
, otherwise  heroically  attentive  to  his  duties. 

I deem,  besides,  specially  deserving;  the  notice  of  the  general  command- 


IG  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  ICnAr.  XV. 


ing  Major  Barnwell  and  Captains  Yates  and  Read,  of  the  Regular  Army; 
Major  Lee,  of  the  engineers;  Col.  Gaston  Allen,  who  kindly  acted  as 
my  special  aide,  and  my  entire  staff*,  who  did  their  duty  welL 

I may  further  mention  as  deserving  of  great  praise  Captain  Bedon 
and  his  officers  and  Captain  Harms  and  his  officers.  Captain  Werner 
and  his  officers,  especially  Lieutenant  Melchers,  who  fired  the  last  gun. 
Private  Ileidenreich  and  Corporals  Petersen  and  Stelljes,  of  the  German 
Artillery,  deserve  to  be  praisefully  mentioned,  likewise  several  members 
of  the  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Regiment,  whose  names  I have  not  been  able  to 
remember.  Captains  Canaday  and  White  and  their  officers.  Lieutenant 
Scanlan,  of  the  ordnance,  and  Sergeants  Cameron  and  Bruggermann, 
have  also  done  well.  Indeed,  where  all  were  heroes,  with  very  few  ex- 
ceptions, it  is  the  voice  of  our  country  only  which  is  strong  enough  to 
proclaim  their  “ well  done.” 

The  entire  force  in  the  works  consisted  of  220  men,  as  detailed  by  my 
special  alarm  regulations,  and  these  had  to  resist  an  overpowering  array 
of  seventeen  war  vessels,  with  nearly  400  guns  of  the  best  and  heaviest 
caliber.  All  the  guns,  as  is  usual  in  sand  batteries,  worked  hard,  add- 
ing much  to  the  labor  of  the  men,  who  had  already  worked  hard  and  en- 
joj^ed  little  or  no  rest  for  several  days  preceding.  I had  great  reason  to 
be  grateful  to  Captain  Read’s  regulars  for  their  brave  and  valuable  aid. 

Under  the  circumstances  of  our  retreat  nothing  whatever  could  be 
saved  by  the  men.  They  had  been  working  at  the  guns  in  most  cases 
in  shirt  sleeves ; the  sand  had  covered  their  knapsacks  and  muskets, 
sometimes  two  or  three  feet  deep,  and  very  few  arms  were  therefore 
brought  oft*  and  very  few  knapsacks  and  clothing  saved.  They  are 
entirely  destitute,  and  should  be  cared  for  by  the  State.  The  officers 
have  also  lost  all,  in  some  cases  even  their  swords.  The  Confederate 
flag  was  rent  into  so  many  shreds  that  no  piece  could  be  found.  The 
Palmetto  flag,  however,  has  been  brought  home,  decorated  with  many  a 
token  of  the  enemy’s  wrath. 

The  battle  of  Port  Roj^al,  it  is  true,  has  been  lost,  but  the  enemy,  I 
sincerely  believe,  have  paid  very  dear  for  their  success,  and  we  may 
console  ourselves  with  the  conviction  that  we  have  not  only  done  our 
duty  manfully  under  the  most  terrific  circumstances,  but  that  we  have 
for  five  hours  defended  a position  against  the  most  scientific  and  bravest 
seamen  which  one  of  our  best  generals  and  engineers  had  pronounced 
untenable. 

I am,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  WAGENER, 

Colonel  First  Artillery^  8.  G.  Ji.,  late  Comdt.  Fort  Walker. 

Capt.  H.  E.  Young,  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  William  C.  Heyward^  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry^ 
of  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Walker. 

Hdqrs.  Ninth  Regiment  S.  C.  Vols.,* 

Third  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  South  Carolina, 

Camp  Lee,  November  16,  1861. 

Sir:  On  the  morning  of  Thursday,  the  7th  November,  I was  placed 
in  command  of  Port  Walker,  Col.  J.  A.  Wagener  and  Maj.  A.  M.  Huger 

* Tkis  organization  is  borne  on  the  Confederate  registers  as  the  Eleventh  Regiment. 


Chap.XV.J  capture  forts  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


17 


Raving  the  immediate  command  of  the  batteries,  assisted  by  Captain 
Yates  and  Maj.  Jolm  Barnwell.  The  enemy  oi)ened  fire  upon  ns  about 
9 a.  m.,  which  was  briskly  returned  by  us  until  many  of  our  guns  were 
either  disabled  by  them  or  rendered  useless  by  various  accidents.  The 
two  rifled  guns  failed,  in  consequence  of  it  being  found  imi)ossible  to 
force  down  the  shells,  after  two  or  three  discharges.  The  lO  inch  gun 
at  the  fourth  or  fifth  discharge  was  rendered  useless.  Two  of  the  42- 
pounders  were  also  rendered  useless. 

About  2 p.  m.,  finding  the  fire  of  our  batteries  had  nearly  ceased,  I 
inquired  of  Major  Huger  where  Colonel  Wagener  was.  He  informed 
me  that  the  colonel  had  been  stunned  by  the  bursting  of  a shell,  and 
that  he  (Major  Huger)  was  then  in  command  of  the  battery.  On  con- 
sulting with  him  it  was  determined  that  Mr.  L.  Cheves  and  myself 
(Mr.  Cheves  acting  as  aide  to  General  Draj^ton)  should  proceed  to  the 
magazine  and  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  ammunition.  On  reaching 
the  door  we  were  met  by  Lieutenant  Scanlan,  who  reported  that  there 
were  about  ten  or  eleven  rounds  for  32-pounders  left.  On  returning  and 
reporting  this  to  Major  Huger  it  was  decided  that,  as  we  could  fight  no 
longer  with  any  hope  of  success,  one  or  two  guns  should  still  be  served 
slowly  until  all  the  wounded  could  be  removed,  and  then  to  evacuate 
the  fort.  This  was  fortunately  accomplished  with  but  little  additional 
loss,  and  the  retreat  to  Buckingham  Ferry  commenced. 

For  particulars  respecting  the  officers  and  men  of  my  own  regiment 
on  duty  in  the  fort  I refer  you  to  the  reports  of  Capt.  Josiah  Bed  on  and 
Capt.  D.  S.  Canaday.  The  list  of  killed  and  wounded  has  already  been 
sent  in  by  my  adjutant.  Colonel  Wagener’s  report,  I presume,  will  fur- 
nish all  the  necessary  information  respecting  his  regiment.  I regret 
that  my  report  should  be  so  short,  but  without  a room  for  myself,  with 
very  little  convenience  for  writing,  constant  applications  for  leave  of  ab- 
sence, noise  and  confusion  about  me,  I find  it  impossible  to  write  more. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

WM.  C.  HEYWABD, 

Colonel  Ninth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

Capt.  H.  E.  Young, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Captain  Bedon  and  Lieuts.  J.  E.  Heape,  J.  J.  Guerard,  and  W.  A. 
Boyle  behaved  with  distinguished  bravery  during  the  whole  action. 
Mr.  Joseph  A.  Huger  and  Mr.  Hugh  Bose,  aides  to  General  Drayton, 
rendered  great  assistance  and  displayed  great  coolness. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  B.  Be  Saussure^  Fifteenth  South  Carolina  Infantry^ 
of  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Wallcer. 

Camp  Lee,  November  17,  1861. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  general  commanding, 
I beg  leave  to  make  the  following  report  of  casualties  in  the  Fifteenth 
Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  at  the  battle  of  Fort  Walker,  on 
Hilton  Head  Island,  on  the  7th  of  November,  1861.* 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  2 officers  (Lieuts.  Z.  E.  Suggart  and  James  Norris) 
killed,  and  2 officers  and  12  enlisted  men  wounded,  but  see  statement  of  casualties  on 

p.  12. 

2 R R — VOL  VI 


[Chap.  XV. 


18  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GxV.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 

As  tlie  command  was  all  day  under  the  eye  of  the  general  I deem  it 
unnecessary  to  report  its  operations  during  the  engagement,  but  cannot 
close  without  bringing  to  the  notice  of  the  general  commanding  that  Col. 
Eandolph  Spaulding,  of  Georgia,  attached  himself  to  Company  B of  this 
regiment,  and  fought  throughout  the  day  as  a private  in  the  ranks. 

Bespectfully  submitted. 

W.  D.  Be  SAUSSURE, 

Colonel  Fifteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 

Capt.  H.  E.  Young, 

Assista^it  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  6. 

Report  of  Maj.  Francis  B.  Lee^  South  Carolina  Engineers. 

New  River  Bridge,  Becemher  4,  1861. 

Sir  ; In  obedience  to  instructions  I have  the  honor  of  submitting  the 
following  report  of  the  defenses  of  Hilton  Head  up  to  the  time  of  the 
bombardment  of  Fort  Walker,  November  7,  1861: 

As  Chief  of  Engineers  S.  C.  A.,  I received  instructions  during  the 
month  of  May,  1861,  from  General  Beauregard,  then  commanding  pro- 
visional forces  in  South  Carolina,  to  carry  into  execution  the  defensive 
works  on  this  coast.  The  general  location  of  these  defenses,  together 
with  the  number  and  character  of  guns  to  be  employed,  was  designated 
by  General  Beauregard,  and  the  immediate  necessity  of  the  early  com- 
pletion of  the  proposed  works  was  urged  upon  those  in  authority. 

In  the  month  of  June  I received  an  appropriation  of  $15,000,  and  with 
this  limited  means  at  my  disposal  commenced  the  works  at  Port  Royal, 
Captain  Gregorie,  S.  C.  A.,  being  charged  with  the  construction  of  Fort 
Beauregard  at  Bay  Point.  Shortly  after  the  commencement  of  this  work 
Maj.  J.  H.  Trapier,  C.  S.  Engineers,  having  been  charged  with  the  engi- 
neering work  in  this  State,  and  by  order  of  the  governor  having  trans- 
ferred to  Major  Trapier  the  corps  then  under  my  command,  I was  instructed 
to  ])roceed  to  Hilton  Head  and  carry  into  execution  the  defensive  work 
at  that  point. 

I immediately  on  the  receipt  of  this  order  organized  a party  of  artisans, 
and  leaving  Charleston  July  1,  1861,  reached  Hilton  Head  on  the  3d  of 
the  same  month.  The  labor  necessary  for  the  conduct  of  the  work  was 
to  be  immediately  furnished  by  the  planters  of  the  vicinity,  but  owing 
to  some  delays  in  the  issuing  of  the  order  no  laboring  force  was  put  at 
my  disposal  for  three  weeks  after  my  arrival  at  Hilton  Head. 

In  the  mean  time  I designed  and  laid  out  the  proposed  work,  a sketch* 
of  which  accompanies  this  report.  The  armament  of  the  water  front,  as 
ordered'by  General  Beauregard,  consisted  of  seven  lO-inch  columbiads, 
and  my  plans  were  arranged  for  such  a battery.  The  interior  slopes  of 
the  water  battery  were  consequently  intended  for  seven  circular  traverses 
against  eiifiladiug  fire.  The  labor  having  arrived,  the  work  was  rapidly 
pressed  forward,  and  by  September  1,  1861,  was  ready  to  receive  its 
armament.  In  place  of  receiving  seven  10  inch  guns,  but  one  could  be 
Iirocured,  together  with  one  10-inch  columbiad,  model  bored  to  a 32- 
pounder  and  rifled  ; one  8 inch  columbiad,  model  bored  to  a 24-i)ounder 
and  rilled;  one  8-inch  columbiad;  nine  navy  32-pounders ; three  navy 

* To  appear  in  Atlas. 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


19 


42-pouii(lers ; three  navy  S-inch  howitzers;  two  24-x)oun(lers ; two  42- 
pounder  carronades,  and  two  long  English  12-i)ounders.  Thirteen  of 
these,  viz,  one  10-inch  columbiad;  one  10-inch  columbiad,  pattern  bored 
to  a 32-pounder  and  rifled  ; one  8-inch  columbiad,  pattern  bored  to  a 24- 
pounder  and  rifled;  one  8-inch  columbiad;  six  navy  32  imunders,  and 
three  navy  42-pounders,  being  in  all  13  guns,  were  ordered  to  be  placed 
on  the  water  front. 

This  involved  the  necessity  of  subdividing  the  spaces  allotted  to  the 
guns  in  this  battery,  and  consequently  |)lacing  them  in  such  near  prox- 
imity as  efiectually  to  prevent  the  construction  of  traverses  against 
enfilading  fire.  The  salient  of  the  bastions  of  the  fort  on  the  land  side, 
and  also  of  the  demi-lune,  were  arranged  for  circular  traverses,  some 
of  which  were  sent  me ; but,  the  necessary  chassis  and  carriages  never 
having  arrived,  I was  forced  to  make  use  of  two  spare  carriages,  viz, 
one  low  navy  carriage — to  suit  which  an  embrasure  had  to  be  cut  through 
the  salient  of  the  demi-lune  on  the  eve  of  the  engagement — and  one  bar- 
bette carriage,  the  latter  of  which  was  placed  in  the  salient  of  the  south 
bastion,  but  with  a limited  traverse  segment. 

Two  8-inch  navy  howitzers  were  mounted  on  these  carriages.  The 
third  8-inch  howitzer,  intended  for  the  salient  of  the  north  bastion,  was 
never  mounted,  no  carriage  having  arrived  for  it.  Besides  these,  one 
navy  32-pounder  was  mounted  on  the  exterior  angle  of  each  bastion,  and 
one  long  English  12-pounder,  en  embrasure^  was  placed  in  the  shoulders, 
to  enfilade  the  curtain  face  of  the  work.  One  of  these  last  was  after- 
wards removed  for  beach  defense.  Besides  the  8 -inch  howitzer  two  24- 
jiounders,  en  harbettCj  were  mounted  in  the  demi-lune. 

For  beach  defense  two  heavy  shell  guns  were  designated  to  occupy  the 
two  exterior  flanking  works,  which  commanded  the  beach  aiiproaches  on 
both  sides,  and  to  give  a cross-fire  on  the  front  of  the  glacis,  or,  more 
XDroiierly,  cover  face  to  the  water  Ifont  of  the  works.  In  [ilace  of  these, 
two  light  carronades  arrived  a short  time  before  the  bombardment,  but 
without  carriages  or  chassis.  They  were  therefore  simply  buried  in  the 
sand  to  such  depth  and  with  such  directions  as  to  enable  us  to  have  at 
least  one  lire  in  the  event  of  an  attempt  to  storm  the  work.  In  addition 
to  these  the  12-pounder  from  the  north  bastion  was  placed  in  such  posi- 
tion as  to  sweep  the  beach  by  the  approach  from  the  south.  The 
ditches  on  the  water  front  not  being  protected  by  bastions,  I arranged 
cajronieres,  constructed  of  palmetto  logs,  irierced  for  two  tiers  of  mus- 
ketry, api)roached  by  galleries  leading  under  the  parapets  from  the 
interior  of  the  fort.  These  completed  the  ditch  defenses,  and  enabled  us, 
in  the  event  of  the  enemy  attempting  to  cross  the  ditch  at  any  i)oint,  to 
l)our  in  a cross-fire  of  canister  and  ball.  As  a protection  to  the  land 
batteries  of  the  fort  I constructed  a heavy  traverse  longitudinally  to 
the  work,  and  to  insure  against  casualties  from  shot  and  shell  bursting- 
in  the  parade  I arranged  small  traverses  in  rear  of  each  gun  of  the  water 
battery,  sufficiently  low,  however,  as  to  offer  no  obstacle  to  the  passage 
of  such  shell  as  might  graze  the  parapet  of  the  water  front. 

It  was  my  purpose  to  construct  a splinter-roof  over  the  entire  place  of 
arms  between  the  principal  traverse  and  the  curtain  of  the  work,  and 
had  ordered  all  the  necessary  material  for  that  purpose.  My  requisitions 
for  a steamer  to  transport  the  same  some  30  miles  were,  however,  not 
complied  with,  and  I was  enabled  to  cover  in  only  about  one-third  of  the 
l)roper  space,  and  then  by  bringing  ranging  timber  by  hand  nearly  2 
miles,  and  by  working  day  and  night. 

The  magazine  of  the  w^ork  was  large  and  complete,  and  so  protected 
that,  though  an  enormous  amount  of  shot  and  shell  was  fired  against  it, 


20  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

it  remained  at  the  close  of  the  action  as  strong  and  secure  as  before  the 
fight.  'No  permanent  hot-shot  furnace  was  constructed,  but  a portion 
of  the  material  for  one  which  had  been  ordered  arrived  a few  days  before 
the  action,  and  from  it  a temporary  one  was  constructed  on  Tuesday, 
November  5.  This  work  was  well  and  rapidly  executed  by  my  artisans 
while  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  I feel  it  my  duty  to  call  to  your 
attention  the  cool  bravery  of  Mr.  Patterson  and  the  artisans  under  him 
in  executing  my  orders  under  the  most  trying  circumstances.  Besides 
the  above-mentioned  temporary  furnace  a portable  one  had  arrived  some 
time  before  the  bombardment,  but  of  exceedingly  limited  capacity.  In 
connection  with  the  fort  it  was  proper  to  construct  a line  of  infantry 
works  about  2 miles  to  the  south,  and  also  a battery  at  the  outlet  of 
Skull  Creek  into  Broad  Kiver  *,  but,  for  reasons  over  which  I had  no  con- 
trol, these  works  were  never  carried  into  execution. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  the  defenses  at  Hilton  Head  on  the  morn- 
ing of  November  7,  18G1.  As  an  offensive  work,  Fort  Walker  proved 
itself  unequal  to  the  immense  force  brought  against  it.  As  a defensive 
work,  it  accomplished  its  purpose  by  so  well  protecting  the  lives  of  the 
garrison  that  after  sustaining  an  incessant  fire  of  shot  and  shell  for 
nearly  five  hours  but  10  of  the  garrison  were  reported  killed.  This  num- 
ber would,  I believe,  have  been  materially  lessened  had  the  traverses  on 
the  water  front  been  practicable. 

At  the  close  of  the  engagement  the  fort  had  received  but  little  dam- 
age, although  hundreds  of  shot  and  shell  were  buried  in  the  parapets 
and  traverses. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANCIS  H.  LEE, 
Major j Engineers^  S.  C.  A. 

Capt.  H.  E.  Young, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Hardeeville. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Capt.  Josiah  Bedon,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry^  of  the 
bombardment  of  Fort  Walker. 

Camp  Lee,  November  12,  1861. 

Sm : The  following  is  respectfully  submitted  as  a report  of  the  part 
taken  in  the  defense  of  Fort  Walker,  on  the  7th  instant,  by  Company  C, 
of  this  regiment : 

The  company  was  posted  in  the  battery  at  7.30  o’clock  a.  m.  Five 
guns  were  assigned  the  company — one  rifled  24-pounder,  under  my  im- 
mediate charge ; three  42-pounders,  under  charge  of  Lieuts.  J.  E.  Heape, 
J.  J.  Guerard,  and  W.  A.  Boyle,  respectively  j one  32-pounder  in  left 
bastion  of  the  fort.  The  rifled  gun  and  the  three  42-pounders  were  on 
the  left  front  of  the  fort. 

Early  in  the  engagement,  which  commenced  about  9.30  o’clock  a.  m., 
the  rifled  gun  and  one  of  the  42s  became  disabled.  Late  in  the  action 
another  42-pounder  became  disabled.  The  remaining  42  and  one  32 
pounder  were  served  until  the  ammunition  failed.  About  2.30  o’clock 
p.  m.  we  were  ordered  to  evacuate  the  fort.  My  company  retired  in  good 
order,  bearing  with  them  their  arms. 

Two  men  were  slightly  wounded.  Privates  G.  Munroe  and  T.  Hudson, 
and  3 taken  prisoners,  who  were  sick  in  hospital. 

I beg  leave  respectfully  to  call  your  attention  to  the  gallant  conduct 
of  Lieutenant  Heape,  who  had  charge  of  a 42-pounder  until  disabled  and 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


21 


afterwards  took  charge  of  a 32-pounder  in  the  left  bastion  of  the  fort,  as 
also  that  of  Lieutenants  Guerard  and  Boyle.  The  sergeants  who  were 
chiefs  of  pieces  acted  with  great  coolness  and  bravery. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSIAII 

Captain  Company  (7,  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Eeyiment  S.  C.  Vols. 
Lieut.  E.  W.  Eraser, 

Adjutant  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Regiment  S.  C.  Volunteers, 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Capt.  D.  S.  Canaday^  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry^  of 
the  bombardment  of  Fort  Walker. 

Hdqrs.  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Eegiment  S.  C.  Vols., 

Camp  Lee,  November  12,  1861. 

Sir  : The  following  is  respectfully  submitted  as  a report  of  the  part 
taken  in  the  defense  of  Fort  Walker  on  the  7th  instant  by  detachments 
from  Companies  E and  H,  of  this  regiment,  under  my  command: 

There  were  six  guns  under  my  charge — one  32- pounder  on  the  right 
flank  of  the  fort,  two  in  the  right  bastion  of  the  fort,  one  a 32-pounder 
and  the  other  a 24-pounder.  The  remaining  three  were  in  the  redan, 
two  24-pounders  and  one  32-pounder  howitzer.  Lieuts.  F.  B.  Appleby 
and  T.  E.  Eaysor,  of  Company  H,  were  in  charge  of  the  guns  in  bastion 
and  redan,  and  acted  with  coolness  and  bravery.  But  two  of  the  guns 
could  be  used  in  the  action,  as  the  others  could  only  be  used  in  land  de- 
fense. One  32-pounder  was  disabled  by  solid  shot  early  in  the  engage- 
ment. The  other  32-pounder  was  served  until  ammunition  gave  out. 

The  officers  and  men  acted  with  bravery*  and  coolness.  One  private 
in  Company  F (Burnett)  was  killed ; Corporal  O.  Quin  and  Privates  I. 
Martin  and  William  Hudson  slightly  wounded.  In  Company  H were 
wounded  in  the  arm  Corporal  E.  T.  Howell,  and  slightly  in  the  thigh 
Private  P.  Heaton.  The  remainder  of  my  company  and  of  Compan3^  H 
were  acting  as  infantiy  outside  the  fort.  Missing  from  my  company 
(H)  Private  J.  Judah,  and  from  Company  F Privates  James  Bryant  and 
James  Colson. 

We  were  ordered  to  evacuate  the  fort  about  2.30  o’clock  p.  m.,  and  the 
detachment  retreated  in  good  order,  carrying  with  them  their  arms, 
except  those  which  were  shot  to  pieces  by  the  enemy’s  fire. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  S.  CANADAY, 
Captain  Company  IL 

Lieut.  E.  W.  Fraser, 

Adjutant  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Regiment  S.  C.  Volunteers, 


No.  9. 

Statement  of  Capt.  C.  B.  Owens,  Assistant  Commissary  of  Subsistenee, 

C.  S.  Army. 

Office  A.  C.  S.,  Third  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C., 

Camp  Lee,  November  23,  1861. 

Sir  : On  the  morning  of  the  7th  November  I received,  through  Maj. 
E.  Willis,  quartermaster,  your  orders  to  report  to  you  at  Fort  Walker, 
and  accordingly  left  Beaufort  at  5 o’clock  a.  m.  j arrived  at  Fort  Walker, 
Hilton  Head,  and  reported  to  you  at  8 o’clock  p.  m.  On  the  receipt  of 


22  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XV. 

your  orders  to  proceed  to  Charleston  with  steamer  Emma  for  supplies 
1 made  the  necessary  arrangements  to  do  so,  and  started  in  a yawl-boat 
for  the  steamer  Edisto,  in  order  to  be  transferred  to  the  Emma,  then 
engaged  in  landing  troops  at  Bay  Point.  The  steamers  were  compelled 
by  the  fire  of  the  enemy  to  take  refuge  in  Skull  Creek,  and  tlie  steamer 
Emma  I afterwards  learned  continued  on  to  Savannah.  Our  boat,  in 
consequence,  was  compelled  to  return  to  the  island,  and  I found  it  imi)os- 
sible,  for  that  day  at  least,  to  carry  out  your  instructions.  Since  that 
time  you  are  aware  of  all  that  has  transpired  in  my  department.  In 
reference  to  the  stores  left  at  Beaufort  I would  beg  leave  to  call  your 
attention  to  the  report  of  my  chief  clerk,  Mr.  Baya,  a copy  of  which  I 
inclose.*  I feel  satisfied  that  Mr.  Baya  made  every  exertion  in  his 
power  to  have  the  stores  removed  to  a place  of  safety,  and  his  failure 
to  do  so  was  from  causes  entirely  beyond  his  control. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

C.  D.  OWENS, 
Captain^  P.  A.,  and  A.  C.  8, 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Mr.  H.  T.  Baya,  Cleric  in  Confederate  Subsistence  Department. 

Hardee viLLE,  S.  C.,  JSfovemher  23,  1861. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  your  instructions  I left  Beaufort  on  Wednes- 
day morning,  in  the  steamer  General  Clinch,  with  provisions,  to  be  landed 
at  Hilton  Head  and  Bay  Point.  On  our  way  down,  having  met  the 
steamer  John  A.  Moore,  with  a portion  of  the  Fifteenth  Regiment  on 
board,  bound  for  Hilfon  Head,  and  unable  to  continue  the  passage  owing 
to  the  severity  of  the  wind,  we  took  the  troops  off  of  her  on  board  the 
steamer  General  Clinch,  and  proceeded  to  Seabrook’s  Landing,  on  Hilton 
Head  Island,  and  landed  them.  The  provisions  for  that  i)ost  were  also 
safely  landed  there.  Capt.  S.  Simmons,  the  commissary  of  the  post,  to 
whom  the  provisions  were  marked,  not  being  at  ihe  landing,  I sent  the 
invoices  to  him  under  care  of  Capt.  E.  I Dawson,  quai  termaster  of  the 
Ninth  [Eleventh]  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  At  the  landing 
in  question  I met  Capt.  C.  Tracy,  of  General  Drayton’s  staff,  to  whose 
attention  I called  the  landing  of  the  provisions.  At  about  9 p.  m.  we 
started  on  our  mission  to  Bay  Point,  and  laid  quietly  at  anchor  about 
3 miles  from  the  fort  until  about  daylight  the  following  morning  (No- 
vember 7),  when  we  steamed  up  to  quite  near  the  fort  (the  usual 
place  of  landing,)  and  began  landing  provisions  for  the  point  in  two 
lighters.  Capt.  A.  E.  Rabb,  the  commissary  of  the  post,  being  absent, 
I sent  a messenger  to  him  asking  his  presence.  He  soon  came  down  to 
the  point  of  landing,  when  I informed  him  of  the  object  of  my  mission, 
and  handed  him  your  letter  containing  invoices.  He  desired  me  to  hurry 
with  the  landing,  and  he  would  sign  receipts  for  the  goods  as  soon  as  he 
could  check  off*  the  invoices. 

In  the  midst  of  the  landing  the  fleet  of  the  enemy’s  vessels,  which 
were  then  at  anchor  near  the  bar,  appeared  to  be  in  motion,  and  soon 
after  came  in  and  began  the  fight.  On  their  approach  we  stopped  the 
landing  of  provisions,  hoisted  anchor,  and  stood  towards  Beaufort, 
where  we  arrived  at  about  1 p.  m.  I there  found  the  people  under  intense 
excitement,  the  mass  of  whom  were  making  iireparatious  to  go  to  some 
place  of  safety  on  the  main-land,  they  fully  believing  that  the  enemy 


* See  No.  10,  folio wiug. 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


23 


would  take  possession  of  the  town  that  night.  After  considerable 
anxious  thought  I concluded  it  would  be  best  to  have  what  stores  we 
had  in  Beaufort  on  board  of  the  steamer  (teneral  Clinch,  but  in  making 
inquiry  as  to  whether  she  would  take  them,  1 found  that  the  steamer 
was  almost  filled  with  the  various  and  voluminous  properties  of  the  citi- 
zens, who  were  eagerly  taking  advantage  of  any  and  every  method  to 
get  their  things  away;  and,  again,  the  sui)ply  of  wood  was  very  short; 
so  much  so,  that  the  captain  of  the  boat  had  to  knock  down  the  whole 
line  of  fence  extending  from  the  wharf  to  the  street,  that  he  might  take 
and  use  it  for  fire- wood.  He  did  not  wish  to  overload  the  boat,  as  it 
would  make  it  more  difficult  for  him  to  reach  Charleston,  almost  over- 
loaded as  he  then  was,  and  thus,  there  being  no  other  mode  of  moving 
them,  they  had  to  remain  as  they  were. 

At  about  8 p.  m.  I packed  up  all  of  our  papers  and  had  them  taken 
on  board  of  the  steamer  General  Clinch,  but  soon  took  them  oft*  and 
had  them  carried  to  the  quartermaster’s  quarters,  determining  to  remain 
until  the  last  moment.  We  had  already  heard  that  our  trooj^s  were 
retreating,  and  had  been  advised  by  many  (who  appeared  to  be  con- 
versant with  the  geography  of  the  country)  that  we  had  better  send 
any  of  our  valuable  articles  over  on  the  main-land.  We  still  held  on 
until  advised  by  both  Captain  Pope  and  Captain  Elliott  to  go.  We 
packed  two  carts  with  both  the  quartermaster’s  and  commissary’s 
papers,  and  I,  in  company  with  Mr.  Caldwell,  of  the  quartermaster’s 
department,  started  in  charge  of  the  papers  for  Pocotaligo.  While 
crossing  the  town  three  rockets  were  fired  and  the  alarm  bell  was  rung 
to  announce  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  This  was  about  12  o’clock, 
and  the  alarm  was  so  great  that  the  few  remaining  in  the  town  imme- 
diately left,  leaving  the  place  quite  deserted.  On  the  road  out  we  were 
passed  by  several,  who  informed  us  that  the  enemy  were  making  their 
way  up  Broad  River  to  cut  off  communication  by  Port  Royal  Perry  to 
the  main-land  ; but  this,  lik(‘  other  reports,  proved  false.  We  arrived 
at  Pocotaligo  about  0.30  or  10  o’clock  on  Friday  morning,  and  remained 
until  Saturday  morning,  when  Mr.  Tuomey,  of  the  quartermaster’s 
department,  and  myself  started  with  a mule  and  cart  for  Beaufort,  with 
the  determination  to  get  away  any  of  the  public  property  that  we  could, 
and  if  we  were  unable  to  do  so  to  fire  it. 

Arriving  at  the  ferry,  our  mule  being  unfit  to  take  us  to  Beaufort,  we 
endeavored  to  procure  horses,  but  were  unable  to  do  so,  and  thus 
returned  to  Pocotaligo,  where  I remained  until  Sunday  afternoon,  when. 
General  Ripley  offering  his  special  train  for  our  accommodation,  with 
mules,  carts,  and  papers  we  arrived  at  Hardeeville,  and  on  Monday, 
the  11th,  reported  in  person,  with  papers,  to  you. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  T.  BAYA. 


Capt.  C.  D.  Owens, 

P.  A.  and  A.  C.  S.^  Hardeeville^  S.  G. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Col.  R.  G.  M.  Hunovantj  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Infantry^ 
of  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Beauregard. 

Headquarters  Twelfth  Regiment  S.  C.  Yols., 

Camp  Lee,  Poeotaligo,  November  16,  1861. 
Sir  : bn  the  26th  of  October  last  I assumed  command  of  the  forces 
stationed  on  Bay  Point  Island,  consisting  of  three  companies  of  the 


24  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Kintli  [Eleventh]  Itegiment,  to  wit : The  Beaufort  Artillery,  Capt.  Ste- 
phen Elliott ; Colleton  Rifles,  Captain  Anderson,  and  Captain  [J.  J.] 
Harrison’s  company  of  infantry  j six  companies  of  the  Twelfth  Regi- 
ment South  Carolina  Volunteers,  to  wit,  ('ompany  A,  Captain  [W.  U.] 
McCorkle ; Company  C,  Captain  [H.  C.j  Davis ; Company  D,  Captain 
[E.  E. ] Bookter ; Comjjany  E,  Captain  Hinson;  Company  E,  Captain 
[Hayne]  McMeekin,  and  Company  I,  Captain  [N.  B.  j Valandingham, 
and  a small  detachment  of  Captain  Screven’s  company  of  Beaufort 
Guerillas,  under  Lieutenant  Youmans.  My  staff  consisted  of  Lieut.  W. 
H.  Talley,  adjutant ; Dr.  E.  B.  Turnipseed,  surgeon;  Capt.  T.  I.  Bell, 
quartermaster ; Capt.  E.  A.  Rabb,  commissary  ; Rev.  C.  B.  Betts,  chap- 
lain, and  Mr.  Robert  Chisolm,  volunteer  on  staff.  The  entire  lorce  on 
the  island,  inclusive  of  field,  staff,  and  company  officers,  was  619. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Barnes,  of  the  Twelfth  Regiment,  was  placed  in 
command  of  the  six  companies  of  that  regiment  and  Captain  Anderson’s 
company,  then  at  the  Narrows.  Captain  Elliott  was  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  work  known  as  Eort  Beauregard  with  his  own  company 
and  Captain  Harrison’s.  The  detachment  of  Cai^tain  Screven’s  com- 
pany was  ordered  to  report  directly  to  me. 

Monday,  the  4th  instant,  the  enemy’s  fleet  made  its  appearance  early 
in  the  morning,  and  crossing  the  bar  came  to  anchor  to  the  south  of  and 
opposite  the  island,  but  made  no  further  demonstration  of  an  attack  on 
our  position  during  that  day. 

In  the  afternoon  Commodore  Tatnall,  with  three  small  steamers, 
attacked  the  nearest  of  the  enemy’s  vessels,  and  after  sustaining  a heavy 
fire  and  replying  most  gallantly,  retired  slowly  up  the  river. 

Tuesday  morning,  in  view  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  point  and  mode 
of  attack,  the  following  disi)Osition  was  made  of  the  coinpanies  of  the 
Twelfth  Regiment : Companies  A and  D were  posted  in  rear  of  a range 
of  sand  hills,  distant  about  200  yards  from  Fort  Beauregard,  for  the 
purpose  of  protecting  that  work  in  case  of  an  attemi)t  of  the  enemy  to 
land;  Companies  C and  E took  position  near  Captain  Anderson’s  com- 
pany at  the  Narrows,  and  Companies  F and  I were  held  at  the  camp  of 
the  regiment,  being  about  equidistant  between  the  detachments,  so  as  to 
support  either. 

Between  7 and  8 o’clock  Commodore  Tatnall’s  steamers  again  ad- 
vanced and  engaged  the  enemy,  who  met  the  attack  in  such  numbers 
and  with  such  weight  of  metal  that  the  little  steamers  were  compelled 
again  to  retreat  above  the  forts.  The  enemy  followed,  firing  upon  the 
steamers  till  within  range  of  our  guns,  when  Fort  Beauregard  joined 
in  the  conflict,  and  drew  a heavy  fire  of  shot  and  shell,  principally  the 
latter,  upon  that  work  and  the  other  portions  of  the  island  occupied  by 
our  troops.  This  engagement  lasted  nearly  two  hours,  when  the  enemy’s 
fleet  withdrew  and  assumed  very  nearly  its  former  position  opposite  our 
island,  which  it  retained  for  the  remainder  of  the  day. 

The  only  casualties  on  our  part  were  those  stated  in  Captain  Elliott’s 
report,  herewith  transmitted,  as  resulting  from  the  explosion  of  a caisson. 

The  unfavorable  state  of  the  weather  i)revented  any  further  action  of 
the  enemy  on  Wednesday.  Thursday  morning,  however,  the  wind  lulled, 
and  the  Avater  was  unusually  smooth.  Of  this  the  enemy  availed  him- 
self, and  at  8.30  a.  m.  the  fleet  of  war  vessels,  headed  by  what  is  supposed 
to  have  been  the  Minnesota,  bore  towards  the  northwest,  till,  reaching 
the  main  channel,  they  moved  directly  towards  our  batteries.  As  soon  as 
they  came  within  range  Fort  Beauregard  opened  upon  the  vessel  in 
advance,  which,  being  seconded  by  Fort  Walker  and  replied  to  by  the 
enemy,  the  action  became  general.  About  the  time  of  the  first  move- 


Chap.  XY.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


25 


raent  of  the  fleet  it  having  been  reported  to  in'e  that  i)arges  filled  with 
troops  were  leaving  the  transports,  which  still  occupied  their  position 
opposite  the  camp,  in  anticipation  of  an  attempt  to  eflect  a landing  in 
that  vicinity,  I ordered  Companies  C and  E,  which  had  been  withdrawn 
on  Wednesday,  back  to  a point  near  the  earthwork  at  the  Narrows, 
retaining  at  the  camp  the  four  remaining  companies  of  the  Twelfth 
liegiment.  After,  however,  having  made  a careful  personal  observa- 
tion of  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  in  view  of  their  steady  advance 
and  heavy  fire  upon  the  western  end  of  the  island,  I changed  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  force,  throwing  the  four  companies  at  the  camj)  in  the  rear 
of  the  sand  hills  before  referred  to  near  Fort  Beauregard,  and  withdrew 
within  supporting  distance  the  two  companies  of  the  Twelfth  at  the 
Narrows.  Thus  the  troops  remained  for  several  hours  under  a heavy 
fire  of  shot  and  shell,  during  which  they  exhibited  great  coolness  and 
promptness  in  obedience  to  orders.  Nothwithstandiug  the  protection 
afiorded  by  the  sand  hills  many  sliot  and  shell  fell  around  them,  but 
fortunately  without  inflicting  injury  of  any  kind.  The  batteries  at  Fort 
Beauregard  were  worked  with  great  gallantry,  skill,  and  energy,  and 
the  highest  praise  is  due  to  Captain  Elliott  and  his  command  for  the 
manner  in  which  they  discharged  their  important  trust. 

About  2 p.  m.  the  fire  of  the  enemy  upon  our  batteries  was  slackened 
and  redoubled  against  Hilton  Head.  A little  after  3 o’clock  it  was 
reported  to  me  by  Adjutant  Talley  that  a boat  was  leaving  one  of  the 
fleet  for  the  shore  of  Hilton  Head  amid  loud  cheers  from  the  former 
and  that  Fort  Walker  was  silent.  I at  once  proceeded  to  Fort  Beaure- 
gard, and,  after  the  colloquies  accurately  detailed  by  Captain  Elliott  in 
his  report,  ordered  him  to  make  arrangements  for  retreat  from  the  fort 
towards  the  Narrows. 

I then  returned  and  issued  the  necessary  orders  for  the  evacuation  of 
the  island,  and  the  force  moved  in  good  order  towards  the  eastern  por- 
tion of  the  island.  The  only  line  of  retreat  lay  across  the  strip  of  land 
known  as  the  Narrows,  scarce  50  yards  wide  and  1,000  long,  to  the  main 
body  of  Eddings’  Island,  which  itself  is  but  an  extensive  swamp,  entirely 
impenetrable  save  by  a trail  known  to  few,  and  of  such  extreme  difficulty 
as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  transporting  baggage  of  any  kind  beyond 
what  could  be  borne  on  the  shoulders  of  the  men.  Of  the  character  of 
the  route  and  the  consequent  impracticability  of  transportation  I had 
been  fully  advised,  and  therefore  did  not  undertake  the  removal  of  camp 
equipage,  stores,  or  heavy  baggage.  Nor  did  I think  it  prudent  to 
destroy  such  property  by  fire,  inasmuch  as  the  retreat  was  at  best  of 
doubtful  feasibility,  and  the  nature  of  the  movement  would  have  been 
thereby  revealed  to  the  enemy,  and  its  success  still  further  jeoparded, 
if  not  entirely  frustrated. 

I believe  that  in  consequence  of  the  manner  in  which  the  evacuation 
of  the  island  was  effected  it  was  unknown  to  the  enemy  until  it  had 
been  fully  accomplished,  and  this  conviction  is  strengthened  by  their 
failure  to  take  advantage  of  the  entire  command  of  Station  Creek  and 
Beaufort  River  to  cut  off  the  retreat  at  Jenkins’  Landing,  and  especially 
at  White  Hall  Ferry.  The  body  of  the  command  reached  the  landing  at 
Station  Greek  and  crossed  to  Dr.  Jenkins’  plantation  during  the  night, 
and  after  resting  a short  time  at  the  latter  place  resumed  the  march  for 
Beaufort,  where  it  arrived  early  Friday  morning.  The  town  was  deserted 
by  the  white  population,  and  no  representative  of  the  quartermaster’s 
or  commissary’s  departments,  or  other  person  in  authority,  could  be 
found.  I was  therefore  under  the  necessity  of  assuming  the  responsi- 
bility of  taking  for  the  use  of  the  troops  such  provisions  and  necessaries 


26  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

as  their  condition  imj)eratively  demanded,  and  had  I known  the  amount 
and  nature  of  the  stores  might  have  saved  much  public  property,  which 
has  probably  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  I proceeded  with  the 
command  to  Port  Koyal  Ferry,  and  thence  to  this  place,  regarding  the 
latter  as  an  important  point  of  defense,  and  at  the  same  time  one  from 
which  I could  readily  open  communication  to  procure  the  necessary 
supplies  for  my  command.  In  consequence  of  the  intricacy  and  diffi- 
culty of  the  line  of  retreat,  some  officers  and  men,  detained  by  their 
duties,  lost  their  way,  but  all  these  have  since  rejoined  their  respective 
companies.  There  is  but  one  man  whom  I am  under  the  necessity  of 
reporting  as  missing.  As  to  the  particulars  of  this  case  I refer  you  to 
the  accompanying  report  of  the  efficient  surgeon  of  the  Twelfth  Eegi- 
ment,  herewith  submitted.  Some  muskets  were  left,  but  only  those 
which  had  been  drawn  for  enlisted  men,  who  were  at  the  time  absent 
by  reason  of  the  severe  epidemic  which  had  thinned  our  ranks  during 
the  previous  month. 

No  soldier  threw  away  his  arms.  In  regard  to  the  manner  in  which 
the  retreat  was  arranged  and  elfected,  justice  to  myself  and  others 
requires  that  I should  add  a word  of  explanation.  Having  received  no 
instructions  as  to  the  mode  in  which  the  island  of  Bay  Point  should  be 
defended,  nor  of  the  contingencies  upon  which  it  should  be  abandoned, 
with  no  arrangement  for  receiving  orders,  by  means  of  signals  or  other- 
wise, from  headquarters,  and  totally  without  information  of  any  plan 
devised  or  facilities  provided  for  the  retreat  of  my  command  in  case  of 
disaster,  I felt  that  these  circumstances  imposed  upon  me  the  obligation 
of  endeavoring  to  secure  some  means  of  evacuating  the  island  in  the 
event  such  a step  should  become  necessary,  Accordingly,  the  state 
of  facts  above  referred  to  continuing,  on  Tuesday  I went  in  person  to 
Captain  Elliott,  who  perhaps  was  more  familiar  with  the  localities  than 
any  other  person,  and  after  learning  from  him,  in  answer  to  my  inquiries, 
that  a retreat  was  practicable  through  Eddings’  Island,  if  boats  and  flats 
could  be  secured  to  take  the  forces  across  Station  Creek,  I instructed 
him  to  select  some  prudent  and  trusty  person  to  superintend  the  collec- 
tion of  the  necessary  means  of  transportation  at  the  landing  on  Edding’s 
Island.  The  Rev.  Stephen  Elliott  was  chosen  to  discharge  this  impor- 
tant duty,  and  left  on  Thursday  morning  lor  that  purpose.  Fortunately 
Capt.  Thomas  Hanckel,  Mr.  Henry  Stuart,  and  Mr.  W.  H.  Cuthbert,  of 
Beaufort,  had  already  secured  a large  number  of  flats  at  Dr.  Jenkins’ 
Landing,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  them  to  some  point  on  Eddings’ 
Island  for  our  relief.  Mr.  Elliott  informed  them  of  the  plan  agreed  ux)on, 
and  thus,  through  the  co-operation  of  these  gentlemen  and  the  valuable 
assistance  of  Captain  Tripp  and  his  command,  the  evacuation  of  the 
island  was  effected.  I communicated  the  plan  of  retreat  to  none  save 
Captain  Elliott,  the  adjutant,  and  the  quartermaster. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Barnes,  commanding  the  greater  portion  of  the 
infantry,  was  prompt  and  energetic  in  executing  the  orders  for  the  move- 
ments of  his  immediate  command.  From  the  nature  of  the  attack  the 
forces  at  Fort  Beauregard  were  the  only  active  participants  in  the  engage- 
ment, and  I cannot  close  this  report  without  drawing  special  attention 
to  the  high  qualities  of  the  officer  exhibited  by  Captain  Elliott,  com- 
manding that  work.  Compelled  from  the  necessities  of  our  position  to 
act  the  i^art  of  engineer,  ordnance  officer,  and  commander  of  the  fort, 
he  exhibited  an  energy  and  intelligence  in  preparing  the  batteries  for 
the  fight  which  were  only  equaled  by  the  gallantry  and  firmness  of  the 
defense. 

All  the  members  of  my  staff  did  their  duty.  Adjutant  Talley,  Cap- 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


27 


tain  Bell,  quartermaster,  and  Kev.  0.  B.  Betts,  the  chaplain,  fre(iuenTly 
sent  with  orders  to  various  parts  of  the  island  during  the  bombardment, 
executed  their  trust  in  a manner  entirely  satisfactory  to  ine. 

Lieutenant  Youmans  and  his  detachment  were  efficient  in  the  ])erform- 
ance  of  the  part  assigned  them.  To  Lieutenant  Johnson,  of  the  Beaufort 
Artillery,  the  command  is  under  obligations  for  valuable  services  ren- 
dered  at  the  ferry  across  Station  Creek,  and  to  Capt.  Thomas  II.  Elliott 
for  similar  aid  in  passing  White  Hall  Ferry. 

The  reports  of  Captain  Elliott  and  Surgeon  Turnipseed*  are  herewith 
respectfully  submitted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  G.  M.  DUNGY  ANT, 

Colonel  Twelfth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 

Capt.  H.  E.  Young, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Capt,  Stephen  Elliott,,  jr.,,  Beaufort  Artillery ,,  of  the  bombard- 
ment  of  Fort  Beauregard, 

Headquarters  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery, 

November  13,  1861. 

Sir  : Having  been  assigned  to  the  command  of  Fort  Beauregard  by 
Colonel  Dunovaut,  commanding  the  post,  I beg  leave  to  submit  the  fol- 
lowing report : 

The  garrison  consisted  of  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery  (Company  A, 
83  men)  and  Captain  Harrison’s  company  (Company  D,  66  men),  both 
of  Colonel  Heyward’s  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers. To  the  former  was  intrusted  the  main  work  (thirteen  guns) ; 
to  the  latter  the  hot-shot  battery  (three  guns)  and  the  sand  battery  (two 
guns).- 

On  Monday,  the  4th  instant,  the  enemy  appeared  and  anchored  within 
the  bar  4 miles  below  the  fort.  On  Tuesday  morning,  at  7.30  o’clock, 
five  gunboats  came  within  range  and  opened  upon  us  with  heavy  guns, 
throwing  spherical  and  rifle  shell  with  accuracy.  One  of  these  struck 
a caisson,  causing  it  to  explode,  and  thereby  injuring  slightly  one  of  the 
gun  detachments.  T replied,  but  found  the  range  too  great  for  success- 
ful firing,  and  at  9.15  o’clock  a.  m.  the  enemy  withdrew,  having  been 
struck  several  times.  On  Wednesday,  the  weather  being  boisterous,  the 
enemy  remained  quiet. 

On  Thursday,  pursuant  to  an  order  previously  received  from  Colonel 
Dunovant,  I dispatched  the  chaplain  of  the  Ninth  [Eleventli]  Eegiment 
to  Saint  Helena,  for  the  purpose  of  providing  transportation  in  case  it 
should  be  necessar^^  and  prove  practicable  to  retire.  At  8.30  a.  m.  fifteen 
of  the  enemy’s  sail  formed  in  line  and  steamed  up  the  harbor,  engaging 
us  at  9.15  o’clock.  These  were  subsequently  joined  by  four  others. 
Having  passed  the  batteries,  they  turned  to  the  left  and  southwards, 
and  repassed  near  the  Hilton  Head  shore.  This  circuit  was  performed 
three  times,  after  which  they  remained  out  of  reach  of  any  except  our 
heaviest  guns.  The  last  gun  from  my  battery  was  fired  at  3.35  p.  m., 
being  the  eighth  to  which  the  enemy  had  not  replied.  A few  moments 


The  surgeon’s  report  not  found. 


[Chap.  XV. 


28  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 

afterwards  Colonel  Dunovant  entered  the  fort  and  said  to  me,  “ Captain 
Elliott,  wliat  is  the  condition  of  things  over  the  river  ” I replied,  Fort 
Walker  has  been  silenced,  sir.”  “By  what  do  you  judge'?”  “By  the 
facts  that  the  fort  has  been  subjected  to  a heavy  enfilade  and  direct  fire, 
to  which  it  has  ceased  to  reply  j that,  the  vessels  having  terminated  their 
fire,  the  flag  ship  has  steamed  up  and  delivered  a single  shot,  which  was 
unanswered,  and  that  thereupon  cheering  was  heard  from  the  fleet.” 
“Then,  sir,  it  having  been  proved  that  these  works  cannot  accomplish 
the  end  for  which  they  were  designed — that  of  protecting  the  harbor — 
you  will  prepare  to  retire  from  a position  from  which  our  retreat  may 
readily  be  cut  off,  and  which  our  small  force  will  not  enable  us  to  hold 
against  a land  attack.”  I then  prepared  my  command  for  a retreat, 
destroyed  the  greater  part  of  the  powder,  spiked  the  guns,  and  an  hour 
later  took  up  the  line  of  march  for  Eddings’  Island. 

Our  fire  was  remitted  during  those  intervals  when  passing  down  on 
the  farther  side  of  the  river,  as  the  ships  were  too  distant.  This  cessa- 
tion afforded  a respite  to  the  cannoneers,  already  fatigued  by  labors 
properly  belonging  to  the  Engineer  and  Ordnance  Departments.  At  all 
other  times  it  was  kept  up  with  shot  and  shell.  One  of  the  columbiads 
was  fired  57  times;  the  other  not  quite  so  often.  The  j)osition  of 
the  hot  shot  guns  in  the  main  battery  was  such  that,  when  unmasked, 
the  ships  were  too  far  distant  to  be  reached  by  any  elevation  the  guns 
were  susceptible  of.  They  were  therefore  used  but  sparingly,  but  hot 
shot  were  fired  from  two  42-pounders  on  the  front  face.  The  flag-ship 
was  supposed  to  be  on  fire  more  than  once. 

Our  fire  was  directed  almost  exclusively  at  the  larger  vessels.  They 
were  seen  to  be  struck  repeatedly,  but  the  great  distance — never  less 
than  2,500  yards — prevented  our  ascertaining  the  extent  of  injury.  The 
wooden  fuses  for  the  8-iuch  shell  were  very  defective,  generally  igniting 
the  charge  a few  seconds  too  soon.  The  paper  fuses  were  more  reliable. 
It  had  been  found  during  the  engagemant  on  Tuesday  that  the  rifle  shell 
could  not  without  much  difficulty  be  forced  down  after  one  or  two  dis- 
charges. They  had  therefore  in  the  interim  been  refitted.  The  gun, 
however,  exploded  at  the  thirty-second  discharge,  slightly  wounding 
every  man  of  the  detachment.  No  other  cause  can  be  assigned  except 
that  the  gun,  after  being  fired  several  times  in  rapid  succession,  was  loaded 
and  allowed  to  remain.  As  it  became  cool  it  may  have  contracted  upon 
the  shell,  and  hence  the  explosion. 

The  hot-shot  battery,  manned  by  Captain  Harrison’s  company,  fired 
a few  rounds,  but  the  great  severity  of  the  cannonade  in  an  exposed 
jmsition  drove  the  men  from  the  guns.  Some  of  his  men  afterward 
assisted  me  in  the  main  work,  among  whom  Sergeant  Eden  field  deserves 
to  be  mentioned  with  praise.  The  Beaufort  Artillery  behaved  with  cool- 
ness under  a heavy  fire,  as  is  attested  by  the  fact  that  no  accident  attrib- 
utable to  carelessness  occurred  at  their  guns.  Instances  of  conspicu- 
ous bravery  might  be  mentioned,  but  it  would  be  unfair  to  eulogize  a few 
when  the  majority  did  their  duty. 

Previous  to  the  engagement  the  members  of  this  corps  contributed 
each  according  to  his  talent  to  the  efficiency  of  the  whole,  but  especially 
zealous  and  untiring  were  Privates  S.  E.  Scanlan  and  I.  E.  Ealbin  in 
preparing  ammunition  and  placing  the  battery  in  order.  In  this  connec- 
tion I must  mention  with  honor  Captain  Harrison’s  company,  who  for 
months  before  cheerfully  gave  me  their  assistance.  I must  also  thank 
the  companies  of  Colonel  Dunovant’s  command,  who  labored  to  make 
my  position  more  secure.  Honor  is  due  to  Midshipmen  Maffit  and  Read, 
who  with  coolness  and  courage  gave  me  valuable  aid  whenever  it  was 
required. 


Chap.  XV.]  CAPTURE  FORTS  WALKER  AND  BEAUREGARD. 


29 


The  following  is'  a list  of  the  wounded  of  the  Beaufort  Artillery : 
Capt.  S.  Elliott,  in  the  leg,  by  a fragment  of  rilled  gun  ; Sergt.  B.  W. 
Sloman,  in  the  hand,  by  the  same;  Privates  Fripj),  Hamilton,  Wilcox, 
Perryclear,  and  Joyce,  by  same;  Sergeant  Stu.jrt,  by  recoil  of  colum- 
biad ; Private  M.  W.  Eripp, by  the  same;  Privates  William  Elliott  and 
F.  M.  Murdaugh,  by  explosion  of  caisson — all  slightly.  Of  Captain 
Harrison’s  company,  Privates  T.  and  I.  E.  Crews  lost  each  an  arm  by 
the  premature  discharge  of  a gun. 

I am,  sir,  with  resxject,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 
Captain  of  Beaufort  Artillery, 

First  Lieut.  William  H.  Talley, 

Adjutant  of  Twelfth  Regiment. 


No.  13. 

Statement  of  Messrs.  John  Tuomey  and  Henry  C.  Robertson^  of  occurrences 
at  Beaufort,  S.  0.,  November  7 and  8, 1861. 

Quartermaster’s  Office  Provisional  Forces, 

Third  Military  District,  Dept.  S.  C., 
Camp  Lee,  November  24,  1801. 

About  4 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  instant  Capt.  Josej^h  A. 
Huger  arrived  at  our  quarters  in  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  with  instructions  from 
Brigadier-Oeneral  Drayton  to  Maj.  E.  Willis,  quartermaster  Third  Mili- 
tary District,  Department  of  South  Carolina.  Major  Willis,  with  Capt- 
ain Huger,  left  Beaufort  about  5 o’clock  a.  m.in  steamer  Emma  for  Fort 
Walker,  Hilton  Head.  Twelve  o’clock  noon  same  day  written  orders 
were  received  from  Brigadier- General  Drayton  to  Major  Willis,  author- 
izing the  purchase  of  2,000  feet  of  lumber  to  repair  Skull  Creek  Bridge ; 
also  a gang  of  carpenters,  and  to  send  to  Fort  Walker,  Hilton  Head, 
immediately,  six  barrels  of  powder,  then  in  the  arsenal  in  Beaufort. 

Major  Willis  having  been  ordered  to  report  at  Hilton  Head,  the  orders 
were  opened,  the  lumber  purchased  from  Mr.  Cockroft,  carpenters 
engaged,  and  powder  shipped  all  ready  to  start,  when  the  Confederate 
steamers  Huntress,  Captain  Morris,  and  Lady  Davis,  Captain  Eutledge, 
left,  after  setting  fire  to  the  two  lightships  about  three  miles  below  Beau- 
fort. The  enemy  were  then  reported  to  be  in  possession  of  Broad  Eiver 
and  Port  Eoyal  Harbor,  all  communication  cut  off,  and  our  troops  were 
retreating  to  the  main  land,  having  abandoned  the  batteries  at  Hilton 
Head  and  Bay  Point.  The  powder  was  immediately  taken  out  of  the 
steamer  and  taken  charge  of  by  Mr.  Eobert  Chisolm  and  Mr.  McKee,  of 
Beaufort,  who  kindly  had  it  taken  to  a place  of  safety  from  the  enemy. 
It  is  now  at  Mr.  Hej^ward’s  plantation,  near  Pocotaligo.  The  carpenters 
were  dismissed  and  sent  to  Charleston  ; the  raft  of’  lumber  left  in  Beau- 
fort. Then,  with  the  assistance  and  advice  of  Capt.  Thomas  M.  Hanckel, 
of  Brigadier-General  Eipley’s  staff,  and  Capt.  Carlos  Tracy  and  Capt. 
Thomas  E.  S.  Elliott,  of  Brigadier- General  Drayton’s  staff,  the  two 
steamers,  Beauregard  and  Mary  Frances,  ordered  by  Captain  Willey,  of 
Savannah,  Ga.,  were  dispatched  forthwith  to  White  Hall  Ferry  (Ladies 
Island)  with  flats  to  bring  over  the  trooi)s  then  retreating  from  Bay 
Point,  consisting  of  a iiortion  of  Col.  E.  G.  M.  Dunovant’s  command 
(Twelfth  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers)  and  Beaufort  Artillery, 
Capt.  S.  Elliott. 


30 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


The  most  intense  excitement  prevailed  in  Beaufort  amongst  some  of 
the  citizens.  They  threw  up  rockets  about  11.30  or  12  o’clock  at  night, 
as  to  indicate  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  We  immediately  packed  np 
all  the  papers  and  books  we  could  get  and  sent  them  in  charge  of  Mr. 
Caldwell  to  Pocotaligo,  Mr.  H.  0.  Robertson  and  the  undersigned  await- 
ing the  arrival  of  the  troops  from  Bay  Point,  whom  we  furnished  trans- 
l)ortatiou  for. 

On  the  morning  of  8th  instant,  about  4 o’clock,  a report  was  then  in 
circulation  that  communication  was  cut  off  at  Port  Royal  Ferry.  Feel- 
ing anxious  for  the  safety  of  what  books  and  papers  we  had  saved,  as 
they  were  important,  we  left  Beaufort  about  4 o’clock  a.  m.  on  foot  for 
about  three  and  a half  miles. 

Previous  to  our  leaving  Beaufort  we  had  all  the  sick  men  in  the  hos- 
pital cared  for,  about  IG,  who  were  kindly  treated  by  Oapt.  0.  M. 
Morris,  of  steamer  Huntress,  and  taken  to  Charleston.  The  medicines 
and  brandy  left  in  Beaufort  for  Drs.  Johnson  and  Prioleau  were  taken 
charge  of  by  Col.  R.  G.  M.  Huuovant,  as  he  gave  me  to  understand. 

I am,  very  respectfully, 

JOHN  TUOMEY. 

Capt.  H.  E.  Young, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

I certify  that  the  above  is  a correct  statement  of  things  that  trans- 
pired at  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

HENRY  C.  ROBERTSON* 


NOVEMBER  8,  1861. — Reconnaissance  on  Hilton  Head  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Capt.  Q.  A.  Oillmore^  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

Office  of  Chief  Engineer  E.  C., 

Hilton  Heady  8.  0.,  November  8,  1861. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  directions  of  this  date  to  proceed  on  a 
reconnaissance  of  Hilton  Head  Island,  or  so  much  thereof  as  I could 
examine,  returning  to  headquarters  on  the  same  day,  I have  to  report  a 
completion  of  the  day’s  operations  under  the  escort  promised  to  me,  to 
wit,  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Regiment,  900  strong.  Colonel  Terry  com- 
manding. 

The  regiment  was  placed  at  my  disposal  at  11  o’clock  a.  m.,  when  I at 
once  set  out  upon  the  reconnaissance,  the  principal  object  of  which  was 
to  proceed  across  the  island  to  Seabrook,  on  Skull  Creek,  a distance  of 
6 miles,  by  the  nearest  practicable  route,  and  locate  suitable  positions 
for  batteries  to  control  the  inland  water  communications  by  way  of  Skull 
Creek  between  Savannah  and  Charleston. 

As  no  advance  had  been  made  from  our  position  on  Hilton  Head  since 
we  came  in  possession  yesterday  evening,  and  as  nothing  certain  was 
known  of  the  position  and  movements  of  the  enemy  since  he  was  driven 
from  the  work,  I deemed  it  proper  to  exercise  great  caution  against  sur- 
prise, and  accordingly  requested  Colonel  Terry  to  cover  the  advance  of 
the  main  body  of  escort  by  skirmishers.  O vw  a very  considerable  portion 
of  the  route  we  took  to  Seabrook  Point — the  one  running  through  the 
woods  beyond  General  Drayton’s  plantation,  as  distinguished  from  the 
one  near  the  shore — skirmishers  could  not  be  deployed,  as  both  sides  of 
the  road  are  lined  by  an  impenetrable  jungle.  Our  progress  was  necessa- 
rily quite  slow.  We  reached  Seabrook  Lauding  about  2 o’clock  p.  m. 


Chap.  XV.J  EXPEDITION  FROM  HILTON  HEAD  TO  BRADDOCK’s  PT.  31 


without  encountering  any  of  the  enemy  or  any  white  person  wliatever. 
From  what  I can  gather  from  negroes,  there  are  no  rebel  troops  on  any 
of  the  northern  portions  ot  Hilton  Head  Island. 

About  300  of  them,  with  some  wounded,  passed  over  the  road  last  niglit 
about  the  time  we  were  disembarking.  They  were  under  the  inlluence 
of  a terrible  panic  j knapsacks,  haversacks,  canteens,  cartridge-boxes, 
&c.,  were  found  scattered  over  the  road  and  on  the  wharf  at  Seabrook, 
where  the  hasty  embarkation  took  place.  We  also  found  at  the  landing 
a number  of  rided  muskets  and  bayonets.  There  is  near  the  wharf,  some 
in  store  and  some  outside,  a considerable  quantity,  say  fifteen  or  eighteen 
large  wagon  loads,  of  valuable  commissary  supplies,  such  as  bacon,  hard 
bread,  sugar,  rice,  corn,  vinegar,  &c.  We  brought  back  two  wagon 
loads  of  these  articles,  which  Colonel  Terry  will  account  for.  Had  my 
orders  admitted  of  it  I would  have  remained  at  Seabrook  with  half  the 
escort  until  boats  could  have  been  dispatched  from  headquarters  under 
convoy  to  bring  off  the  commissary  stores.  At  Seabrook  an  excellent 
position  for  a battery,  elevated  some  12  or  15  feet  above  the  level  of 
the  river,  to  sweep  and  control  the  Skull  Creek  channel,  has  been  selected. 
The  river  at  that  point  is  about  one-fourth  of  a mile  inside,  and  is  skirted 
OQ  the  farther  side  by  a marsh,  which  enlarges  the  distance  between  the 
firm  ground  on  the  opposite  shore  to  half  a mile  or  a little  more. 

I caused  soundings  to  be  taken  across  the  stream  at  half  tide,  finding 
two  fathoms  at  the  end  of  Seabrook  wharf,  three  fathoms  a short  distance 
out,  and  a good  5-fathom  anchorage  in  the  middle  of  the  stream. 

A battery  of  five  or  six  heavy  guns  at  Seabrook  would  be  quite  suffi- 
cient to  close  this  inland  water  passage  between  Charleston  and  Savannah, 
but  to  secure  it  against  a coup  de  main  I would  recommend  an  inclosed 
work  of  strong  relief  and  of  sufficient  capacity  for  1,000  men,  with  guns 
on  the  gorge  and  with  suitable  flanking  arrangements,  should  be  com- 
menced immediately.  It  should  mount  fifteen  guns,  at  least,  of  all  cali- 
bers. The  route  over  which  I passed  is  practicable  for  heavy  artillery 
and  heavy  transportation  generally,  but  materials  can  best  be  taken  to 
Seabrook  by  water.  The  wharf  there  requires  some  repairs. 

On  my  return  I increased  the  guard  at  General  Drayton’s  plantation 
at  the  request  of  the  officer  in  charge  there.  I found  no  public  property 
or  papers  at  General  Drayton’s,  with  the  exception  of  two  letters  already 
in  your  possession. 

There  is  no  post-office  at  Seabrook.  I have  to  acknowledge  the  cordial 
and  efficient  co  operation  of  Colonel  Terry  in  carrying  out  the  objects  of 
the  reconnaissance. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Captain  of  Ungmeers,  Chief  Engineer  E.  C. 

Brigadier-General  Wrigmit, 

Commanding  Forces  on  Hilton  Head^  S.  C. 


NOVEMBER  10-11,  1861. — Expedition  from  Hilton  Head  to  Braddock’s 

Point,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Capt,  Q.  A.  Gillmore,  JJ.  8.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

U.  S.  Engineer  Office, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  0.,  November  12,  1861. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I accompanied  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Wright  on  a night  expedition  to  Braddock’s  Point,  leaving  Hilton 


32  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Head  on  the  evening  of  the  10th  instant  and  returning  on  the  afternoon 
of  the  following  day.  We  reached  Lawton’s  plantation  about  midnight, 
where  our  escort,  composed  of  five  companies  of  the  Seventh  Connecti- 
cut Volunteers,  Colonel  Terry  commanding,  was  halted  until  4 o’clock 
in  the  morning.  By  the  road  Lawton’s  place  is  nearly  4 miles  from 
Braddock’s  Point.  At  4 o’clock  the  march  was  resumed,  and  the  column 
reached  the  point  where  the  road  strikes  the  beach  just  at  the  break  of 
day,  where  another  halt  was  ordered.  When  it  became  light  enough  to 
reconnoiter  a single  company  was  sent  forward  for  that  purpose.  The 
report  soon  came  back  that  the  place  appeared  to  be  abandoned,  when 
General  Wright  and  staff  went  forward. 

A battery  of  one  24-pounder  gun,  old  pattern,  was  found  behind  an 
irregular  parapet.  It  was  on  a siege  carriage.  A battery  of  one  10- 
inch  columbiad,  on  a new  wrought-iron  carriage  and  a good  wooden 
platform  with  iron  traverse  circle,  was  found.  The  parapet  at  this  point 
is  of  considerable  length  (203  feet),  and  contains  within  it  a good  maga- 
zine and  some  little  ammunition.  A well-constructed  parapet,  contain- 
ing two  24-pounder  guns,  old  pattern,  was  found.  It  contained  a good 
magazine.  Some  few  rounds  of  balls,  grape  and  canister,  were  scattered 
on  the  beach  outside  the  parapet,  apparently  left  behind  in  the  haste  of 
embarkation  or  for  the  want  of  the  means  of  transportation.  N^ear  this 
battery  is  a good  garrison  sling- cart,  and  all  the  finished  parts  of  wooden 
columbiad  platform,  full  circle.  Three  ordinary  ^^A”  tents  were  left 
standing,  which  were  probably  all  that  the  garrison  had,  as  extensive 
preparations  existed  for  protecting  troops  from  the  inclemency  of  the 
weather  by  means  of  poles  erected  on  the  ground  and  covered  with 
branches  of  trees. 

Braddock’s  Point  cannot  be  held  by  us  without  a considerable  force 
(except  by  the  active  co-operation  of  the  fleet),  so  as  to  enable  us  to  con- 
trol the  Calibogue  Sound.  To  hold  it  with  this  end  in  view  the  point 
should  be  occupied  in  force,  and  strong  guards  stationed  at  the  point 
where  the  cross-road  at  Lawton’s  and  the  one  above  it  debouch  upon 
the  eastern  shore. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A GILLMORE, 
Captain  and  Chief  Engineer, 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Division^  Hilton  Head^  S.  C, 


NOVEMBER  24,  1861. — Occupation  of  Tybee  Island  by  the  Union  forces. 

Beport  of  General  Robert  E.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army, 

Headquarters,  Savannah,  November  29,  1861. 

Sir  : On  Sunday  last,  24th  instant,  the  enemy  crossed  Savannah  Bar 
with  five  of  his  vessels,  and  made  a lodgment  on  Tybee  Island.  Sub- 
sequently three  other  vessels  joined  them,  and  the  force  on  Tybee  Island 
was  re-enforced.  Five  vessels,  one  of  them  a frigate,  said  to  be  the  Sa- 
bine, now  lay  inside  of  the  bar  north  of  Tybee  Island.  They  are  3 or 
4 miles  from  Fort  Pulaski,  within  range  of  whose  guns  they  have  not 
yet  approached.  The  force  ou  Tybee  Island  is  reported  to  be  large, 
but  I am  unable  to  state  it.  No  demonstration  of  their  purpose  has  yet 
been  made  further  than  the  occupation  of  the  island. 


CIIAV.  XV.]  EXPEDITION  TO  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY  AND  BEAUFORT.  33 

The  preparation  and  arrangement  of  Fort  Pulaski  ordered  on  my  first 
arrival  have  progressed  slowly,  but  I do  not  think  the  passage  of  the 
river  can  be  forced.  Fort  Jackson  is  now  armed,  and  its  defenses  have 
been  strengthened,  and  forms  an  interior  barrier.  The  channel  of  the 
river  has  also  been  blocked  up. 

The  force  in  the  Savannah  Kiver  is  believed  to  be  part  of  that  from 
Port  Royal  Harbor. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commayiding, 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War^  BicJimon(f  Va. 


DECEMBER  6-7, 1861. — Expedition  to  Port  Royal  Ferry  and  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Reports  of  Col,  William  E.  Martin^  C.  8.  Army,  icith  preliminary  cor- 
respondence. 

Headquarters  Mounted  Regiment, 

Rocotaligoj  November  25,  1801. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Aide-de-Camp,  Coosawhatcliie,  8.  C. : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  of  inclosing  copies  of  the  following  papers  : 

A.  General  Ripley^s  order,  date  November  10. 

B.  Memorandum  by  myself. 

O.  Reports  to  General  Ripley,  November  19. 

D.  Letter  to  F.  H.  Harlestou,  aide-de-camp,  November  22. 

E.  Extract  from  a letter  of  General  Ripley,  November  24. 

I hope  you  will  pardon  the  trouble  of  asking  your  attention  to  these 
papers.  I am  embarrassed  about  the  duty  devolved  upon  me,  because 
I do  not  know  whether  my  coadjutor.  Captain  Pope,  appointed  to  the 
command  jointly  with  myself,  has  abandoned  the  project  j and  whether 
he  has  or  has  not,  I am  at  a loss  to  know  whether  General  Lee  would  ap- 
prove the  execution  of  the  only  order  practicable  for  cavalry — the  opera-, 
tious  on  Port  Royal  Island  and  separate  movement.  If  the  matter  had 
been  confided  to  me  solely  I would  have  attempted  that  portion  of  it 
before  this  time.  I feel  bound  to  wait  for  the  co-operation  of  Captain 
Pope  a reasonable  time.  My  doubts  are  whether  I have  a right  to  wait 
any  longer.  These  doubts  it  is  my  anxious  desire  to  have  resolved  by 
an  expression  of  opinion  from  headquarters,  and  it  is  to  solicit  your 
assistance  in  obtaining  it  that  I venture  to  invite  your  kind  assistance. 

In  the  exercise  of  the  discretion  with  which  I am  intrusted  I would  not 
now  ask  advice  if  the  matter  were  not  complicated  by  the  joint  operation 
contemplated  and  now  apparently  impracticable.  I am  anxious  to  grat- 
ify the  public  expectation  for  action  on  Port  Royal  Island  immediately. 
I think  the  objects  of  the  expedition  can  be  attained  in  safety  as  far  as 
that  island  is  concerned,  and  I would  be  gratified  by  permission  to  pro- 
ceed in  its  execution.  May  I beg  the  favor  of  you,  therefore,  under  the 
circumstances,  to  favor  me  with  advice  from  General  Lee,  if  you  think  it 
proper  to  request  it. 

I have  tJie  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

WM.  E.  MARTIN, 
Colonel  Mounted  Regiment, 

3 R R VOL  VI 


34  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


f Inclosure  A.] 

Headquarters  Provisional  Forces,  Dept.  S.  C., 

Tulajinny^  November  IG,  1801. 

Col.  William  E.  Martin, 

Commanding  Mounted  Regiment : 

Colonel  : You  will  proceed  as  quickly  as  possible  to  organize  four 
or  more  parties,  to  be  composed  of  volunteers  from  your  command  and 
such  citizens  as  you  can  induce  to  give  their  services  to  the  country,  to 
proceed,  in  such  manner  as  you  may  determine  upon  and  direct,  into 
that  section  of  country  which  is  now  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  to  take 
such  steps  as  may  be  fit  and  proper  for  the  removal  and  escape  of  citi- 
zens of  South  Carolina  or  their  slaves,  and  for  the  protection  of  the  ma- 
terial projierty  which  may  be  in  the  vicinity,  and  to  prevent  its  falling 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Should  it  be  necessary,  you  are  author- 
ized to  destroy  all  cotton  which  is  in  that  district  of  country,  to  iirevent 
its  being  made  use  of  by  the  enemy,  but  where  the  owner  of  the  prop- 
erty is  present  let  him  be  consulted.  On  no  account,  however,  let  it  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  if  your  force  can  prevent  it.  Much  discre- 
tion must  be  left  to  you  in  carr^fing  out  these  orders,  but  first  'secure  all 
property,  next  prevent  the  enemy  from  getting  possession  of  cotton. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  S.  EIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

P.  S, — Should  you  be  unable  from  any  circumstance  to  carry  out  this 
order  in  full,  carry  it  out  as  far  as  possible. 


[Indorsement.] 


I have  seen  the  within  order  and  approve  of  it.  I suggested  it  to 
General  Lee,  because  I consider  the  property  now  in  possession  of  the 
enemy  and  because  its  destruction  weakens  the  enemy. 


E.  W.  PICKENS. 


f Inclosure  B.] 

November  16,  1861. 

On  the  next  day  I was  shown  by  Captain  Pope  orders  from  General 
Ripley  assigning  the  captain  to  the  command  of  two  or  more  parties  in 
the  expedition,  and  directing  the  movements  to  be  made  in  conjunction 
with  and  simultaneous  with  mine. 

[WM.  E.  MARTIN, 
Colonel  Mounted  Regiment.] 


[Inclosure  C.l 

Camp  Martin,  near  Pocotaligo,  S.  C., 

November  19,  1861. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

General  : Referring  to  your  orders  for  penetrating  into  the  islands 
held  by  the  enemy,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  consequence  of 
Captain  Pope’s  intimate  knowledge  of  the  topography  of  these  islands 
and  the  navigation  for  reaching  them  and  his  capabilities  as  an  officer, 
I intrusted  to  him  the  details  of  the  plan  for  reaching  Saint  Helena, 
while  I determined,  in  conjunction  with  Major  Oswald,  to  take  charge 
of  a strong  column  of  cavalry  for  operations  on  Port  Royal  Island. 
Your  orders  directed  the  duties  to  be  performed  by  volunteers  from  my 
command  and  such  citizens  as  could  be  induced  to  give  their  aid.  On 


Chap.  XV.]  EXPEDITION  TO  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY  AND  BEAUFORT.  35 

my  return  to  camp,  after  an  absence  of  twenty-ei^iit  hours  (my  visit  to 
the  city  being  partly  to  see  my  sick  family  and  partly  to  make  arrange- 
ments for  the  expedition),  I found  the  first  imi)ediment  in  the  way  by 
the  discovery  of  the  whole  plan  being  known  and  openly  talked  about 
among  the  planters  5 indeed,  in  several  instances,  under  my  own  obser- 
vation, they  spoke  of  it  in  promiscuous  assemblages  as  if  it  were  an 
ordinary  topic  of  conversation.  Fearing  the  information  would  reach 
the  enemy,  I determined  to  act  promptly.  Captain  Pope  undertook  to 
confer  with  the  island  planters  and  ascertain  how  many  of  them  could 
be  induced  to  co-operate  with  us.  Here  we  have  both  experienced  a 
great  disappointment,  as  we  have  scarcely  met  with  a man  who  was 
willing  to  lend  his  aid  and  the  knowledge  of  navigation  essential  to  the 
enterprise.  The  water  transportation  to  Saint  Helena  would  be  in  boats 
and  flats  by  oars,  occupying,  under  the  most  favorable  circumstances  of 
weather  and  tide,  fully  two  hours.  If  cavalry  were  to  be  transported  the 
flats  would  take  horses  with  their  riders,  and  I was  unwilling,  with  my 
knowledge  of  the  difficulty  and  danger  of  transporting  cavalry  in  o])en 
water  and  in  flats  without  aprons,  to  risk  any  horses  and  men  but  those 
belonging  to  Captain  Tripp’s  company,  in  which  the  troopers  and  horses 
are  accustomed  to  such  mode  of  transportation.  I regret  to  be  obliged 
to  inform  you  that  with  two  or  three  exceptions  this  company  refused 
to  volunteer.  Having  no  infantry,  I was  thus  left  to  the  volunteers 
from  my  command.  I have  purposely  avoided  calling  on  them  until 
the  expedition  was  ripe  for  execution,  but  I have  no  doubt  of  being 
able  to  get  the  requisite  number.  As  it  was  deemed  expedient  by  you 
and  Captain  Pope,  and  I fully  concurred  in  the  opinion,  that  the  move- 
ment should  be  simultaneous,  I have  not  deemed  it  advisable  to  make 
the  descent  upon  Port  Royal  until  the  remaining  portion  of  the  expedi- 
tion was  ready,  especially  as  that  island  is  still  and  is  likely  to  continue 
accessible  to  us,  the  euemy  not  being  in  sight  of  it  and  not  having 
drawn  cotton  and  ])fovisions  from  it  up  to  this  time.  I have  been 
obliged  to  make  this  full  narration  to  inform  you  fully  of  the  causes 
which  have  led  to  a suspension  of  our  proceedings  for  the  present. 

This  will  be  handed  to  you  by  Captain  Pope,  who  will  explain  matters 
more  fully.  In  the  mean  time  I hope  the  circumstances  will  justify  in 
your  estimation  the  suspension  we  deem  necessary.  As  soon  as  we  are 
prepared  to  be  successful  we  will  use  every  exertion  to  carry  out  your 
orders  in  their  spirit  and  letter. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  yours,  most  respectfully, 

WM.  E.  MARTIN", 
Colonel  Mounted  Regiment. 


[Inclosure  I).] 

Camp  near  Pocotaligo,  November  22,  1801. 

Capt.  F.  H.  Harleston, 

Aide  de-Camp.;  Charleston.,  S.  C.: 

Captain:  On  the  19th  instant  I submitted  to  General  Ripley  a 
detailed  report  of  the  causes  which  retarded  the  execution  of  his  order 
of  [the]  10th,  relative  to  an  expedition  to  the  islands  in  possession  of  the 
enemy.  In  that  report  I stated  that  Captain  Pope,  who  was  assigned 
to  the  command  of  one  or  more  parties  by  General  Ripley,  had  gone  to 
headquarters  to  confer  with  the  general  relative  to  the  further  prosecu- 
tion of  the  scheme,  and  I gave  my  reasons  for  awaiting  the  issue  of  their 
conference.  I refer  you  to  the  communication  for  a full  explanation. 


36  COASTS  OF  S.  a,  GA.,  and  middle  and  east  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

I have  heard  nothing  since  from  Caydain  Poi)e,  and  I do  not  know 
whether  he  is  still  i)rosecuting  his  plans  or  has  returned  to  his  com- 
mand at  Stono,  nor  where  to  address  him.  1 feel  very  anxious  to  dis- 
charge tbe  obligation  imposed  uy)on  me  by  the  order,  and  I am  at  a loss 
whether  I should  wait  longer  upon  Captain  Pope.  Under  these  circum- 
stances may  I ask  the  favor  of  you  to  mention  the  subject  to  the  general, 
and  to  confer  with  Captain  Pope,  if  he  is  in  Charleston,  and  ask  him  to 
let  me  have  his  views  or  inform  me  whether  he  has  gone  to  Stono  ? I 
am  disposed  to  execute  the  scheme  as  to  Port  Royal  Island  and  without 
waiting  longer,  and  I would  be  most  happy  to  be  relieved  from  the  sus- 
pense at  present. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  E.  MARTIN, 
Colonel  Mounted  Regiment. 


[Inclosure  E.] 


[Extract  from  a letter  from  General  Eipley  in  reply.] 


Novembee  24,  1861. 

#**#*#* 

I 

As  regards  the  execution  of  the  order  relative  to  operations  on  Port 
Royal  you  are  to  use  your  own  discretion. 

* * * * * * * 


Headquarters  Mounted  Regiment, 
Pocotaligo^  S.  (7.,  December  5,  1861 — 3 y).  m. 

General  : I wrote  to  Captain  Elliott  yesterday  that  you  desired  his 
presence  with  mine  at  your  headquarters  to  know  the  details  of  the  expe- 
dition to  Port  Royal  Island.  I have  just  learned  that  after  the  receiyit 
of  the  letter  Caiitain  Elliott  went  over  with  25  men  and  has  yiartly  exe- 
cuted his  mission,  and  had  not  returned  when  last  heard  from.  I send 
this  by  a special  messenger,  to  inquire  if  you  will  ayiprove  of  my  start- 
ing immediately  with  a detachment  of  30  or  40  men  to  support  Cayitain 
Elliott  and  complete  the  work.  If  you  will  favor  me  with  a reyily  by 
telegraph  it  will  expedite  my  departure. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  E.  MARTIN, 
Colonel  Mounted  Regiment. ' 

Major-General  Lee,  CoosaivliatcliWy  S.  C. 


Headquarters  Mounted  Regiment, 

Poeotaligoj  S.  (7.,  December  9,  1861. 

General  : At  9 p.  m.,  5th  instant,  1 received  a telegram  from  you, 
authorizing  me  to  proceed  to  Port  Royal  Island  to  complete  the  burning 
of  the  cotton  commenced  by  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott.  As  it  was  advis- 
able to  cross  the  ferry  about  dark,  I started  next  daj’^  at  12  m.,  sent  for- 
ward scouts  to  Beaufort  to, report  to  me  at  the  ferry.  Tliey  did  so,  and 
the  information  from  the  town  was  brought  (down  to  sundown)  that  there 
was  no  enemy  on  the  island. 

At  6 p.  m."l  crossed  the  ferry  with  10  men,  under  a lieutenant,  with 
two  guides — Capt.  O.  Barnwell  and  Dr.  Hasell — leaving  the  remainder 


Chap.  XV.]  EXPEDITION  TO  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY  AND  BEAUFORT.  37 


of  the  detachment  of  about  50  men  to  follow  me, under  the  command  of 
Major  Oswald,  of  my  regiment.  It  was  my  intention  to  enter  the  town 
and  meet  Major  Oswald  2 miles  this  side  and  commence  the  burning 
back  towards  the  ferry.  I had  provided  an  additional  mode  of  egress 
from  the  island  in  case  of  pursuit  by  crossing  with  hats  to  Page's  Point, 
on  the  main-land.  In  this  I was  aided  by  Captain  Maffit,  Colonel  Jones, 
and  Major  Sams.  I will  mention  for  your  information,  in  passing,  that 
II  men  can  be  crossed  at  the  regular  ferry  with  their  horses  in  llfteen 
minutes  with  the  flat  in  use. 

I proceeded  until  within  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  Beaufort. 
VvJienat  the  distance  of  about  thirty  yards  we  received  the  fire  of  about 
thirty  muskets,  as  I suppose,  of  the  enemy.  The  order  to  halt  from  the 
enemy,  with  oaths  and  curses,  was  followed  up  instantly  by  their  dis- 
charge. 1 am  obliged,  with  much  pain,  to  say  that  the  whole  (letachment 
and  the  guides  retreated  instantly,  with  the  exception  of  one  man.  I 
saw  but  one  discharge  from  our  retreating  party,  and  that  seemed  to  be 
in  the  air.  The  exception  to  which  I refer  was  a private  [of]  Captain 
Bostick’s  company,  the  Allendale  Mounted  Guard.  At  the  discharge 
his  horse  dashed  forward  and  he  checked  him  aboutten  paces  in  advance 
of  me.  He  then  fired  one  barrel  of  his  gun  and  snapped  the  other  three 
times.  I then  heard  him  complaining  of  the  retreat  of  our  detachment, 
adding,  Their  guns  (the  pickets’)  are  all  discharged,  and  we  could  have 
captured  them  all  if  the  men  had  not  run  away.”  As  he  is  one  of  my 
soldiers  I must  do  him  the  justice  of  meutioniug  his  name,  although  he 
is  my  son — Private  Vincent  F.  Murtin.  The  retreat  of  the  detachment 
was  so  nearly  simultaneous  with  the  flashing  of  the  guns,  that  the  men 
informed  me  that  they  did  not  hear  my  orders  to  them  to  halt,  which  I 
gave,  intending  to  form  an  advance.  I recalled  Private  Martin  after 
one  or  two  minutes,  and  we  rode  down  the  way  our  men  had  retreated 
to  the  distance  of  seventy-five  yards,  or  thereabouts,  and,  one  of  us  on 
either  side  of  the  road,  we  listened  for  half  an  hour  for  sounds  in  both 
directions.  W e heard  no  sounds  except  t he  discharge  of  sixty  or  seventy 
guns  in  the  town  or  outskirts  about  half  an  hour  after  the  firing  on  us. 

I then  rode  on  with  the  soldier  above  mentioned  in  a walk  all  the  way 
to  the  ferry  in  momentary  expectation  of  meeting  first  the  advance 
guard  and  then  the  main  body,  but  was  disappointed,  and  when  I reached 
the  ferry  the  whole  detachment  was  on  the  opposite  side. 

Major  Oswald,  in  his  report,  informs  me  of  the  following: 

About  5 miles  from  the  ferry  we  met  one  of  the  advance  detach- 
ment at  full  speed  crying  out,  “ The  colonel  is  killed,”  and  he  rushed  on 
past  the  men.  The  major  ordered  his  column  to  advance  to  revenge 
llieir  colonel,  but  they  did  not  move.  Others  came  at  the  same  speed 
from  the  direction  of  Beaufort,  also  stating  the  death  of  the  colonel  and 
that  there  was  a wounded  man  behind.  Major  Oswald  then  again 
ordered  his  men  to  advance  to  succor  this  wounded  man.  This  man 
came  up  immediately,  but  did  not  halt  from  his  speed,  although  ordered 
to  do  so  by  Major  Oswald.  He  turned  out  to  be  Capt.  O.  Barnwell,  who 
was  wounded  in  the  arm — a flesh  wound — badly.  With  him  all  Major 
Oswald’s  detachment,  except  about  20,  retreated.  The  officers  collected 
around  Major  Oswald,  and  he  inquired  if  they  were  willing  to  go  on,  but 
met  with  no  encouragement.  He  then  called  for  volunteer’s,  but  received 
but  one.  Private  Edward  Bostick,  of  the  Allendale  Mounted  Guard, 
who  replied  he  would  follow  him  to  the  death  to  revenge  the  colonel. 
Major  Oswald  then,  finding  he  could  accomplish  nothing,  ordered  a 
retreat,  which  he  conducted  in  good  order,  crossing  the  ferry,  where  I 
ascertained  they  were. 


38  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,.  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  fCiiAP.  XV. 

Major  Oswald’s  conduct  was  all  I knew  it  would  be  in  a brave  and 
judicious  offi(;er.  He  mentions  in  bis  report  that  Capt.  AV.  G.  Green, 
of  the  Salkebatchie  Guerrillas,  was  cool  and  collected,  and  was  willing 
to  advance,  but  that  in  bis  (tbe  captain’s)  judgment  it  was  not  advis- 
able. 

I did  not  recross  tbe  ferry,  but  remained  on  tbe  other  side  with  Pri- 
vate Martin,  and  ordered  them  to  recross.  This  they  did  at  12  midnight 
with  tbe  utmost  alacrity,  cheering  me  with  tbe  utmost  enthusiasm.  From 
tliis  moment  1 am  spared  tbe  pain  of  recording  anything  more  to  their 
discredit.  I conducted  tbe  column  to  a plantation  on  tbe  road  to  Beau- 
fort, and  bivouacked  until  daylight  about  2 miles  from  tbe  ferry. 

Early  in  the  morning  I moved  tbe  column  to  within  4 miles  of 
Beaufort,  when  I called  for  volunteers  to  go  into  the  town.  I wanted 
but  8,  but  nearly  all  tbe  detachment  volunteered.  I ought  to  have 
added  that  at  tbe  ferry,  my  guides  having  left  me,  I sent  over  for  volun- 
teers to  Captain  Barnwell’s  and  Captain  Smith’s  Company,  but  received 
only  one — a Mr.  Givens.  Tbe  detachment  of  volunteers  i^assed  round 
the  bead  of  Saltwater  Creek  to  within  2 miles  of  Beaufort,  and  within 
tbe  lines  of  tbe  enemy’s  pickets,  and  exchanged  shots  with  them.  They 
were  commanded  by  Captain  Smart,  of  tbe  Allendale  Mounted  Guard, 
an.  officer  whose  conduct  has  won  my  respect  by  the  manner  in  which  he 
discharged  the  duty  assigned  to  him.  Privates  Edward  Bostick,  Y.  F. 
Martin,  B.  T.  Lawton,  J.  E.  Bailey,  and  J.  A.  Owens,  of  his  company; 
Sergt.  Maj.  Marion  Green,  and  Charles  Jones  and  Shepherd,  of  Green’s 
company,  and  the  guide,  J.  C.  Givens,  above  named,  constituted  his 
party. 

Mr.  Givens’  and  Mr.  Shepherd’s  services  as  guides  were  meritorious 
and  valuable  to  me  until  1 left  the  island. 

On  the  return  of  mj  i)ickets  from  the  enemy’s  lines  I divided  the  col- 
umn into  two  detachments,  and  taking  charge  of  one,  and  assigning  the 
other  to  Major  Oswald,  we  ])roceeded  respectively  to  the  waters  around 
the  island  where  the  plantations  lie  and  burned  all  the  cotton,  except 
where  the  quantity  was  too  inconsiderable  to  destroy  the  building  or 
where  the  owners  were  engaged  in  removing  it.  1 have  reason  to  sup- 
l)ose  but  little  cotton  remains  on  the  island.  AVhere  the  cotton  was  in 
the  dwelling-houses,  or  its  destruction  involved  the  loss  of  valuable 
buildings,  it  was  thrown  out  and  rendered  valueless. 

The  two  detachments  united  at  a rendezvous  near  the  ferry,  and 
crossed  at  10  p.  m.  on  [the]  7th  instant,  the  men  having  been  almost  in- 
cessantly in  the  saddle  for  thirty-four  hours,  with  but  two  meals,  which 
they  carried  in  their  haversacks. 

I liave  no  casualties  to  men  or  horses  in  my  command  to  report,  and, 
regretting  the  necessity  of  so  lengthy  a communication,  I have  the  honor 
to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

• AVM.  E.  MARTIFT, 
Colonel  Mounted  Regiment, 

Major-General  Lee,  Coosaivliatchicj  S,  C. 

P.  S. — I omitted  to  state,  on  my  arrival  within  half  a mile  of  the  ferry, 
on  my  way  to  cross  over  from  this  side,  I concealed  my  men  in  a dense 
thicket  and  allowed  no  negroes  to  pass ; that  when  I biv^ouacked  on  the 
l)lantation  beyond  the  ferry  I guarded  every  negro  house  and  the  coun- 
try around,  and  that  at  all  times,  after  the  pickets  fired  on  us,  I took 
every  negro  who  was  ])assing  into  custody,  and  that  all  opportunity  of 
conveying  intelligence  of  our  movements  was  cut  offi. 


Chap.  XV.] 


EVACUATION  OF  ROCKVILLE. 


39 


DECEMBER  17,  1831. — Evacuation  of  Rockville,  S.  C.,  by  Confederate 

forces. 

RlSlPbRTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  J.  L.  Branch,  Rifle  Regiment. 

No.  3. — Capt.  T.  G.  Budd,  quartermaster  Rifle  Regiment. 

No.  1. 

Beport  of  Brig.  Gen.  B.  8.  Bq^leg,  C.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  Second  District  South  Carolina, 

Charleston^  8.  0.,  December  30,  18G1. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  the  report  of  Colonel 
Branch  and  accompanying  papers  [Nos.  2 and  3]  relating  to  [the'  retreat 
from  Kockville.  I also  inclose  copy  of  the  orders  given  to  Colonel  Branch 
from  these  headquarters  when  he  occupied  John’s  Island.  I should  have 
forwarded  these  papers  earlier,  but  that  I deemed,  considering  the  organ- 
ization of  the  troops,  that  a report  on  the  subject  could  not  very  mate- 
rially benefit  the  service. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

11.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Capt.  T.  A.  V^ASHINGTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Coosawhatchie,  8.  C. 

[Inclosure.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Sec’d  Mil.  Dist., 

No.  217.  ( Charleston,  8.  C.,  November  25,  1861. 

I.  Colonel  Branch’s  regiment  of  rifles.  South  Carolina  militia,  will  take 
post  on  John’s  and  VYadmalaw  Islands  as  soon  as  possible.  One  battal- 
ion of  the  regiment  will  land  at  tlohn’s  Island  Ferry,  and  leaving  one 
company  at  that  point  in  charge  of  the  ferry  and  boats,  which  will 
accompany  the  command,  will  proceed  to  the  interior  of  the  island. 
The  other  battalion,  with  the  headquarters,  will  proceed  to  Rockville,  and 
take  post  in  observation  at  that  point. 

II.  The  regiment  will  move  with  as  little  baggage  as  possible,  and 
on  no  account  will  the  strict  regulation  allowance  of  transportation  be 
exceeded. 

III.  The  different  commands  and  detachments  will  be  kept  in  light 
marching  order,  and  move  from  point  to  point,  as  may  be  directed  by 
the  colonel  or  commanding  officer,  the  object  being  to  familiarize  the 
ofucers  and  troops  wfith  the  locality,  as  well  as  to  give  protection  to  the 
inhabitants. 

IV.  Colonel  Branch  is  authorized  to  employ  such  guides  as  may  be 
necessary,  and  if  possible,  until  cavalry  can  be  furnished  him,  to  mount 
a small  force  of  his  command  to  keep  up  his  communications. 

V.  The  regiment  will  take  fifteen  days’  rations  of  small  stores,  but 
the  principal  part  of  the  subsistence  will  be  purchased  in  the  vicinity. 

VI.  After  having  made  a thorough  reconnaissance  of  the  island. 
Colonel  Branch  will  report  to  these  headquarters  upon  the  strength  of 
the  position  and  the  disposition  of  his  command.  He  will  meantime 


40  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

keep  bimself  in  communication  with  the  post  near  Cburcli  Flats,  and 
be  ready,  if  necessary,  to  support  it  by  any  means  in  his  power. 

* ****## 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Eipley  : 

F.  H.  hablesto:n, 

Aide-de-Camp, 


Ko.  2, 

Beport  of  Col.  John  L.  Branch.^  Blfle  Bcgiment. 

Headquarters  Eegiment  of  Eifles, 

Camp  Evans.,  December  22,  18G1. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  statement  of  facts 
and  leasons  which  governed  me  in  tbe  removal  of  this  command  from 
its  late  encampment  near  Eockville  : 

On  Tuesday,  the  17th  instant,  about  4.30  p.  m.,  it  was  reported  to  me 
that  four  of  the  enemy^s  vessels  had  crossed  the  bar  or  were  in  sight, 
and  firing  shells.  I at  once  prepared  to  make  observations  for  myself, 
and  saw  the  vessels,  o e considerably  in  advance  o.f  the  others,  coming 
up  the  Edisto  Eiver.  I ordered  the  regimental  line  to  be  formed  with- 
out knapsacks  and  marched  out  of  camp,  supposing  that  a fire  of  shells 
would  at  once  be  opened  upon  it.  This  was  not  done,  however,  and 
the  advanced  steamer  continued  up  the  river,  while  the  others  stopped 
near  the  entrance  of  the  Bohicket  Creek  (about  one  and  a half  miles 
from  Eockville)  into  the  Edisto. 

On  this  river  and  the  several  bold  creeks  connected  therewith  are 
many  places  where  troops  could  be  landed,  and  by  a forced  march  to 
our  rear  gain  possession  of  the  only  two  bridges  (Church  and  Bugby) 
connecting  AVadmalaw  with  John’s  Island,  and  thereby  cut  oft  my 
entire  command,  292  rifles.  Having  no  means  of  ascertaining  whether 
or  not  such  would  be  the  action  of  the  enemy — five  of  my  mounted 
officers  being  absent — I ordered  the  regiment  to  fall  back  to  this  point 
as  a better  position  for  defense.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  had  no  dem- 
onstration been  made  to  cut  us  off  from  John’s  Island,  no  retreat,  save 
beyond  the  range  of  [the]  enemy’s  shells,  would  have  been  ordered,  un- 
less a very  heavy  1‘orce  had  been  landed  at  Eockville. 

The  commissary’s  report  will  show  the  losses  sustained  in  his  depart- 
ment, and  the  report  of  the  quartermaster,  whose  activity  and  energy 
in  the  duties  of  his  office  deserve  the  highest  commendation,  will  set 
forth  the  condition  of  the  transportation  and  account  in  some  measure 
for  those  losses. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  L.  BEANCH, 
Colonel  Regiment  of  Rifles, 

Leo.  I).  Walker, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  South  Carolina, 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  T.  G.  Budd,  Quartermaster  Rifle  Regiment, 

Headquarters  Eifle  Eegiment, 

Camp  Evans^  S.  0.,  December  23,  I8G1. 
Dear  Sir  : I beg  leave  to  report  in  as  concise  form  as  possible  the 


Chap.  XV.]  EVACUATION  OF  ROCKVILLE.  41 

circumstances  interesting  my  department  at  the  retreat  from  the  vicin- 
ity of  liockville  on  the  evening  of  the  17th  instant : 

You  will  bear  in  mind  the  lapse  of  time  from  the  first  alarm  to  the 
appearance  of  four  of  the  enemy’s  ships  did  not  exceed  twenty  minutes. 
At  the  first  intimation  of  an  attack  I had  the  teams  prom])tly  harnessed. 
The  ammunition  wagon  first  moved  off,  next  followed  tlui  surgeon’s 
wagon  with  medical  stores.  Two  wagons  were  sent  to  the  commissary 
store  house  and  loaded  with  the  most  valuable  and  necessary  provisions. 
One  spring  cart  was  loaded  with  various  articles  out  of  my  store-rooms, 
and  the  four  remaining  wagons,  with  the  other  spring  cart,  were  loaded 
with  knai^sacks  and  blankets,  in  accordance  with  your  orders.  On  these 
wagons  were  i)laced  other  articles  of  a private  character,  in  opposition 
to  my  express  orders  to  the  contrary,  as  it  was  impossible  to  supervise 
in  person  the  loading  of  each.  All  the  wagons  were  then  taken  in  charge 
by  the  regiment  and  retreated  to  Bogle  Place,  about  lour  and  a half 
miles  distant.  The  first  three  of  them  unloaded  were  returned  to  camp 
and  again  dispatched  with  tents.  Two  other  wagons  returned  and  were 
also  dispatched  with  tents  and  commissary  stores. 

At  this  period  our  scoute  reported  the  enemy  as  having  landed  on 
the  wharf  at  Eockvjlle,  and  you  instructed  me  to  turn  back  the  other 
wagons,  which  were  returning  to  camp  for  the  purpose  of  saving  the 
remainder.  At  my  request  Quartermaster-Sergeant  Green  visited  a 
neighboring  plantation  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  additional  transpor- 
tation. He  secured  one  team,  on  which  was  placed  the  property  of  the 
field  and  staff',  or  so  much  of  it  as  was  saved. 

You  are  aware  of  the  repeated  applications  I have  made  to  the  bri- 
gade quartermaster  lor  transportation  sufficient  to  move  the  regiment, 
and  the  loss  realized  by  the  retreat  was  due  to  the  small  capacity  and 
limited  number  of  wagons  I could  control.  The  c.)mmissary  stores  lost, 
consisting  of  about  thirteen  days’ rations  of  grist,  sugar,  and  bread,  were 
too  bulky  for  rapid  movement,  owing  to  the  size  of  the  packages  (hogs- 
heads and  tierces),  even  had  I the  necessary  wagons. 

I will  also  call  your  attention  to  the  anxiety  I had  expressed  to  you 
that  large  wall-tents  should  be  furnished  for  the  storing  of  commissary 
and  quartermaster’s  stores.  These  had  been  refused  at  headquarters 
after  my  repeated  applications  for  them,  and  after  my  having  brought 
to  the  notice  of  the  brigade  quartermaster  (with  a request  that  he  would 
read  my  remarks  at  headquarters)  that  if  they  were  not  sent  my  respon- 
sibility for  the  loss  occasioned  by  having  the  stores  in  advance  of  the 
regiment  ceased.  Great  delay  was  occasioned  by  the  inferiority  of  the 
team  harness,  as  they  continually  broke,  and  also  from  many  of  the 
mules  given  me  in  exchange  for  the  horses  which  had  been  taken  for 
artillery  service  in  the  city,  [which]  were  wild  and  unbroken.  Eight  of 
them  would  not  draw  or  lead,  and  on  the  retreat  broke  loose  from  the 
wagons  to  which  they  were  hitched ; 2 have  since  been  recovered  and 
6 are  still  in  the  woods. 

I am  satisfied  that  had  the  proper  transportation  been  furnished, 
together  with  other  appliances  actually  necessary  to  the  regiment,  all 
the  quartermaster’s  and  commissary  stores,  as  well  as  other  i^roperty, 
would  have  been  saved.  You  are  well  aware  I have  often  complained 
to  you  of  the  want  of  those  articles  essential  to  the  perfect  organization 
of  my  department,  and  the  difficulty  I exx)erienced  in  getting  my  orders 
filled  or  a response  to  my  applications. 

My  assistants,  Quartermaster-Sergeant  Green  and  Private  Adam, 
rendered  good  service  in  making  the  loss  light  as  posssible  under  the 


42 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


adverse  circumstances  attending  tlie  retreat,  and  I feel  indebted  to  each 
of  them  for  their  active  co-operation. 

In  conclusion,  I may  add  the  loss  realized  is  much  less  than  at  first 
anticipated. 

I am,  dear  sir,  your  respectful  and  obedient  servant, 

T.  G.  BUDD, 

Quartermaster  First  Eegiment  Rifles. 
Col.  John  L.  Branch,  Commanding. 


DECEMBER  17,  1861.— SkirmiGh  on  Chisolm’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  U.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  District  of  Port  Royal, 

Beaufort,  8.  C.,  Decemher  18,  1861. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  my  directions  Lieutenant  Porter,  Eighth  Michi- 
gan Regiment,  took  a party  last  evening  across  the  Coosaw  River,  and 
surprised  a iiicket  on  Chisolm’s  Island.  I found  an  intelligent  negro  as 
guide.  The  party  started  at  9.30  o’clock,  crossed  the  Coosaw,  got  in  the 
rear  of  the  picket,  attacked  it,  and  took  the  whole  party  of  6 prisoners. 
Two  were  wounded.  They  belonged  to  the  Fourteenth  Regiment  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel  [JamesJ  Jones  commanding,  and  their 
names  are  J.  P.  Longford,  L.  M.  Longford,  B.  Mathis,  John  Mates,  M. 
W.  dennings  (wounded),  and  Corporal  J.  Y.  Longford  (wounded). 

I have  not  been  able  to  elicit  much  information  from  them.  They 
state,  however,  that  theirs  is  the  only  regiment  stationed  at  Garden’s 
Corner,  and  that  there  are  no  pieces  of  artillery  there.  They  have  been 
in  the  Confederate  service  about  four  months ; have  received  no  pay. 
They  stated  that  the  common  people  had  been  led  into  the  war  by  1 he 
leaders;  that  they  volunteered  to  prevent  being  drafted.  They  i^cbe 
prisoners)  believe  the  whole  difficulty  grows  out  of  a misunderstanding. 
Their  leaders,  however,  were  very  determined. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier  General,  Commanding. 

Capt.  L.  H.  Pelouze, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Port  Royal,  8.  C. 


DECEMBER  20,  1861. — Sinking  of  the  Stone  Fleet  at  the  entrance  to 
Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

E 3?  O R X S . 

No.  1. — General  Robert  E.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Thomas  M.  Wagner,  8.  C.  Artillery. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  General  Robert  E.  Lee,  C.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters,  Coosa wiiatchie,  S.  C., 

December  20,  1861. 

Sir:  It  has  been  reported  to  me  by  General  Ripley  that  the  enemy 
brought  his  stone  fieet  to  the  entrance  of  Charleston  Harbor  to  day,  and 


Chap.  XV.]  SINKING  STONE  FLEET  IN  CIIAllLESTON  HARBOR.  43 

sunk  between  thirteen  and  seventeen  vessels  in  the  main  ship  chanuel. 
The  North  Channel  and  Maffit’s  Channel  are  still  open.  Tliis  achieve- 
ment, so  unworthy  any  nation,  is  the  abortive  eximession  of  the  malice 
and  revenge  of  a i)eople  which  it  wishes  to  perpetuate  by  rendering- 
more  memorable  a day  hateful  in  their  calendar.  It  is  also  indicative 
of  their  despair  of  ever  capturing  a city  they  design  to  ruin,  for  they 
can  never  expect  to  possess  what  they  labor  so  hard  to  reduce  to  a con- 
dition not  to  be  enjoyed.  I think,  therefore,  it  is  certain  that  an  attack 
on  the  city  of  Charleston  is  not  contemi)lated,  and  we  must  endeavor 
to  be  i)re[)ared  against  assaults  elsewhere  on  Ihe  Southern  coast. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War^  Eichmond,  Va, 


No.  2. 

Eeport  of  Maj.  Thomas  M.  Wagner j S.  C.  Artillery. 

Fort  Sumter,  Charleston  Harbor, 

February  12,  1862. 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  instructions,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 
following  report  of  the  sinking  of  the  stone  fleet  at  the  entrance  of 
Charleston  Harbor: 

On  the,  afternoon  of  December  18  a large  increase  to  the  blockading 
squadron  was  observed.  The  majority  of  vessels  appeared  to  be  old 
whaling  and  trading  vessels.  On  the  19th,  the  weather  being  bad,  not 
much  ])r ogress  was  made  in  their  preparations  for  sinking.  A few  of 
the  vessels  were  stripped.  By  dawn  on  the  morning  of  the  20th  great 
activity  was  observed  ; fifteen  vessels  were  placed  in  line  more  or  less 
direct  across  the  main  ship  channel,  about  4 miles  south-southeast 
of  Fort  Sumter  and  3 miles  east-southeast  of  the  light  on  Morris 
Island.  By  evening  all  had  been  stripped,  dismasted,  and  sunk.  From 
the  observations  made  tbe  vessels  ai)peared  to  have  been  placed  in  a 
single  irregular  line,  with  intervals  of  100  feet,  making  a distance  of 
about  3,500  feet  in  extent  from  shoal  to  shoal,  and  completely  occupy- 
ing the  channel.  The  vessels  commenced  to  settle  immediately,  and  at 
the  end  of  a week  but  little  was  to  be  seen  of  any  of  their  hulls.  They 
have  now  entirely"  disappeared.  Large  portions  of  the  wrecks  have  from 
time  to  time  come  ashore.  The  position  of  the  blockading  squadron 
has,  however,  prevented  any  accurate  survey  being  made. 

On  January  20  another  fleet  came  to  anchor  ofl*  the  port.  They  took 
up  their  jiosition  in  a line  extending  from  the  entrance  of  the  north 
channel  southwardly  to  the  main  ship  channel.  The  vessels  were  mostly 
of  a smaller  class  than  those  of  December.  They  were  fourteen  in  num- 
ber— barks  and  brigs.  They  were  stripped  and  towed  northwardly  to 
their  i)ositions,  which  was  on  the  south  edge  of  the  shoal  known  as  the 
Battle  Snake,  and  opposite  the  entrance  of  the  Maffit  Channel,  with  the 
exception  of  one  vessel,  which  was  placed  on  the  eastern  edge  of  the 
shoal  about  two  and  a half  miles  east  of  the  other  vessels  and  between 
the  Shoal  and  the  Long  Island  Beach. 

The  line  extended  from  north  to  south,  and,  by  measurement,  six 
miles  and  a half  east-northeast  of  Fort  Sumter.  The  place  has  been 


44  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  iCiiAr.  XV. 

carefully  noted  on  the  chart  of  the  harbor  at  Fort  Sumter.  The  first 
four  vessels  to  the  north  of  the  line  were  sunk  on  the  western  end  of  the 
Hattie  Snake  in  shoal  water,  the  balance  in  4 or  5 fathoms  water,  and 
in  the  track  of  vesselsentering-  Charleston  Harbor  b^'  Mafiit’s  Channel. 

The  operations  on  both  occasions  were  superintended  by  six  armed 
steamers  and  a sailing-  frigate. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  M.  WAGNER, 

Major,  S.  C.  Artillery,  Commanding  Fort  Sumter, 

Capt.  Leo.  D.  Walker, 

AssMant  Adjutant-  General, 


• JAlfUAIlY  1,  1862. — Engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  Coosaw  River,  S.  C. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  with  congratulatory  orders. 
No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Col.  William  M.  Fenton,  Eighth  Michigan  Infantry. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  Col.  James  L.  Fraser,  Forty-seventh  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  5.— Col.  James  H.  Perry,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  6. — Maj.  David  Morrison,  Seventy-ninth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  William  St.  George  Elliott,  Seventy-ninth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  8. — Col.  B.  C.  Christ,  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  9. — Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  S.  Brenholts,  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  10. — Col.  Daniel  Leasure,  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  11. — Lieut.  William  S.  Cogswell,  Fifth  Connecticut  Infantry,  Signal  Office. 

No.  12. — Lieut.  Henry  S.  Tafift,  Fifteenth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  Signal  Office. 

No.  13. — Letter  from  Maj.  Albert  J.  Myer,  Signal  Officer,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  14. — Return  of  casualties  in  Union  forces. 

No.  15. — Congratulatory  orders  from  Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  16. — Brig.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  17. — Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  S.  Donelson,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  18. — Col.  James  Jones,  Fourteenth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  19. — Lieut.  Col.  Dixon  Barnes,  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  20. — Maj.  Cadwalader  Jones,  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  21. — Col.  William  E.  Martin,  Mounted  Regiment. 

No.  22. — Return  of  casualties  in  Confederate  forces. 

No.  1. 

Rejyorts  of  Brig,  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  icith  congratu- 
latory orders. 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  January  2,  1802. 
Sir:  As  the  V^anderbilt  leaves  to-morrow  morning,  I deem  it  proper 
to  inclose  to  you  a letter  of  instructions  to  General  Stevens,  commanding 
second  brigade  of  this  division,  of  December  30. 

The  simple  object  of  this  dash  was  to  destroy  the  batteries  which  the 
enemy  appeared  to  have  erected  on  the  Coosaw  River  for  the  obstruc- 
tion of  the  navigation  and  the  passage  of  that  stream,  aud  also  to  pun- 
ish him  for  the  insult  in  firing  upon  the  steamer  Mayflower  on  her  recent 
passage  through  that  stream  for  the  fiuipose  of  sounding  the  depth  of 


CIIAP.  XV.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


45 


tbe  cliannel.  Tlie  affair  succeeded  perfectly,  aud  the  enemy  were  driven 
out  of  their  batteries,  the  batteries  demolislied,  and  i)r()perty  Ibnnd 
there  brought  away  or  destroyed  with  little  or  no  loss  of  life  on  our'side. 
After  the  object  of  the  movement  was  executed  General  Stevens,  agree- 
ably to  his  instructions,  returned  to  Port  Koyal  Island.*  As  soon  as  his 
report  readies  me  it  will  be  duly  forwarded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SBERMANT, 
Brigadier-  G enera /,  Commanding, 

General  L.  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TI.  S.  A.,  Washington^  D,  G. 


[ Inclosure.  J 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royalj  8.  C.,  December  30,  18G1. 

General:  Agreeably  to  the  conversation  already  had  with  you,  it  is 
designed  to  cross  a force  over  the  Coosaw  River  on  the  morning  of  the 
1st,  and  seize  upon  the  enemy’s  batteries  at  the  ferry  and  other  points 
on  that  river.  According  to  our  understanding,  you  will  be  able  to  laud 
from  1,500  to  2,000  men  suddenly  from  the  means  of  trausjiortation  at 
your  disposal.  These  men  can  probably  be  landed  above  the  Brick-yard 
at  a convenient  place  for  making  a dash  at  the  ferry  fort.  A small  force 
should  also  cross  at  Seabrook  at  the  proper  time,  or  certainly  attempt 
to  do  so.  ('ommodore  DuPont  will  furnish  some  gunboats  and  gun- 
launches,  to  be  commanded  by  Oapt.  C.  R.  P.  Rodgers,  U.  S.  ISTavy,  with 
whom  you  must  consult  and  co-operate.  . Two  of  these  gunboats  will 
probably  take  up  a position  near  you  and  above  the  Brick-yard.  The 
other  two  will  probably  enter  Whale  Branch  at  the  proi)er  time,  and 
advance  towards  the  ferry.  The  time  for  crossing  the  troops  above  the 
Brick-yard  is  prompt  daj^^ light,  when  the  gunboats  there  will  be  prepared 
to  cover  your  storming  party. 

The  gunboats  at  Whale  Branch  I would  recommend  to  enter  the  branch 
as  soon  as  it  is  sufficiently  light  to  see,  and  proceed  up  the  stream,  and 
when  approaching  Seabrook  the  force  you  will  have  at  that  point  should 
then  attemxit  to  cross  under  their  fire  and  seize  upon  and  destroy  what- 
ever may  be  found  there.  A sufficient  force  I recommend  to  move 
straight  upon  the  fort  from  the  first-mentioned  landing  and  seize  it  by 
storm  or  escalade,  whilst  probably  a larger  force  should  maintain  a cov- 
ering position  on  its  right,  but  not  so  extended  as  to  iirevent  the  fire  of 
the  gunboats  raking  any  of  the  enemy’s  force  coming  from  Garden’s 
Corner  without  hitting  our  own  men. 

When  the  fort  is  fully  in  possession  of  our  men,  and  not  till  then,  a 
signal  agreed  upon  beforehand  should  make  the  fact  unmistakably 
known  to  all  the  gunboats,  when  those  boats  I would  recommend,  if 
possible,  should  speedily  close  in  towards  the  fort  and  effectually  cover  it 
whilst  our  men  are  removing  or  destroying  the  guns  and  other  i)roperty. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  a corps  of  pioneers,  &c.,  should  be  ready 
to  destroy,  burn,  &c. 

The  above  are  only  calculated  as  hints  in  the  management  of  the  affair, 
but,  after  all,  the  success  must  depend  mainly  uiion  the  judgment  of 
yourself  and  able  coadjutors,  who  must  necessarily  be  governed  in  a great 
measure  by  circumstances.  It  must  be  understood,  however,  general, 
that  the  object  of  this  dash  is  simx)ly  the  destruction  of  the  enemy’s 

See  also  Sherman  to  McClellan,  January  2,  1862,  in  “Correspondence,  etc.,”  p.  214. 


[Chap.  XV. 


46  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 

batteries,  and  no  advance  must  be  made  beyond  wbat  is  necessary  to 
eftect  that  object.  It  is  unnecessary  to  assure  you  that  a deviation  from 
this  injunction  would  at  the  present  time  harm  us  more  than  the  advan- 
tage of  destroying  their  batteries. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAK, 
Brigadier- Genera Commanding. 

Brigadier-General  Stevkns, 

Commanding  at  Beanfort,  S.  C. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Fort  Bogal,  S.  C.,  January  4,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  herewith  the  report  of  Brigadier- 
General  Stevens  of  the  affair  at  Port  Royal  Eerry  on  the  1st  instant, 
and  referred  to  in  my  communication  of  the  2d.  It  having  been  reported 
to  me  that  the  enemy  had  erected  batteries  at  Port  Royal  Eerry  and  at 
the  landing  opposite  Seabrook,  which  report  having  been  confirmed  by 
General  Stevens^  pickets,  and  especially  by  the  reports  of  ofticerj^  who 
had  long  been  watching  the  progress  of  these  works,  that  seven  guns  of 
heavy  caliber  had  been  mounted  in  the  former  and  probably  some  in 
the  latter,  and  which  seemed  to  be  still  more  strongly  confirmed  from 
the  fact  of  large  numbers  of  the  enemy  being  habitually  seen  in  that 
vicinity,  the  object  of  this  movement  was  to  storm  these  works  by  a 
small  portion  of  our  troops  and  bring  away  or  destroy  the  cannon  and 
other  property.  Hence  my  instructions  to  General  Stevens,  a copy  of 
which  has  already  been  forwarded.  In  consequence  of  the  presumed 
nature  of  the  works  and  their  armament,  their  position  relative  to  the 
points  of  landing  of  the  storming  parties,  I applied  to  Flag-Officer  Du- 
Pont for  a few  gunboats  to  assist  in  the  operation,  which,  he  cheerfully 
furnished,  and  placed  under  the  command  of  Commander  0.  R.  P.  Rod- 
gers. 

The  idea  was  to  carry  the  works,  of  whatever  nature  they  were  found 
to  be,  by  storm.  In  consequence  of  the  difficulty  of  maneuvering  gun- 
boats in  so  narrow  and  tortuous  a river  as  the  Coosaw  under  the  fire  of 
forts,  these  boats,  whilst  covering  the  rear  of  our  storming  party,  were 
to  have  remained  in  reserve  until  the  works  at  the  ferry  were  in  posses- 
sion of  the  stormers,  and  were  then  to  close  in  from  both  directions  and 
cover  the  works  from  the  assaults  of  the  enemy  whilst  the  storming 
party  were  carrying  off’ or  destroying  the  artillery  and  other  property. 

This  plan  appears  to  have  been  well  carried  out.  Although  we  were 
somewhat  disappointed  in  the  amount  of  artillery  found  in  the  forts  and 
the  state  of  progress  the  Confederates  had  yet  made  with  their  batteries, 
the  maneuver  will  be  found  from  General  Stevens^  report  to  have  met 
with  complete  success,  and,  still  more,  to  have  proved  that  our  inexpe- 
rienced trooi)S  will  behave  well  in  critical  situations,  to  w^hicli  they  are 
very  soon  to  be  doubly  exposed.  The  fine  co-operation  of  the  naval 
forces  under  that  able  and  indefatigable  officer  Commander  C.  R.  P. 
Rodgers  is  deserving  of  all  praise,  and  I am  also  happy  to  have  the 
opi)ortunity  to  add  the  important  service  and  the  zeal  and  intelligence 
of  the  signal  officers  connected  with  the  expedition,  as  stated  by  General 
Stevens. 

General  Stevens,  to  whom  the  command  of  this  expedition  on  the  part 
of  the  land  forces  was  intrusted,  is  too  well  known  to  the  country  for 


Cnxr.  XV.  1 


47 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 

t 

bis  extensive  official  acquirements,  bis  indomitable  zeal  and  energy,  to 
even  attempt  enlarging  upon  tbein  here.  Tbe  i)rompt  and  comi)lete 
execution  of  bis  orders  and  its  clever  and  bappy  result  are  all  that  need 
be  mentioned. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-General^  Commanding. 

General  L.  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  IT.  S.  Army.,  Washington,  D.  C. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  E.  C., 

No.  1.  f Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  January  7,  18G2. 

Tbe  general  commanding  desires  to  express  bis  gratification  at  tbe 
good  conduct  exhibited  by  tbe  troops  under  command  of  Brigadier- 
General  Stevens  when  engaged  on  the  1st  instant  in  capturing  and 
destroying  tbe  enemy’s  batteries  on  tbe  Coosaw  River. 

The  conduct  of  this  affair  confirms  him  in  the  conviction  that  our 
troops,  when  ordered  to  march  ahead,  will  know  no  obstacle,  and  will 
])romptly  and  in  good  order  penetrate  wherever  ordered. 

Tbe  thanks  of  the  commanding  general  are  specially  due  to  Brigadier- 
General  Stevens  for  the  energy  and  good  judgment  evinced  in  tbe  prep- 
aration and  prosecution  of  this  afiair. 

To  Flag-Officer  DuPont,  commanding  blockading  squadron,  and  to 
Commander  0.  R.  P.  Rodgers,  commanding  tbe  naval  i)ortion  of  this 
expedition,  and  the  officers  and  men  under  bis  command,  tbe  thanks  of 
tbe  country  and  the  Army  are  likewise  due.  Tbe  energy,  alacrity,  and 
efficiency  which  supported  tbe  land  forces  on  this  occasion,  tbougli  noth- 
ing more  than  what  could  have  been  expected  from  that  distinguished 
branch  of  tbe  service,  will  ever  be  gratefully  remembered. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman : 

L.  H.  PELOHZE, 

Captain  Fifteenth  Infantry,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  IT.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade  Exped’y  Corps, 

Beaufort,  8.  G.,  January  3,  1862. 

Sir  : I li^ive  tbe  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  tbe  command- 
ing general,  tbe  complete  success  of  tbe  joint  expedition  of  which  tbe 
land  forces  were  placed  under  my  command,  and  tbe  return  of  the  sev- 
eral regiments  to  their  respective  encampments.  Tbe  object  of  tbe  joint 
expedition  was  to  seize  and  destroy  tbe  enemy’s  batteries  on  tbe  main 
oi)posite  Port  Royal  Island,  bring  away  tbe  guns  and  other  property, 
but  not  to  engage  the  enemy  except  in  tbe  accomplishment  of  this  object, 
and  not  to  advance  into  the  interior. 

To  effect  it  Commodore  DuPont  furnisbed  five  gunboats,  under  tbe 
command  of  Cai)t.  C.  R.  P.  Rodgers,  U.  S.  Navy,  to  operate  with  tbe  land 
forces,  which  consisted  of  my  own  brigade  and  the  Forty-seventh  and 
Forty-eight  New  York  Regiments  of  General  Viele’s  brigade.  Tbe  plan 


48  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CiiAr.  XV. 

was  for  tliree  of  the  gunboats  to  operate  from  Coosaw  Eiver  and  two 
from  Broad  Biver,  both  entering  the  Port  Boyal  channel,  and  moving 
the  foriuer  towards  the  ferry  and  the  latter  towards  Seabrook.  A force 
was  at  early  dawn  to  effect  a landing  at  some  convenient  i)oint  on  the 
right,  move  rapidly  towards  the  fort,  whilst  simultaneously  should  oper- 
ate from  the  ferry  and  from  Seabrook. 

On  the  31sfc  instant,  leaving  two  companies  of  the  Eoundhead  [One 
hundredth  Pennsylvania]  Eegiment  as  a guard  for  the  town  and  depot 
of  Beaufort,  and  one  company  at  the  cross -roads,  3 miles  from  this 
place,  to  relieve  the  two  companies  of  the  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teers there  on  duty,  I advanced  the  remaining  eight  companies  of  the 
Eoundhead  Eegiment  to  the  advanced  posts  on-  the  island.  I with- 
drew, at  the  same  time,  seven  companies  of  the  Seventy-ninth  NTew 
York  (Highlanders)  from  these  advanced  posts  for  the  operation  on 
our  right.  At  Seabrook  two  companies  of  the  Highlanders  and  two 
companies  of  the  Eoundheads,  under  Captain  Elliott,  of  the  High- 
landers, were  to  cross  the  river,  land  on  the  main,  destroy  the  enemy’s 
works,  and  bring  away  his  guns  and  other  property.  At  the  ferry  one 
company  of  Highlanders  and  four  companies  of  the  Eoundheads  were 
to  observe  the  enemy  and  cross  over  should  circumstances  favor  it. 
At  the  point  running  down  from  the  ferry  opposite  to  the  Brick-yard 
Eansom’s  two  guns  of  Hamilton’s  battery  were  placed  to  cover  the 
advance  of  the  land  party  and  to  act  according  to  circumstances.  The 
entire  remaining  force,  consisting  of  seven  companies  of  Highlanders, 
Major  Morrison  j the  Eighth  Michigan,  Colonel  Fenton ; Fittieth  Penn- 
sylvania Volunteers,  Colonel  Christ;  the  Forty-seventh  New  York, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Fraser,  and  the  Forty-eighth  New  York,  Colonel 
Perry,  were  destined  to  form  the  land  party,  to  operate  against  the 
enemy’s  left. 

Ever  since  my  occupation  of  this  island  I had  taken  great  pains  to 
collect  every  boat  and  flat  that  could  be  found,  and  in  consequence  had 
already  at  Seabrook  and  the  ferry  transportation  enough  to  cross  the 
two  bodies  of  troops  in  position  there.  These  boats  I caused  to  be  ])i  e- 
pared  for  their  work.  I sent  up  all  the  boats  and  flats  I had  at  Beaufort 
and  could  find  at  other  points  on  the  nights  of  the  30th-31st,  to  a secure 
and  good  landing  on  the  creek  which  flows  into  the  Coosaw  at  the  Brick- 
yard and  well  up  the  creek,  so  as  to  be  screened  from  the  observation  of 
the  enemy,  and  from  this  point  I designed  by  one  embarkation  to  cross 
to  the  main  that  portion  of  the  party  which  belonged  to  my  own  brigade. 

At  13  m.  of  the  31st  Cap  ain  Eodgers,  in  command  of  the  naval  ])or- 
tion  of  the  expedition,  arrived  with  the  Ottawa  and  the  Pembina,  and 
towards  night  was  joined  by  the  Hale,  the  force  destined  to  operate  from 
the  Coosaw,  and  we  arranged  the  details  of  the  joint  operation,  and 
especially  agreed  upon  the  signals  which  would  enable  us  to  act  in  con- 
cert in  engaging  the  enemy.  About  dark  Colonel  Perry,  Forty- eighth 
New  York,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fraser,  Forty-seventh  New  York, 
arrived  from  Hdton  Head.  Tiiey  were  ordered  to  follow  the  gunboats, 
effect  a landing  at  the  Adams  house,  and  act  in  co  operation  with  the 
party  which  were  to  cross  the  river  in  flat-boats. 

It  was  expected  that  the  landing  from  the  flat-boats  would  have  been 
made  at  daylight,  and  that  the  gunboats,  creeping  up  the  Port  Eoyal 
channel  at  night-fall  of  the  3ist  to  within  a short  distance  of  the  Brick- 
yard, and  passing  through  that  channel  at  daylight,  would  appear  in 
the  Coosaw  shortly  afterwards,  and  thus  aid  in  the  advance  of  the  land 
forces.  These  forces  were,  in  crossing  the  river,  to  be  accomi)anied  by 
four  launches,  under  the  personal  command  of  Captain  Eodgors,  each 


Chap.  XV.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY.  49 

lauDch  having  a 12-pounder  gun,  and  when  the  landing  was  effected 
they  were  to  move  towards  the  ferry  pari  passu  with  the  advance  of  the 
land  forces.  This  plan  was  in  substantial  points  carried  out.  Four 
companies,  however,  of  the  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania,  under  the  command 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brenholts,  were  moved  directly  from  the  town  of 
Beaufort  by  means  of  flats  collected  in  that  vicinity  on  the  31st,  and  the 
flats  collected  in  the  Brick-yard  Creek  were  found  insufficient  to  embark 
the  six  companies  of  the  Fiftieth  PennsylYania,  which  had  therefore  to 
wait  till  the  boats  were  sent  back. 

In  the  night  of  the  31st  and  1st  1 visited  all  the  troops  and  positions 
on  the  island,  and  at  3.30  o’clock  was  with  all  the  troops  at  the  place  of 
embarkation,  which  I superintended  in  person.  At  the  first  break  of 
day  we  were  under  way,  viz:  seven  companies  of  Highlanders,  four 
companies  of  the  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania,  and  the  entire  Michigan  regi- 
ment. This  side  of  the  Brick  yard  met  Captain  Rodgers  and  his  four 
launches,  and  immediately  pushed  for  the  opposite  shore.  Meanwhile 
the  gunboat  Ottawa  had  made  her  appearance.  I landed  at  about  S 
o’clock  at  a good  landing  place  below  the  cotton-gin  and  some  3 
miles  below  the  Adams  house,  and  immediately  sent  back  boats  to  take 
off‘  Colonel  Christ’s  command,  with  orders  to  land  them  at  the  Adams 
house.  I found  also  that  the  Eighth  Michigan  was  still  waiting  in  the 
creek,  having  misunderstood  my  orders.  1 sent  word  to  them  to  push 
at  once  to  the  Adams  house,  and  turned  off  in  the  same  direction  all  the 
flats  which  had  not  come  up,  and  with  five  companies  of  the  Highland- 
ers, and  the  four  companies  of  the  Fiftieth  Pennsylv^ania,  consisting  of 
about  500  men,  and  with  two  howitzers  from  the  boats  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Irwin,  U.  S.  I^^avy,  I commenced  my  march.  We 
moved  rapidly  and  in  good  order,  employing  the  Highlanders  as  skir- 
mishers and  the  howitzers  to  drive  off  small  parties  of  the  enemy.  We 
observed  them  at  several  points,  but  without  noticing  the  few  shots  they 
fired  at  us  we  pushed  to  the  Adams  house,  where  we  arrived  after  a very 
fatiguing  march  at  about  11  o’clock. 

It  was  some  two  and  a half  hours  before  I was  able  to  resume  the 
movement  with  the  remaining  forces.  At  1.30  o’clock  I formed  my 
order  of  march,  and  avoiding  the  main  road,  but  pushing  across  the  open 
field,  I marched  for  the  fort.  The  Highlanders  were  in  advance, 
preceded  by  two  companies  thrown  out  as  skirmishers.  The  two  howit- 
zers of  the  Kavy  followed.  The  support  were  the  regiments  of  Colonel 
Christ  and  Colonel  Fenton,  and  the  Forty-seventh  and  the  Forty-eighth 
New  York  constituted  the  reserve,  under  Colonel  Perry.  Now  the  sig- 
nals came  most  beautifully  and  effectively  into  use.  All  the  commands 
bore  the  flag  which  had  been  agreed  upon,  viz,  a ground  of  white  and 
blue.  The  signal  officer.  Lieutenant  Taffl,  was  with  the  skirmishers, 
communicating  constantly  with  his  colleague.  Lieutenant  Cogswell,  on 
board  the  Ottawa.  The  concert  of  action  thus  established  was  abso- 
lutely perfect.  The  skirmishers  marched  steadily  on,  followed  at  proper 
intervals  by  the  entire  command,  moving  in  column  of  companies  or 
divisions  or  by  flank,  according  to  the  ground.  The  shells  from  the 
gunboats  tore  through  the  woods  just  in  advance  of  the  skirmishers. 
They  had  well  passed  the  position  taken  by  the  enemy  in  the  woods 
when  he  opened  his  battery  upon  our  columns.  I got  my  command  into 
the  position  I desired  before  the  troops  ascertained  that  it  was  not  the 
fire  of  the  boats  but  the  fire  of  an  enemy.  It  was  exceedingly  well 
adapted  to  the  ground  and  favored  my  getting  information  by  means 
of  skirmishers.  Nor  was  it  possible  for  the  enemy,  although  in  large 
force,  to  make  a flank  movement  against  me  without  my  being  able  in 

4 R R VOL  VI 


50  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


season  to  make  my  dispositions  to  repel  it.  The  two  regiments,  the 
Torty-seventh  and  Forty-eighth  New  York,  were  formed  in  hue  on  the 
right,  and  about  at  right  angles  to  the  remainder  of  the  line.  The 
Eighth  Michigan  and  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  were  formed  in  line  in  the 
center,  and  the  Highlanders  in  column  of  compvniies,  with  their  skir- 
misliers  in  position,  constituted  the  left. 

I now  ordered  Colonel  Fenton  to  send  forward  skirmishers  from  his 
regiment,  the  Eighth  Michigan,  to  feel  the  enemyj  and,  if  circumstances 
favored,  to  seize  the  battery.  He  first  sent  three  companies  to  the  front 
and  left,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Graves,  and  soon  four  companies  to 
the  front  and  right,  under  Major  Watson,  the  flanks  resting  under  cover 
of  the  woods,  which  extended  to  our  right  and  ran  down  quite  closely 
to  our  left.  These  companies  advanced  in  most  admirable  order,  pushed 
forward  rapidly,  plunged* under  a heavy  fire  of  musketry  into  the  woods 
at  a double-quick,  ahd  engaged  the  enemy.  The  firing  showed  that  he 
Avas  ill  large  force.  I at  once  ordered  Colonel  Perry  to  push  skirmishers 
from  his  right  along  the  skirt  of  woods,  and  Colonel  Christ,  Avith  one 
Aving  of  his  regiment,  to  move  well  to  the  front  and  left  in  column  of 
comiianies  and  push  skirmishers  to  the  rear  of  the  enemy’s  position. 
My  object  in  these  several  dispositions  was  to  ascertain  the  force  of  the 
enemy,  the  iiarticular  character  for  the  jiassage  of  troops  of  the  wooded 
country  in  which  the  enemy  lay  concealed,  and  to  carry  out  the  plan 
which  I had  formed  of  interposing  the  bulk  of  my  force  between  him 
and  his  battery,  and  thus  compel  the  latter  to  surrender. 

These  orders  were  obeyed  Avith  great  alacrity  and  Avithout  a moment’s 
delay.  Both  bodies  moved  forward  and  engaged  the  enemy.  Colonel 
Christ’s  movement  was  A^ery  opportune.  It  drove  back  the  skirmishers 
on  our  left,  and  enabled  the  skirmishers  of  Fenton  and  Perry  to  fall 
back  and  give  information  of  the  condition  of  the  field ; for,  be  it, 
remembered,  our  men  had  gained  positions  from  Avhich  they  could  not 
be  dislodged,  and  rendered  certain  the  feasibility  of  my  plan  of  attack. 
Indeed,  the  cheers  at  this  moment  from  all  portions  of  our  line  showed 
that  our  troops  looked  upon  the  day  as  theirs.  The  progress  of  our 
troops  had  been  observed  from  the  mast-heads  of  the  gunboats,  who 
throAV  shells  OA^er  their  heads  into  the  ranks  of  the  enemy.  At  this 
moment  I received  Avord  that  the  skirmishers  of  the  Highlanders, 
neA^er  once  halting,  had  pushed  on  and  entered  the  fort  almost  simul- 
taneously with  the  force  from  the  front  under  Colonel  Leasure.  The 
enemy’s  fire  had  ceased  for  some  fifteen  minutes,  and  I gave  orders  for 
moving  the  whole  command  into  the  fort,  where  Ave  arrived  at  about 
4.30  o’clock.  Here  I met  both  Colonel  Leasure,  who  Avas  placed  by  me 
in  command  of  the  front  and  of  the  special  movement  from  the  ferry, 
and  Captain  Elliott,  Avho  commanded  the  crossing  party  at  Seabrook, 
and  learned  of  the  complete  success  of  the  latter.  The  gunboats,  the 
Seneca,  Captain  Ammen,  and  the  Ellen,  Captain  Budd,  entered  Whale 
Branch,  as  originally  intended,  and  opened  fire  upon  the  battery  oppo- 
site Seabrook.  Captain  Elliott  crossed  Avith  his  party  and  found  a 
battery  ready  for  guns,  but  no  guns  in  position,  and  after  destroying 
the  works  returned  to  Seabrook. 

Captain  Podgers  most  kindly  sent  on  shore  a 12-pounder  hoAvitzer  gun, 
under  the  command  of  Lieut.  J.  H.  Upshur,  and  kept  there  one  of  the 
howitzers  AAUich  had  accomi)anied  our  march  by  land  under  Acting 
Master  Louis  Kempfl’.  One  of  the  Avheels  of  the  other  hoAvitzer  had 
been  broken  a short  time  before  reaching  the  fort.  Night  signals  were 
also  specially  arranged  to  communicate  with  the  gunboats. 

Just  before  dark  Lieutenant  Lyons  came  in  from  the  pickets,  bringing 


^CiiAr.  X.Y.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


51 


word  that  lie  had  met  a flag  of  truce,  and  that  the  officer  bearing  it 
asked  for  permission  to  take  off  their  dead.  The  gunboats  were  about 
firing  a few  shells  into  the  woods  where  the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy 
had  been  observed.  The  firing  was  immediately  stopped,  and  I sent 
Lieutenant  Lyons  back  twice,  granting  ,a  truce  of  one  hour  for  that 
purpose,  but  iic  did  not  on  either  occasion  find  the  flag.  The  gunboats 
were  now  brought  into  position  on  either  side  of  the  ferry  and  placed 
suitably  to  cover  our  operations,  and  I at  once  proceeded  to  make  the 
proper  dispositions  for  the  night,  established  a strong  picket  force,  with 
the  entire  Eoundhead  regiment  as  a reserve,  and  had  the  ferry  prop- 
erly prepared  for  the  return  of  the  troops. 

My  post  and  brigade  quartermaster,  Capt.  AVilliam  Lilley,  in  this 
business  was  most  efficient,  for  he,  entirely  in  the  night,  absolutely 
restored  the  old  ferry,  ropes,  windlass,  and  all,  and  with  the  assistance 
of  two  of  my  staff*.  Lieutenant  Cottrell,  Eighth  Michigan,  and  Lieutenant 
Lyons,  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania,  made  arrangements  for  the  most  rapid 
and  most  orderly  recrossing  of  the  troops.  The  use  of  the  ferry  was 
required  early  in  the  morning  for  the  ])assage  of  wagons  and  the  12- 
pounder  and  its  carriage,  which  was  the  only  one  i>iece  of  ordnance 
found  in  the  fort. 

About  9 o’clock  the  work  of  crossing  the  troops  commenced.  The 
passage-way  is  about  550  feet  wide.  The  whole  force  of  3,000  men,  with 
their  horses,  was  over  at  12  o’clock.  It  was  not  less  orderly  than  rapid. 
The  enemy  was  in  considerable  force  in  the  woods  back  of  our  position, 
watching  our  movements.  The  shell  from  the  gunboats  kept  him  very 
quiet  At  12  o’clock  I myself  crossed  with  the  last  of  the  forces,  having 
caused  the  buildings  in  the  vicinity  of  the  fort  to  be  burned  and  the  fort 
to  be  leveled  sufficiently  for  all  practical  purposes. 

I cantiot  close  this  report  without  congratulating  the  commanding 
general  and  the  country  on‘  the  good  conduct  of  the  troops  under  mj^ 
command,  none  of  whom,  except  the  Highlanders,  had  ever  been 
under  fire  before,  and  on  the  perfect  success  of  the  expedition,  placed  by 
him,  so  far  as  regards  the  land  forces,  in  my  hands.  Looking  to  the 
marches  by  land  and  the  movements  by  water,  looking  to  the  very  consid- 
erable combination  involved  in  the  final  concentration  of  troops,  it  is  a 
little  remarkable  that  every  departure  in  detail  from  the  original  plan, 
and  indeed  every  accident,  seemed  only  to  further  it.  We  effected  in 
flat-boats,  manned  by  negroes  alone  and  without  the  aid  of  a single 
employe,  a landing  on  the  enemy’s  shore,  having  to  cross  in  our  boats 
a space  of  3 miles.  We  moved  to  our  point  not  along  the  main  road, 
but  across  the  fields  and  along  paths  shown  us  by  negroes  picked  up 
upon  the  shore.  We  engaged  the  enemy  on  our  oAvn  and  not  on  his 
field.  We  gave  him  fair  challenge  of  battle.  Every  regiment  of  my 
command  was,  through  its  skirmishers,  brought  into  contact  with  him. 
He  kept  under  cover,  fell  back  from  his  position,  and  yielded  the  field  to 
us.  Our  troops  have  confidence  in  themselves  and  faith  in  the  bayonet. 

This,  in  brief,  is  the  history  of  the  expedition  and  its  morale^  to  be 
shown,  I trust,  more  signally  on  future  fields.  Moreover,  this  is  the  first 
occasion  the  system  of  signals  invented  by  Major  Myer  has  been  tested 
in  actual  battle.  I claim  for  the  signal  officers  of  my  staff — Lieutenant 
Tafft  and  Lieutenant  Cogswell — the  merit  of  showing  the  code  to  be  a 
perfect  success,  and  myself  the  good  fortune  of  commanding  on  the  occa- 
sion. 

Says  Lieutenant  Cogswell,  who  was  on  board  the  Ottawa: 

Permit  me,  before  closing,  to  call  your  attention  to  tbe  able  and  efficient  manner  in 
"wliicli  Lieutenant  Tafft  managed  the  signals  on  shore.  During  the  whole  march  from 


52 


COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  IChap.  XV. 

Adams’  Landing  to  tLe  ferry  lie  so  managed  it  tliat  only  for  a few  minutes  was  lie  so 
situated  that  he  could  not  instantly  open  communication,  though  in  order  to  accom- 
plish this  he  was  frequently  exposed  to  the  direct  lire  of  the  enemy. 

1 must  also  express  my  warm  acknowledgments  and  high  appreciation 
of  the  services  of  the  Navy.  • Captain  Eodgers  on  all  occasions  responded 
to  my  requests.  The  working  of  the  gunboats  in  the  narrow  channel  of 
Port  Eoyal  and  the  handling  of  the  guns  was  most  masterly  and  most  beau- 
tiful. The  signaling  was  i)erfect  throughout.  The  whole  operation  re- 
llects  the  highest  credit  upon  the  Navy  and  upon  the  officers  and  men 
specially  engaged  in  it.  I repeat,  my  whole  command,  as  well  as  myself, 
will  mark  with  a white  stone  the  day  of  this  fraternal  and  patriotic  co- 
operation. In  saying  that  the  troops  under  my  command  behaved  with 
great  coolness  and  constancy,  I only  say  what  every  man  observed.  I 
will  not  particularize,  except  to  say  that  the  skirmishers  of  the  High- 
landers first  met  the  enemy,  and  those  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  came 
into  the  severest  contact  with  hho.  This  regiment  has  been  and  still  is 
a great  sufferer  from  sickness,  but  it  showed  that  loyal  steel  from  the 
frozen  North  has  fire  and  power  against  the  enemies  of  our  country. 

I must  return  my  acknowledgments  to  the  several  members  of  my 
staff’,  to  my  assistant  adjutant- general,  Oapt.  Hazard  Stevens,  who  is 
referred  to  in  the  highest  terms  in  the  accompanying  reports  5 to  Lieu- 
tenant Porter,  Eighth  Michigan  Eegimeut,  who,  by  means  of  the  negroes, 
guided  my  force  all  the  Avay  from  the  first  landing  to  the  ferry  (in  this 
he  was  assisted  by  Lieutenant  Taylor,  Eoundhead  Eegimeut)  5 to  Lieu- 
tenant Lyons,  Piftieth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  who  organized  the 
transportation  on  flat-boats,  in  which  duty  Lieutenant  Cottrell,  Eighth 
Michigan,  rendered  service;  to  Gai)tain  Fuller,  assistant  quartermaster, 
for  valuable  aid  in  his  department  and  on  my  staff ; and  to  Lieutenant 
Holbrook,  who  volunteered  and  served  most  acceptably  as  aide  through- 
out. Hr.  Kemble,  the  brigade  surgeon,  was  very  efficient.  He  exam- 
ined ill  person,  under  fire,  the  ground  occuined  by  our  skirmishers,  and 
personally  superintended  the  bringing  off*  of  our  wounded  men.  I am 
under  veiy  special  obligations  to  my  post  and  brigade  quartermaster, 
Capt.  William  Lilley,  who  was  indefatigable  in  preparing  for  the  expe- 
dition and  efficient  in  furthering  it.  He  furnished  the  crews  of  negroes 
for  the  fiats  and  removed  the  12-pounder  gun  and  carriage  to  Beaufort. 
At  midnight  he  remounted  it,  took  it  across  the  ferry  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  brought  it  into  Beaufort  before  night,  taking  along  with  him  a 
wagon  load  of  three-inch  plank,  and  making  eight  bridges  on  the  road. 
The  large  ferry-boat  itself,  with  all  its  appurtenances,  is  now  safely  laid 
away  at  Beaufort  in  his  charge,  for  use  on  future  occasions. 

The  loss  of  my  brigade  is  one  killed,  one  missing,  and  nine  wounded, 
as  per  surgeon’s  report,  herewith  appended;*  in  addition  to  which  3 
men  were  slightly  wounded  of  the  Forty-eighth  Eegiment.  Among  the 
wounded  is  Major  Watson,  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  Eegiment,  a most 
excellent  officer,  and  who  gallantly  commanded  in  the  late  affair.  The 
enemy’s  loss  must  have  been  very  considerable  from  our  skirmishers 
alone,  and  still  heavier  from  the  shell  practice  of  the  Navy.  We  buried 
3 of  their  men  and  have  1 of  their  wounded  men  in  our  hands. 

A reconnoitering  j^arty  I sent  out  to-day  landed  at  the  Adams  house, 
examined  the  battle  field,  and  went  to  the  ferry.  They  found  aud  buried 
1 of  our  missing  men,  known  to  have  been  wounded,  and  the  only  one 
killed,  and  encountered  but  one  small  scouting  party  of  G mounted  men 
of  the  enemy. 


Embodied  in  No.  14. 


CHAr.  XV.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


53 


The  negroes  all  report  that  there  are  no  trooi)S  this  side  of  Garden’s 
Corner.  This  party  consisted  of  20  men  of  the  Eighth  Michigan^  under 
the  command  of  Captain  Ely.  • 

From  the  observations  made  from  the  mast-heads  of  the  gunboats  and 
those  made  on  the  field,  I estimate  the  force  of  the  enemy  at  about  3,000 
men,  and  from  information  obtained  to-day  they  had  2,000  more  within 
two  hours’  march.  The  force  which  I moved  from  the  Adams  house  was 
about  2,500  men,  which,  with  the  command  of  Leasure  and  of  Elliott, 
made  my  whole  force  3,000  men. 

i append  the  sub-reports;  and,  in  conclusion,  I hope  the  general  com- 
manding may  be  gratified  wdth  our  celebration  ofKew  Year’s  Day. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 

Brigadier-General^  Commanding  Land  Forces. 

Capt.  L.  H.  Pelouze, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General  Exped'^ij  Corps^  Port  Rogal.,  S.  C. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  William  M.  Fenton.,  Eighth  Michigan  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Eighth  Michigan  Eegiment, 
Main-land,  Port  Royal  Ferry,  January  1,  1862 — 8 p.  m. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  your  order, 
this  I’egiment  was  safely  landed  at  the  Adams  house,  on  main-land, 
having  effected  the  crossing  in  flat-boats  from  Brick-yard  Point,  Port 
Eoyal  Island,  and  took  up  the  line  of  march  towards  the  enemy’s  battery 
at  this  place  at  1 o’clock  p.  m.  On  our  approach  towards  the  ferry  we 
were  ordered  to  attack  as  skirmishers  a masked  battery  which  opened 
fire  on  us  from  the  right.  I immediately  detached  the  first  two  and  the 
tenth  companies,  and  directed  their  march  to  the  left  and  front  of  the 
battery.  This  was  followed  by  four  additional  companies  to  the  right 
and  front.  The  fire  of  the  battery  with  shells  continued  on  our  line 
until  the  skirmishers  reached  the  right,  when  it  was  turned  on  them, 
and  on  their  approach,  right,  left,  and  front,  to  within  50  to  100  yards  of 
the  enemy’s  position,  a fire  of  musketry  wms  opened  upon  them.  The 
force  of  tiie  enemy  as  well  as  the  battery  was  concealed  to  a considerable 
extent  by  trees,  brush,  and  underwood,  but  appeared  to  consist  of  two 
mounted  howitzers,  supported  by  a regiment  or  more  of  infantry  and 
some  cavalry.  The  skirmishers  were  measurably  protected  in  brush 
and  furrows,  and  continued  their  fire  upon  the  enemy,  which  was 
returned  by  volleys  of  musketry  and  shells  from  the  battery.  Our  fire 
was  well  directed  and  seemed  to  be  effective.  One  mounted  officer,  who 
appeared  to  be  very  active,  was  seen  to  fall  from  his  horse,  at  whicli  the 
troops  on  the  enemy’s  right  were  thrown  into  confusion.  Their  position 
seemed  to  be  changing  to  the  rear,  and  as  our  skirmishers  were  called 
oft*  and  the  regiment  formed  in  line  the  enemy’s  fire  ceased.  The  regi- 
ment was  then  marched  to  its  position  in  line  of  battle  in  rear  of  the  fort 
at  this  point.  Lieutenant  Colonel  Graves  led  on  the  left  and  Major 
Watson  the  right  of  skirmishers.  The  major,  in  leading  on  his  line, 
received  a severe  flesh  wound  in  the  leg.  I have  to  report  that  officers 
and  men  behaved  with  admirable  bravery  and  coolness. 


54  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA,,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai’.  XV. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  from  the  well-directed  fire  of  our  skirmishers, 
cannot  ho  less  than  40.  Our  loss  is  7 wounded,  2 missing. 

I*have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  M.  FENTON, 
Colonel  Eifjhth  Michigan  Regiment. 

Brigadier-G-eneral  Stevens. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  L.  Fraser^  Forty  seventh  New  Yorlc  Infantry^ 

Headquarters  Forty- Seventh  Eegiment  N.  Y.  S.  V., 

Hilton  Head.)  January  3,  1802. 

Captain  : Pursuant  to  orders  from  Brigadier-General  Yiele,  1 em- 
barked with  my  regiment  on  board  the  United  States  steamboat  Boston 
on  or  about  noon  Tuesday,  December  31,  1801,  and  was  ordered  by 
General  Sherman  to  report  to  Brigadier- General  Stevens  at  Beaufort, 
where  we  arrived  at,  say,  0 p.  m.,  remaining  on  board  off  said  place 
until,  say,  7 a.  m.,  the  morning  following,  when  we  started  for  Port 
Koyal  Ferry,  arriving  some  few  miles  this  side,  and  landed  by  means  of 
surf-boats.  Upon  landing  of  the  right  wing  orders  were  received  to 
march.  Taking  my  position  on  the  left  of  Colonel  Perry,  Forty-eighth 
New  York,  and  under  his  orders  we  advanced,  and  arriving  at  the 
woods,  was  ordered  by  . Colonel  Perry  to  reconnoiter  with  my  regiment, 
and  give  all  information  as  regards  the  position  of  the  enemy.  Discov- 
ered a rifle-pit.  The  right  flank  company,  being  skirmishers,  fired,  and 
instantly  routed  the  enemy,  holding  said  pit,  when  orders  came  from 
Colonel  Perry  to  return  to  the  fort.  During  the  night  the  regiment 
was  detailed  on  picket  and  fatigue  duty. 

At,  say,  11  a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  January  2,  18G2,  the  regiment 
crossed  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  and  marched  to  Beaufort,  went  on  board  the 
United  States  steamboat  Boston,  and  remained  off  said  place  all  night. 
Sailed  for  Hilton  Head  early  in  the  morning  of  January  3.  Lauded  by 
means  of  surf-boats,  and  returned  to  the  camp  in  fine  spirits,  and  am 
happy  to  inform'  you  that  none  of  my  regiment  were  either  wounded, 
killed,  or  taken  prisoner. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  L.  FEASEE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel)  Comdg.  Forty  seventh  Regiment  N.  Y.  Vols. 

Capt.  Hazard  Stevens, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General)  General  Stevens^  Brigade. 


No.  o. 

Report  of  Col.  James  H.  Ferry)  Forty -eighth  Neio  YorJc  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Forty-eighth  Eegiment  N.  Y.  Vols., 

Hilton  Head)  S.  0.,  January  3,  1862. 
Captain  : I beg  leave  respectfully  to  submit  for  the  information  of 
the  general  commanding  the  following  report  of  the  i)articipation  of  my 
command  in  the  affair  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  on  the  1st  instant : 

On  account  of  some  delay  on  the  part  of  the  Foi ty-seventli  New  York, 


Chap.  XV.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


55 


I detained  iny  column  at  Adams’  plantation  (the  place  of  landing)  until 
the  latest  moment,  and  finally  commenced  the  march  before  the  arrival 
of  two  companies  of  that  regiment.  I had  advanced  i)erhai)s  three- 
quarters  of  a mile,  when  I received  an  order  from  the  general  to  bring 
forward  my  command  with  the  greatest  expedition.  We  immediately 
advanced  at  double-quick  until  we  overtook  the  supporting  column, 
when  I received  notice  of  the  existence  of  a battery  threatening  our 
right  flank,  and  was  ordered  to  attack  and  capture  it.  In  obedience  to 
the  order,  I immediately  deployed  my  column,  and  forming  double  line 
of  battle  advanced  upon  the  position  of  the  enemy,  the  Forty-eighth 
New  York,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barton,  leading,  sup- 
ported by  the  Forty-seventh  New  York,  under  the  command  of  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Fraser. 

When  my  first  line  was  fairly  under  fire  at  long  range  it  was  halted 
under  shelter  of  the  timber  and  protected  by  the  inequalities  of  the 
ground,  and  I sent  forward  two  companies  of  skirmishers,  with  orders 
to  ascertain  the  exact  position  of  the  battery,  the  best  method  of 
approaching  it,  the  number  of  its  guns,  and  with  what  force  it  w'as 
supported.  The  skirmishers  were  met  by  a sharp  fire  of  artillery  and 
musketry,  but  they  went  forward  steadily  and  rapidly,  and  soon  reported 
to  me  that  a marsh  covered  the  front  of*  the  enemy’s  position,  and  that 
they  had  at  least  four  guns,  supijorted  by  a heavy  force  of  infantry.  I 
then  advanced  the  Forty-seventh  New  York  for  the  purpose  of  maneu- 
vering upon  the  left  flank  and  gaining  the  rear  of  the  enemy  before 
attacking  in  front.  The  Forty-seventh  pressed  through  the  timber,  and 
had  gained  a position  well  on  the  left  and  rear,  and  their  advance  had 
exchanged  a few  shots  with  the  enemy,  when  I received  the  general’s 
order  to  retire,  the  battery  on  the  river  having  been  taken  and  the  object 
of  the  expedition  accomplished.  I drew  off  my  men  without  loss.  Three 
members  of  the  Forty-eighth  Eegiment  were  slightly  wounded,  but  not 
a man  was  disabled  or  rendered  unfit  for  duty. 

I am  happy  to  add  that  the  men  and  officers  of  my  command  behaved 
with  great  steadiness  and  resolution,  obeying  the  word  of  command 
under  fire  as  if  they  had  been  on  drill. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  H.  PEERY, 

Colonel  Forty-eighth  Begiment  New  Yorlc  Volunteers. 


No.  G. 

Report  of  Maj.  David  Morrison.,  Seventy-ninth  New  Yorlc  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Seventy^-ninth  Eegiment  (Highlanders), 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  January  3,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  my  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Seventy-ninth  (Highlanders)  with  the  expedition  on  the 
1st  instant  under  your  command  : 

Agreeably  to  orders  received  on  the  afternoon  of  the  31st  ultimo,  I 
moved  seven  companies  of  my  regiment,  consisting  of  the  1st,  2d,  3d,  4th, 
5th,  7th,  and  8th  companies,  to  the  creek  leading  to  the  Brick-yard,  reach- 
ing that  [)oint  at  5 o’clock  p.  m.,  where  they  bivouacked  for  the  night. 
At  4 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant  I received  orders  to  embark 
in  boats,  seven  in  number,  furnished  by  Lieutenant  Lyons.  Having 
accomplished  this  satisfactorily,  I proceeded  down  the  creek  leading  to 


56 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.j  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


the  Brick -yard,  and  was  there  joined  by  five  large  man-of-war  launches, 
manned  by  sailors  and  armed  with  howitzers,  who  conveyed  us  to  the 

point  directly  opposite  on  the  main-land,  known  as Landing, 

where  we  arrived  about  8 o’clock  a.  m.  and  disembarked. 

By  your  orders  I immediately  advanced  a party  of  skirmishers  to 
scour  the  woods  in  the  vicinity,  which  was  done  without  opposition 
from  the  enemy.  I then  formed  the  battalion  and  advanced,  sending 
forward  two  comi)anies,  the  4th  and  5th,  as  skirmishers,  and  took  the 
road  leading  to  the  Adams  plantation.  We  were  accompanied  by  a 
party  of  sailors,  with  two  small  brass  howitzers,  and  arrived  there  about 
noon.  This  operation  was  under  the  immediate  direction  of  Capt.  Hazard 
Stevens,  the  assistant  adjutant- general.  After  resting  about  half  an 
hour  I was  ordered  to  take  up  the  position  in  advance,  leading  to  the 
enemy’s  fort  at  Port  Eoyal  Perry.  I advanced  about  half  a mile  and 
halted  until  receiving  further  orders,  which  were  given  by  Cai)tain  Ste- 
vens, viz,  to  send  forward  skirmishers  and  advance.'  I detailed  for  this 
purpose  the  4th  and  8th  companies,  who  at  once  took  up  their  position 
as  such  at  about  a quarter  of  a mile  in  advance  of  the  main  body  of  the 
battalion.  The  order  was  then  given  to  move,  which  was  done  in  gal- 
lant style.  The  men  were  eager  to  tackle  the  enemy,  and  it  was  with 
difliculty  I could  restrain  them  from  pushing  forward.  Having  advanced 
about  the  distance  of  1 mile  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  us  from  a bat- 
tery in  the  woods  on  our  right  flank,  some  of  the  shells  falling  in  our 
midst,  but  happily  without  doing  any  injury,  my  men  remarking  that 
^Hheir  shells  were  warranted  not  to  kill.” 

I continued  to  advance,  and  took  up  a position  within  half  a mile  of 
the  fort,  and  rested  for  some  time  until  I received  orders  from  you  to 
advance  and  occupy  the  fort,  which  had  already  been  taken  possession 
of  by  my  skirmishers,  who  exchanged  a few  shots  with  the  retreating- 
foe.  I entered  the  fort  and  found  it  evacuated  by  the  enemy,  leaving 
behind  them  one  cannon,  spiked.  I am  happy  to  be  able  to  report  that 
the  whole  operation  was  conducted  without  loss. 

In  closing  my  report  I deem  it  my  duty  to  bring  before  your  notice 
the  exemplary  and  soldierly  conduct  of  the  Highlanders,  every  one 
acting  as  if  on  parade,  and  confident  that  their  general  would  lead  them 
to  victory.  Captain  Stevens’  noble  conduct  excited  our  admiration,  and 
their  confidence  and  attachment  to  hitn  are  none  the  less  than  towards 
yourself. 

Bespectfully  submitted  bv,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  MOEEISOil, 

il/ajor.  Commanding  Seventy-ninth  Siglilanders. 

General  Isaac  I.  Stevens. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut.  William  St.  G.Elliottj  Seventy-ninth  New  Yorh  Infantry. 

I 

Seabrook’s  Perky,  January  2,  1802. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  body  of  troops  assigned  me 
for  duty  on  January  1,  instant,  were  in  position  along  the  bank  of  the 
river  opposite  Barnwell’s  Island  before  daybreak,  awaiting  the  arrival 
of  the  gunboats.  About  8 o’clock  I manned  a boat  and  went  down 
V^hale  Branch  to  meet  the  vessels  on  tlieir  wny  up  the  river,  as  I was 


Chap.  XV.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


57 


anxious  to  coiiiinuuiciite  with  them  in  relation  to  a code  of  signals  I had 
instructed  two  men  in  for  the  purpose  of  properly  directing  the  gun- 
boats’ line  of  fire.  I met  them  about  1 mile  below,  and  went  on  board 
the  Seneca  and  communicated  my  wishes  to  Captain  Ammen,  who  very 
kindly  gave  me  all  the  assistance  in  Ids  power.  I suggested  that  a few 
shell  should  be  thrown  into  the  enemy’s  works  opposite  Seab rook’s  Ferry 
and  then  a number  back  in  the  woods  to  the  right  and  left.  I had  no 
idea  at  any  time  that  there  were  more  troops  than  one  picket  stationed 
at  their  works,  but  apprehended  a concealed  force  in  the  woods  to  the 
right.  At  a given  signal  from  me  the  troops,  who  until  now  lay  con- 
cealed in  the  bushes,  manned  the  flat-boats  in  the  following  order:  1st, 
0th  Company,  and,  2d,  Gth  Com])any  Highlanders;  Company  B and  Com- 
pany C,  Eoundheads.  I led  tbe  way  in  a small  boat.  The  tide,  for- 
tunately, was  very  high,  and  I could  thus  take  the  flats  directly  across  200 
yards  of  marsh  that  intervened  between  the  river  and  the  enemy’s  works. 
The  companies  landed  in  regular  succession,  except  Company  C,  Bound- 
head  regiment,  which  I did  not  think  it  necessary  to  land.  We  found 
the  work,  as  we  expected,  abandoned,  with  evidences  of  a hasty  retreat 
of  but  a small  party  of  men.  The  works  were  nearly  completed,  and 
were  intended  for  one  large  sea-coast  gun  and  a field  battery.  The  maga- 
zine was  rather  out  of  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  works,  being  amply 
large  enough  for  a fort  of  six  heavy  pieces.  The  works  were  admirably 
masked  and  pretty  well  constructed.  I threw  out  a semicircular  line  of 
pickets,  who  reported  small  bodies  of  the  enemy  some  distance  in  the 
interior.  I gave  orders  for  the  entire  destruction  of  the  work  and  the 
felling  of  trees,  while  I started  in  my  boat  for  Stewart’s  plantation,  for- 
merly the  headquarters  of  a rebel  incket,  and  situated  about  half  a mile 
from  Port  Boyal  Ferry.  I made  a snccessfal  lauding,  and  searched  for 
late  papers  and  letters  or  other  property  of  service  to  the  Army.  I found 
2ione  of  the  former,  and  all  of  the  latter  is  now  in  possession  of  Captain 
Stevens,  assistant  adjutant- general. 

From  this  point  I had  a very  good  view  of  the  batteries  at  Port  Boyal 
Ferry  and  I found  them  quite  deserted.  This  must  have  been  three 
hours  before  possession  was  taken  of  the  place  by  the  troops  under  Colo- 
nel Leasure.  I should  have  immediately  gone  there  had  I known  ofii- 
eially  that  another  column  was  approaching  from  the  right.  I returned 
to  my  command,  and  finding  the  work  of  destruction  about  finished, 
with  the  exception  of  all  the  trees,  and  not  having  sufiicient  axes  for  the 
purpose,  I withdrew  the  troops  after  some  trouble,  as  the  tide  had  fallen 
and  the  flats  were  floating  in  an  adjacent  creek,  the  troops  consequently 
being  obliged  to  march  some  distance  through  heavy  mud.  I relanded 
rny  command  at  Seabrook’s  without  further  difficulty. 

Truly  and  respectfully, 

W.  ST.  G.  ELLIOTT, 
Commanding  Left  Column. 

Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens. 


B'o.  8. 

' Report  of  Col.  B.  C.  Christy  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  January  2,  18G2. 

^ Sir  : I respectfully  submit  the  following:  According  to  Special  Orders, 
— , T left  our  encampment  at  Beaufort  at  5.30  o’clock  p.  m.  December 


58  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 


30,  18G1,  four  companies  of  my  command,  viz,  G,  E,  F,  and  K,  and 
proceeded  along  the  shell  road  in  the  direction  of  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  to 
the  cross-roads,  where  I was  joined  by  Companies  D and  H.  We  then 
proceeded  along  the  shell  road  to  the  6-mile  post,  where  we  bivouacked 
until  2.30  o’clock  a.  m.  January  1,  1862,  when  I again  took  up  my  line 
of  march,  under  the  direction  of  a guide,  to  a point  on  Ooosaw  Creek. 
From  this  latter  i^oint  I was  ordered  by  the  general  commanding  to  a 
point  called  the  Brick-yard,  on  the  upper  end  of  Port  Eoyal  Island,  and 
as  soon  as  boats  were  furnished  me  to  push  across  Coosaw  Eiver  and 
land  at  the  Adams  house,  where  I arrived  at  12.30  p.  m.,  and  imme- 
diately formed  a junction  with  Companies  A,  B,  G,  and  I,  under  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Brenholts,  who  had  reached  this  point  Irom 
Beaufort  by  boats.  The  whole  regiment  then  took  their  position  in  the 
center  of  the  brigade,  and  proceeded  with  it  under  heavy  cannonading 
of  the  enemy  over  a narrow  causeway  and  along  a road  leading  to  the 
fort  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry.  When  within  three-quarters  of  a mile  of  the 
fort  I was  ordered  to  move  with  the  right  wing  of  my  command  on  the 
enemy’s  right,  with  a view  to  support  Colonel  Fenton,  of  the  Eighth 
Michigan,  who  was  gallantly  leading  his  command  in  the  face  of  a bat- 
tery on  the  enemy’s  left.  I accordingly  moved  forward,  taking  the 
precaution  to  throw  out  small  skirmishing  parties,  tlie  better  to  watch 
the  movements  of  the  enemy  and  to  guard  against  surprise.  After 
moving  forward  about  300  yards  my  advance  was  tired  upon  by  the 
enemy  from  a wood  on  our  left.  I called  in  my  skirmishers,  and 
immediately  put  my  command  on  a double-quick  until  within  good 
musket  range,  when  I discovered  from  400  to  500  of  tlie  enemy  forming 
in  line  of  battle  and  evidently  preparing  to  give  us  a warm  reception. 
I,  however,  anticipated  his  movement,  and  before  his  line  was  com- 
pleted mine  was  formed  and  ready  for  action.  I immediately  com- 
menced tiring,  and  I believe  with  telling  effect,  for  at  the  third  volley 
the  enemy  broke  and  beat  a hasty  retreat  towards  the  woods. 

I again  rapidly  pushed  forward,  with  a view  to  cut  off  his  retreat  and 
])revent  a junction  with  the  main  bodj^,  when  I was  arrested  in  my 
i'urther  i:n’ogress  by  shells  from  our  gunboats,  which  now  came  pouring 
in  among  them,  making  sad  havoc  in  their  already  decimated  ranks. 
After  firing  one  more  volley  at  their  broken  and  disordered  ranks  we 
retired  about  200  yards  out  of  range  of  the  gunboats,  and  were  subse- 
quently ordered  to  take  a position  near  the  fort,  where  we  bivouacked 
for  the  night,  and  to-day,  January  2,. recrossed  the  Coosaw,  and  reached 
our  encampment  at  5 o’clock  p.  m. 

Although  the  whole  of  my  command  were  within  range  of  the  enemy’s 
cannon  for  a half  hour  and  a x^ortion  of  them  within  100  yards  of  a 
detachment  of  his  (the  enemy’s)  infantiy,  and  for  some  time  sustained 
a heavy  fire,  I have  no  killed  to  report  and  none  wounded  save  M. 
Weidenhammer,  of  Company  E,  a slight  wouud  on  the  right  foot,  and 
Ensign  Herbert,  wounded  in  the  leg  by  a spent  piece  of  shell. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  expressing  my  decided  approbation 
of  the  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  of  my  command — to  the  officers 
for  anticipating  almost  every  order,  thereby  rendering  my  portion  of 
the  work  comparatively  easy,  and  to  the  men  for  their  strict  attention 
and  prompt  comxfiiance  with  every  command.  ^ 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

B.  C.  CUEIST, 

Colonclj  Commanding  Fiftieth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Hazard  Stevens,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XV.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY.  5(> 

0. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Cot.  Thomas  S.  BrenJiolts.  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Infantry^ 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  January  3,  18G2. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  move- 
ments and  operations  of  that  portion  of  your  regiment  whieh  was 
placed  under  my  command  on  the  afternoon  of  December  31j  18G1 : 

Soon  after  you  had  taken  up  your  line  of  march  I received  an  order 
through  the  assistant  adjutant-general  to  form  my  command  and  march 
them  to  the  wharf  at  Beaufort,  where  we  were  rapidly  embarked  in  six 
llat-boats.  In  accordance  witli  my  instructions,  I then  reported  for 
further  orders  to  General  Stevens,  and,  these  being  received,  I pushed 
off  with  my  command,  consisting  of  Companies  A,  B,  G,  and  I,  under 
the  guidance  of  Corporal  Hurst,  and  after  a long  and  laborious  passage 
reached  the  Ottawa,  where  I conferred  with  Captain  Rodgers,  command- 
iog  the  fleet,  and  after  leaving  with  him  several  negroes  acquainted  with 
the  channel  we  pushed  on,  making  but  slow  progress,  the  tide  setting 
swiftly  against  us,  and  finally  reached  the  Brick-yard,  where  we  were 
informed  that  the  place  of  rendezvous  was  farther  on,  at  a point  which 
we  reached,  after  the  most  arduous  rowing,  about  2 o’clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  1st  January,  18G2.  The  Highlanders  here  embarking 
in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  the  general  commanding,  who  was 
himself  on  the  ground,  we  followed  them,  and  between  the  hours  of  G 
and  7 effected  an  unopposed  landing  on  the  enemy’s  shore.  Here,  pre- 
ceded by  skirmishers  from  the  Highlanders,  by  the  boats’  crews  with 
howitzers,  and  immediately  by  the  Highland  regiment,  we  took  u]) 
our  line  of  march  for  the  ferry,  seeing  none  of  the  enemy  but  a small 
party  who  Avere  convoying  a wagon,  and  from  whom  we  received  a few 
harmless  shots,  up  to  the  time  of  our  being  joined  by  yourself  while  we 
were  lying  in  the  rear  of  the  house  known  as  Adams’. 

Ill  conclusion,  I would  express  my  entire  satisfaction  with  the  con- 
duct of  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command. 

Terv  respectfully, 

THOMAS  S.  BRENHOLTS, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding, 

Col.  B.  0.  Christ. 


Xo.  10. 

Report  of  Col.  Daniel  Leasure,  One  hundredth  Pennsylrania  Infantry,. 

Fort  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  January  1,  18G?. 

General  : Pursuant  to  your  orders  I dispatched  two  companies  of  my 
command,  viz.  Company  B,  Captain  Dawson,  and  Company  C,  Captain. 
Cornelius,  to  report. to  Captain  Elliott,  of  the  Seventy-ninth  New  Nork 
Regiment  (Highlanders),  in  command  at  Seabrook.  on  yesterday ; last 
night  at  8 o’clock  Lieutenant-Colonel  Armstrong  to  a well-masked  po- 
sition south  of  the  Stewart  house,  near  Port  Royal  Feny,  with  four 
companies,*  viz.  Company  A,  Caxflain  Templeton ; Company  G,  Captain 
Brown;  Company  I,  Captain  Squiers,  and  Com])any  31,  Caiitain  Camp- 
bell, where  he  remained  ])eifectly  concealed  from  the  enemy  until  he 
received  orders  to  move  over  the  ferry.  With  Company  D,  Captain 
Hamilton,  and  Company  K,  Captain  Van  Gorder,  I remained  in  reseiwe 
at  the  headquarters  of  Major  Morrison,  of  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York 


<30  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

llegimeut,  until  8 o’clock  this  morning,  Avlien  I placed  them  under  charge 
of  Major  Leckey,  with  instructions  to  remain  till  ordered  forward,  and 
<letain  all  teams  and  carriages,  as  well  as  all  spectators,  at  that  point  till 
I gave  orders  for  them  to  he  permitted  to  advance. 

At  8.30  o’clock  I joined  Lieutenant-Colonel  Armstrong,  and  selected 
a point  of  observation  at  the  fort,  where  with  a strong  glass  I could 
observe  the  operations  of  the  enemy  in  front  and  on  either  side  along- 
shore. At  that  hour  the  enemy  could  be  seen  in  force  in  and  about 
the  fort  and  for  some  distance  in  its  rear.  I counted  about  200  men 
in  the  fort  at  that  time,  and  the  number  to  the  rear  I computed  at 
four  times  that  number,  but  there  was  evidently  a force  of  cavalry  se- 
creted in  the  forest  still  farlher  to  the  rear,  as  I could  observe  mounted 
men  in  considerable  numbers  passing  the  interstices  of  the  woods.  At 
that  time  the  enemy  seemed  unconscious  of  any  attack  impending,  for 
my  own  force  in  front  was  effectually  concealed,  save  the  ordinary  sen- 
tinels of  the  Seventy-ninth,  which  were  posted  as  usual,  and  there  was 
310  evidence  of  any  approach  visible  from  the  fort. 

At  9 o’clock  one  of  the  enemy’s  pickets  came  hastily  in  from  the  east- 
ward, and  immediately'  the  forces  in  and  about  the  fort  fell  into  line,  and 
the  artillerists  manned  the  guns,  and  gave  them  a direction  to  command 
the  approach  by  water  from  the  east.  At  9.30  heavy  firing  on  the  west 
announced  that  the  gunboats  Seneca  and  Ellen  were  approaching  from 
Broad  Eiver  and  shelling  the  batteries  as  they  advanced.  This  seemed 
to  disturb  the  occupants  of  the  fort  a good  deal,  and  they^  changed  the 
range  of  their  guns  to  command  the  approach  by  waterfrom  that  direc- 
tion. In  a few  minutes  (say  twenty)  the  firing  to  the  east  announced 
the  approach  of  the  gunboats  Pembina,  Ottawa,  and  Hale,  and  a look  in 
that  direction  revealed  those  boats,  or  at  least  two  of  them — the  Ottawa 
and  Pembina — covering  the  landing  of  troops  in  small  boats  from  a 
transport  lying  at  anchor  about  4 or  5 miles  to  the  east  of  the  ferry. 
At  10  to  10.30  o’clock  the  firing  on  the  west  was  very  heavy,  and  as  tlu' 
boats  approached  nearer  and  nearer  and  the  shells  began  to  explode  in 
the  woods  along  the  shore  and  far  back  towards  the  interior  the  enemy’s 
infantry  began  to  leave  the  trenches,  and  seek  an  open  field  to  the  east 
and  rearward  of  the  fort,  where  they  lay'  down  in  the  deep  furrows 
amongst  the  weeds. 

At  this  stage  of  affairs  I ordered  Lieutenant  Marshall,  couiinanding 
Oompany  K,  of  the  Seventy -ninth  New  YorkBegiment  (who  was  for  the 
time  being  with  his  command  attached  to  my^  command),  to  send  an 
orderly  to  the  position  occupied  by^  one  of  his  pickets  alongshore  east- 
ward, to  communicate,  if  possible,  the  position  of  the  enemy’s  infantry 
to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  nearest  gunboat.  In  about  half  an 
hour  the  Hale  steamed  up  and  fired  several  shells  with  great  precis- 
ion into  the  field,  and  the  enemy  ran  off  in  all  directions  inland,  and  1 
saw  no  more  of  them.  Seeing  the  works  apparently  deserted,  and  fear- 
ing the  low  tide  might  beach  the  fiat-boats,  1 sent  some  men  into  them, 
with  instructions  to  place  them  well  afloat  at  low  tide.  On  seeing  this 
some  20  or  30  artillerists  in  the  fort  ran  out  a field  piece  so  as  to  com- 
!nand  the  boats,  and,  not  wishing  to  precipitate  matters  or  draw  their 
fire  unnecessarily,  I recalled  the  men,  and  at  this  juncture  the  ollicer  in 
•command  of  the  Pembina  arrived,  and  reported  to  me  that  you  were  on 
the  ffirther  shore,  with  the  troops  accompanying  you,  as  indeed  1 had 
observed  for  some  time ; and,  further,  that  the  gunboats  would  run  up 
shortly'  and  shell  out  the  fort.  I now  instructed  Coxswain  Connor,  who 
had  been  assigned  to  me  by^  Cai)tnin  Fuller,  to  hold  a party  of  water- 
men, C in  number,  from  Com[)any  iM,  in  reacliness  to  put  the  boats  into 


Chap.  XV. J 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


G1 


the  ferry  at  a moment’s  notice.  Shortly  after  tlie  gunboats  on  both  sides- 
approached  and  began  to  throw  shells  into  the  fort.  As  soon  as  the* 
gunboats  began  to  approach  the  enemy  withdrew  one  or  two  field  pieces 
and  hastily  sent  them  up  northward,  and  also  attempted  to  remove  a 
lieavy  siege  gun ; but  they  seemed  to  encounter  some  difficulty,  and  they 
abandoned  it  with  much  precipitation  on  the  bursting  of  a shell  from  tlie- 
Ottawa,  which  fell  in  close  proximity. 

I now  observed  your  skirmishers  of  the  Seventy-ninth  ISTew  York 
liegiment  approaching  carefully  along  the  coast  about  a mile  eastward 
of  the  fort,  and  judging  that  a rapid  concentration  of  the  forces  was  your 
aim,  I ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Armstrong  to  advance  the  first  detach- 
ment, Company  M,  Captain  Campbell,  to  the  ferry,  to  be  followed  by 
(Company  D,  Captain  Hamilton,  and  Company  K,  Captain  Van  Gorder, 
under  charge  of  Major  Leckey,  and  1 attended  to  getting  off  the  boats 
as  rapidly  as  possible  to  meet  them.  Through  the  efficient  aid  of  Cox- 
swain Connor,  whom  I take  this  opportunity  of  recommending  to  your 
favorable  notice,  the  boats  were  at  the  ferry  at  the  proper  moment,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Armstrong  immediately  embarked  and  crossed  over 
with  his  detachment,  and  on  reaching  the  fort  he  found  it  entirely  aban- 
doned by  the  enemy,  and  took  possession  of  it,  and  sent  Captain  Camp- 
bell with  a portion  of  his  command  to  make  a reconnaissance  to  the 
northward.  Captain  Campbell  soon  came  ui^on  the  enemy  in  retreat, 
and  received  their  fire  without  any  damage,  and  returned  it  without 
knowing  with  what  effect.  The  enemy,  about  50  in  number,  continued 
to  retreat,  and  a detachment  of  Captain  Campbell’s  company,  while 
deploying  in  the  order  of  skirmishers  to  the  right,  came  upon  about  40 
of  the  enemy  guarding  the  approach  to  a hospital.  The  enemy  fired 
upon  Captain  Campbell’s  men  without  effect,  and  on  their  returning  the 
fire  two  of  the  enemy  fell,  as  I afterwards  learned,  mortally  wounded, 
and  died  instantly.  Before  this  I had  arrived  with  the  rest  of  my  com- 
mand, and  a portion  of  the  Seventy-ninth  'New  York  Eegiment  had  also 
arrived,  and  in  a short  time  you  also  arrived  with  your  entire  force,  and 
the  day  was  won. 

I am  happy  in  being  able  to  report  favorably  of  my  command,  and 
also  to  recommend  to  your  favor  Lieutenant  Marshall,  in  command  of 
Company  K,  of  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York  Eegiment,  for  the  time 
being  attached  to  my  command.  His  intimate  knowledge  of  the  local- 
ity and  ready  co  operation  deserve,  as  they  have  received,  my  warmest 
thanks,  which  I very  respectfully  submit. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  LEASUEE, 

Colonel  Roundhead  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 
Isaac  I.  Stevens, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Second  Brigade  E.  C. 


' Eo.  11. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  William  S.  Cogswell,  Fifth  Connecticut  Infantry,  signal 

officer. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  Jamiary  3,  1862. 
General:  Agreeably  to  your  instructions,  received  on  the  31st 
instant,  I reported  to  Captain  Eodgers,  on  board  the  Ottawa,  for  signal 
service.  Communication  was  first  opened  with  your  command  on  the 


€2 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


main-laud  at  Adams’  Lauding  about  11  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  1st 
instant, .and  was  carried  on  without  interruption  until  our  troops  had 
all  recrossed  to  Port  Eoyal  Island,  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  instant.  By 
means  of  the  signals  the  position  of  the  enemy,  your  own  movements 
and  wishes,  were  promptly  communicated  to  Captain  Lodgers,  enabling 
him  to  render  you  assistance,  which  otherwise  would,  I think,  have 
been  impossible.  This  is,  as  far  as  I am  aware,  the  first  time  this  sys- 
tem of  signaling  has  been  used  in  action.  I flatter  myself  that  it  has 
proved  successful,  and  trust  that  it  will  meet  with  your  approval. 

Permit  me,  before  closing,  to  call  your  attention  to  the  able  and  effi- 
•cient  manner  in  which  Lieutenant  Tatft  managed  the  signals  on  shore. 
During  the  whole  march  from  Adams’  Landing  to  the  ferry  he  so  man- 
aged it  that  only  for  a few  minutes  was  he  so  situated  that  he  could  not 
instantly  open  communication,  though  in  order  to  accomplish  this  he 
was  frequently  exposed  to  the  direct  tire  of  the  enemy. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

WM.  S.  COGSWELL, 

Lieutenant  in  charge  of  Party  attached  to  Second  Brigade. 

Oeneral  Isaac  I.  Stevens. 


Beaufort,  S.  C.,  January  4,  18G2. 

Major  : I hereby  transmit  the  following  report  of  signal  operations : 

Dpring  the  first  of  last  month  General  Stevens  occupied  Beaufort, 
and  as  soon  as  possible  after  our  arrival  stations  were  built  and  com- 
munication opened  with  headquarters  on  Hilton  Head,  since  which 
time  the  line  has  been  constantly  employed  in  the  transmission  of  mes- 
sages. 

Oil  the  31st  of  last  month  I was  notified  by  General  Stevens  of  an 
<‘xpedition  to  surprise  and  take  possession  of  a battery  of  the  enemy, 
and  received  orders  to  report  to  Captain  Rodgers,  on  board  the  gunboat 
Ottawa,  for  signal  duty. 

On  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant  I accompanied  Captain  Rodgers, 
who  went  with  the  launches  to  cover  the  landing  of  our  forces. 

After  our  troops  had  landed  I returned  to  the  Ottawa,  and  opened 
-communication  with  the  shore  at  Adams’  Landing  (a  point  about  a mile 
and  a half  from  the  first  landing,  but  in  order  to  reach  it  the  troops  had 
to  make  a circuit  inland,  and  were  hid  from  the  shipping  by  thick  woods) 
about  11  o’clock,  from  which  time  until  all  our  forces  had  recrossed  to 
Port  Royal  Island,  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  instant,  communication  was 
uninterr  upted.  The  distance  from  Adams’  Landing  to  tbe  ferry  is  about 
2 miles  (the  ferry  is  where  our  troops  remained  overnight  and  crossed 
the  next  morning)  j the  shore  is  swampy,  and  heavy  woods  come  down 
nearly  to  the  water,  with  occasional  openings.  In  these  woods  the 
enemy  were  posted,  and  through  them  our  forces  had  to  fight  their  way 
to  tbe  battery  at  tbe  ferry.  By  means  of  your  signals  Captain  Rodgers 
was  kept  constantly  informed  of  tbe  position  of  the  enemy  and  the  dis- 
position of  our  troops,  and  was  thus  enabled  to  direct  his  fire  with  pre- 
cision and  without  fear  of  injuring  our  own  men. 

Nothing  could  be  more  perfect  than  the  manner  in  which  we  were 
able  to  transmit  communications ; it  exceeded  my  expectations  entirely. 
During  the  whole  march,  which  occupied  some  four  hours,  I do  not  think 
there  was  more  than  ten  minutes  during  which  we  could  not  transmit 


CUAI’.  XV.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


G3 


messages  ilistautl3^  Both  Geueral  Stevens  and  Captain  Itodgeis  were 
fdeased  to  express  their  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  your  system 
of  signals,  commending  it  very  highly.  Without  its  assistance  I do  not 
think  the  lleet  Avould  have  been  able  to  have  rendered  the  great  service 
it  did  and  our  land  forces  would  have  met  much  greater  resistance. 

In  conclusion,  permit  me  to  congratulate  you  upon  the  success  of  the 
expedition  and  the  part  your  signals  took  in  it. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

WM.  S.  COGSWELL, 

Lieutenant^  Acting  Signal  Officer  Second  Brigade  E.  C. 

MaJ.  Albert  J.  Myer. 


:No.  12. 

Reports  of  lAeut.  Henry  S.  Tafft,  Fifteenth  Massachusetts  Infantry^  signal 

officer. 

Ueadquarters  Second  Brigade  E.  C., 

Beaufort^  S.  C.,  January  3,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  agreeably  to  your  instruc- 
tions, I accompanied  the  expedition  under  your  command  to  the  main- 
land, and  was  present  during  the  engagement  with  the  enemy  near 
Port  Iloyal  Ferry  on  the  1st  instant;  that  during  the  whole  time  your 
requests  to  the  commander  of  the  gunboats  were  successfully  trans- 
mitted by  the  system  of  signals  invented  by  Major  Myer.  The  firing 
from  the  gunboats  was  in  this  manner  done  in  entire  concert  with  you, 
and  therefore  i)r6ved  the  more  effective,  as  the  various  positions  of  the 
vnemy  were  thus  made  known  to  CaiDtain  Kodgers,  commanding  gun- 
boats. My  signal  flag,  carried  by  myself,  Avas  repeatedly  fired  uiion 
when  in  presence  of  the  enemy.  Without  egotism,  I claim  the  honor 
tor  Lieutenant  Cogswell  (who, was  on  gunboat  Ottawa)  and  myself  of 
being  the  first  signal  officers  who  have  performed  signal  duty  under 
fire  upon  the  battle-field  since  the  adoption  of  the  system  into  the 
service  of  the  United  States;  whether  successfully  or  not  I of  course 
leave  to  your  judgment. 

Very  respectlullv,  your  obeilient  servant, 

HENRY  S.  TAFFT, 
lAeutenantj  Signal  Officer. 

Brigadier-General  Stevens, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade  E.  C., 

Beaufort.!  S.  0.,  January  4,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I was  present  and  took  part 
in  the  battle  of  Port  Royal  Ferry  on  the  1st  instant,  Lieut.  William  S. 
Cogswell  being  on  board  gunboat  Ottawa,  acting  in  concert  Avith  me. 

General  Stevens  (commanding  our  troops)  directed  all  the  firing  from 
the  gunboats  during  the  battle  through  the  signal  officers,  naming 
different  points  where  their  shells  should  be  thrown,  when  to  cease  firing, 
when  to  open  fire,  &c.,  thus  enabling  the  gunboats  to  use  their  artillery 


[Chap.  XY, 


64  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 


with  as  much  precision  as  though  they  were  upon  the  field,  and  conse- 
quently creating  terrible  slaughter  among  the  enemy,  s 
I had  before  the  battle  caused  to  be  made  some  two  dozen  flags,  blue 


and  wliite 


White 

, to  be  carried  b}'  our  troops,  to  prevent  any  mis- 

Eluo  I 


takes  by  firing  upon  each  other,  and  also  to  assist  the  firing  from  the 
gunboats,  which  I believe  was  a great  assistance,  and  effectually  pre- 
vented any  such  unfortunate  errors. 

Lieutenant  Cogswell  and  myself  had  also  arranged  a simple  code 
for  certain  messages,  which  enabled  us  to  work  with  surprising  quick- 
ness, and  by  so  doing  added  still  more  to  the  success  of  your  system  of 
signaling.  I believe  that  an  imi^romptu  code  can  always  be  arranged 
by  signal  officers  for  use  upon  any  imi3ortant  occasiou  of  this  kind,  and 
when  they  know  their  ground,  which  will  prove  of  immense  service.  I 
found  in  this  manner  that  I could  send  a message  from  the  battle-field 
to  Lieutenant  Cogswell  between  the  discharges  of  artillery,  when  the 
smoke  lifted,  which  could  not  otherwise  have  been  done. 

My  flag  was  repeatedly  fired  upon, .the  enemy  seeming  to  understand 
its  use  and  importance.  Their  battery,  which  was  concealed  in  the 
woods,  threw  canister  and  shell  directly  across  the  field  in  which  1 was 
stationed,  and,  although  they  struck  all  around  and  near  me,  neither 
myself  nor  the  man  with  me  (Sergeant  Eied)  were  hurt. 

My  feet  were  first  upon  the  shore  of  the  main-laud  of  South  Carolina, 
the  signal  flag  the  first  to  wave,  and  it  was  kept  constantly  flying  during 
the  whole  engagement. 

At  10  p.  m.  I returned  to  Beaufort  with  a dispatch  for  General  Sher- 
man, at  Hilton  Head,  announcing  our  success,  and  Lieutenant  Town 
immediately  went  back  to  the  ferry  to  act  in  my  place  in  case  of  necessity. 

I believe  that  the  very  great  assistance  rendered  by  the  use. of  your 
system  of  signals  aided  very  materially  in  gaining  a victory  for  us,  and 
that  fact  I also  think  is  fully  impressed  upon  the  mind  of  the  general 
commanding,  as  well  as  upon  the  officer  commanding  the  gunboats. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  S.  TAFFT, 

First  Lieut.  Fifteenth  Mass.  Fegt.  VoJs.,  Acfg.  Sig.  Off.  F.  G. 

Maj.  Albert  J.  Myer, 

Commanding  Signal  Corps. 


Xo.  13. 


Letter  from  Maj.  Albert  J.  Mger^  Signal  Officer,  U.  S.  Army. 

Office  of  the  Signal  Officer,  A.  P., 

^Yasllington,  D.  G.,  January  14,  1802. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  the  general  commanding  the  Army 
the  inclosed  letter  of  special  mention  from  General  Stevens,  the  official 
report  of  Commander  C.  E.  P.  Eodgers,  commanding  naval  forces,  in  the 
recent  action  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  and  the  official  reports  of  Lieuts.  Henrj’ 
S.  Tafft  and  William  S.  Cogswell,  acting  signal  officers  of  the  Army, 
engaged  in  that  action. 


CIIAI'.  XV.] 


engagemp:nt  at  port  royal  ferry. 


G5 


The  g’iillaiitry,  gcod  conduct,  and  services  rendered  by  First  Lieut. 
AVilliam  S.  Cogswell,  Fifth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  First  Lieut. 
Henry  S.  Tafft,  Fifteenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  acting  signal  offi- 
cers, having  been  of  a character  which  ha.^  elicited  the  oflicial  approbation 
and  mention  of  the  officers  commanding  both  the  land  and  the  naval 
forces,  I desire  to  bring  their  names  to  the  especial  notice  of  tlie  general 
commanding  the  Army. 

1 nm,  sir,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

ALBERT  J.  IMYER, 

Sifjnal  Officer,  ]\[ajor,  U.  8.  Army. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  Williams, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Genera}.,'  Army  of  the  Potomac. 


[ruclosuro.) 


U.  S.  Flag-Ship  Walash, 

Port  Royal  Harbor^  S.  C.,  January  3,  18G2. 


Sir  : Lieutenant  Cogswell,  a signal  officer  of  the  Army,  w’as 

directed  to  report  to  me  lor  duty,  and  furnished  me  with  the  means  of 
constantly  communicating  with  General  Stevens  with  a facility  and 
rapidity  unknown  to  the  naval  service.  I take  this  opportunity  of  rec- 
ommending that  the  code  of  signals  invented  by  Major  Myer  be  at  once 
introduced  into  the  Navy. 

I hrfve  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  R.  P.  RODGERS, 

Commander. 


Flag-Officer  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Commanding  South  Atlantic  BlocJcading  Squadron. 


f Inclosure.  1 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade  E.  C., 

Beaufort.)  S.  C.,  January  3,  18G2. 

Dear  Sir  : I desire  to  express  my  great  confidence  in  your  code  of 
signals  from  my  actual  experience  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  to  call  your 
attention  to  the  great  skill  and  merit  of  the  signal  officers  of  my  com- 
mand, Lieutenant  Tafft  and  Lieutenant  Cogswell.  In  my  official  report 
of  the  affair  at  Port  Royal  Ferry  on  New  YeaFs  Day  I have  stated  that 
the  signaling  was  a iierfect  success.  It  was  indeed  an  extraordinary 
success.  So  far  as  I am  advised,  this  is  the  first  time  it  has  been  tested 
in  actual  battle. 

It  afibrds  me  the  greater  satisfaction  to  be  able  to  give  this  testimo- 
nial from  the  circumstance  that  I had  faith  in  your  code  from  the  begin- 
ning, as  you  will  well  remember,  and  lent  my  humble  name  in  favor  of 
your  appointment  to  your  present  position. 

Trulv,  your  friend, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier- General)  Coynmanding. 

Maj.  Albert  J.  Myer, 

Signal  Officer  of  tlie  Army)  Washingtoyi  City. 

5 R R— VOL  VI 


66  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.  XV. 

No.  14. 


lletiirn  of  casualties  in  the  Vnion  forces  at  Port  Poyal  Peny,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862. 
[ConipiltHl  from  records  of  Adjutant-GcBeral’s  Office.] 


Command. 

Killed.  I 

Wounded,  j 

Miss^iu". 

Officers. 

] 

^ 1 
Z 

w 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers.  j 

Z 

lie 

it 

c 

tc 

CJD 

8tli  Micliijian 

2 

i 

1 1 

6 

3 

2 

I 

1 , 

10 

3 

2 

48th  Now  York 

50th  Pennsylvania  

i::;::: 

Total 

2 

' 1 

11 

1 

15 

No.  15. 

Congratidatory  orders  from  Major-General  McClellan^  TJ.  S.  Army. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  A.  G.  O., 

No.  99.  ) ^Yas^lington.,  November  14,  1861. 

The  Major-General  Gommanding  announces  to  the  Army  with  sincere 
pleasure,  Ist,  the  brilliant  reduction  of  the  forts  in  Port  Koyal  harbor, 
by  the  officers  and  sailors  of  our  gallant  fleet,  under  command  of  Flag- 
Officer  S.  F.  DuPont,  the  utter  rout  of  the  enemy,  the  capture  of  the 
town  of  Beaufort,  and  the  lauding  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman’s  army 
on  the  coast  of  South  Carolina  ; 2d,  the  victory  achieved  by  Brig.  Gen. 
William  Nelson  at  Pikeville,  I^y.,  in  which,  after  two  days’  hard  fight- 
ing, the  rebels  were  completely  defeated  and  put  to  flight ; and,  3d,  the 
daring  attack  made  by  Brig.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  with  an  inferior  force, 
on  the  rebels  at  Belmont,  Mo.,  and  the  signal  defeat  of  the  latter,  with 
a loss  of  all  their  artillery,  baggage,  and  means  of  transportation. 

The  Major-General  Commanding  cannot  too  highly  extol  the  steadi- 
ness, courage,  and  admirable  conduct  displayed  by  officers,  sailors,  and 
soldiers  alike  in  these  several  engagements.  He  commends  them  to 
the  imitation  of  the  whole  Army. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan : 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Pemberton^  C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Fourth  JMilitary  Dist.  S.  C., 

Poeotaligo  Station^  S.  €.,  January  10,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  iuclose  herewith  official  reports  from  Brig. 
Gen.  D.  S.  Donelsou,  Provisional  Armj^ ; Col.  James  Jones,  Fourteenth 
, Kegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  j Lieut.  Col.  D.  Barnes,  Twelfth 
Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  and  Maj.  C.  Jones,  Twelfth  Eegi- 
meut  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  of  their  respective  operations  against 
the  enemy  in  the  aftair  on  the  Coosaw  Piver  on  the  1st  instant. 


Chap.  XV.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY.  G7 

About  9.30  a.  m.  on  that  day,  hearing'  heavy  and  rapid  firing,  1 moved 
with  as  much  dispatch  as  possible  from  my  headquarters  near  Poco- 
taligo  Station  towards  the  direction  whence  it  appeared  to  proceed.  On 
reaching  the  camp  of  the  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Kegiment,  located 
where  the  Sheldon  road  and  that  from  Page’s  Point  and  Cunningham’s 
Bluff*  intersect  the  Port  Koyal  road,  I found  that  no  positive  informa- 
tion had  been  received  as  to  the  precise  points  whence  the  cannonading 
proceeded. 

Towards  12  m.  I received  the  first  dispatch  from  Col.  James  Jones, 
commanding  Fourteenth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  stating  that  the 
enemy  was  landing  in  strong  force  at  Chisolm’s  Lauding,  and  shortly 
after  another  informing  mo  that  there  was  an  evident  intention  of  land- 
ing a large  force  from  Chisolm’s  to  Port  Eoyal  Ferry.  I immediately 
directed  Colonel  Jones  to  have  the  siege  howitzer  and  the  long  12-pounder 
iron  gun  on  siege  carriage  (the  only  two  guns  of  greater  caliber  than 

0 pounder  field  i)ieces  which  I had  been  able  to  place  in  position  on  the 
Coosaw  River)  in  readiness  to  be  removed  from  the  intrenciiraents  at 
the  ferry  should  their  safety  be  threatened  by  the  enemy’s  advance  on 
our  left.  I will  here  remark  that  the  12-pounder  referred  to,  being  very 
heavy  and  not  equipped  for  transportation,  was  unfortunately,  but  ac- 
cidentally, overturned  in  a ditch  in  the  act  of  removal.  The  heavy  fire 
from  the  enemy’s  gunboats  rendered  it  impracticable  to  extricate  it  with- 
out the  risk  of  "too  great  a loss  of  life.  It  was  therefore  spiked  and  left. 

1 also  directed  Colonel  Jones  to  move  towards  the  enemy  at  once,  and 
to  attack  him  the  moment  an  opportunity  should  offer,  and,  if  com- 
pelled to  fall  back,  to  do  so  fighting.  In  addition  to  his  own  regiment, 
Colonel  Jones  had  under  his  command  a section  of  Captain  Leake’s 
Virginia  battery,  which  on  several  occasions  during  the  day  was  effect- 
ively employed  against  the  enemy’s  columns,  under  Captain  Leake  in  per- 
son. Forty  cavalry,  under  Major  Oswald  and  Captain  Evans,  and  four 
companies  of  the  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant  Colonel 
Barnes  commanding)  Colonel  Dunovant  being  in  attendance  at  the  ses- 
sion of  the  State  Convention  in  Columbia),  were  moved  forward  with  as 
msLch  dispatch  as  possible.  Colonel  Barnes  arrived  in  time  to  assist  in 
opening  the  first  fire  on  the  enemy’s  forces. 

To  the  reports  of  these  officers  (Colonel  Jones  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Barnes)  I respectfully  refer  for  details  of  the  operations  of  their  respect- 
ive corps,  though  during  the  engagement  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barnes 
acted  under  the  immediate  orders  of  his  superior. 

A large  portion  of  the  Tennessee  brigade,  under  Brigadier-Ceneral 
Donelson,  and  Thornton’s  Virginia  field  battery  were  also  ordered  forward 
to  the  support  of  Colonel  Jones.  They  did  not,  however,  reach  the  field 
in  time  to  take  part  in  the  action ; though  moved  with  the  utmost  prompti- 
tude, the  brigade  was  disappointed  in  its  desire  to  meet  the  enemy.  I 
respectfully  refer  to  General  Donelson’s  report,  herewith. 

Luring  the  day  and  succeeding  night  I was  in  frequent  communication 
with  Maj.  C.  Jones,  commanding  a detachment  of  three  companies  of 
his  regiment  (Twelfth  South  Carolina  Volunteers)  and  asectionof  Leake’s 
battery,  near  Page’s  Point,  and  in  observation  of  Cunningham’s  Bluff. 
The  enemy,  though  expending  a large  number  of  shot  and  shell,  did  no 
further  damage  than  to  burn  the  wood  work  of  a battery  which  I was 
about  completing,  but  for  which  I had  not  been  able  to  obtain  guns. 
Major  Jones’  report  is  respectfully  forwarded  herewith. 

Although  the  enemy  did  not  land  in  force  at  Page’s  Point  or  Cun- 
ninghain’s  Blufi*,  it  was  entirely  practicable  for  him  to  have  done  so  under 
cover  of  Ins  gunboats  at  any  time.  This  compelled  me  to  hold  in  reserve 


G8  COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  f'-iiAi-.  XV. 

a sufficient  force  to  meet  him  on  the  road  in  those  directions ; or,  should 
he  so  select,  on  that  to  Mackay’s  Point,  where  a landing'  was  equally 
feasible,  and  would  have  taken  my  advanced  troops  in  rear,  should  he 
succeed  in  forcing  his  way.  For  these  reasons  no  other  troops  than 
those  mentioned  were  advanced,  though  others  were  held  in  readiness 
at  a moment’s  notice. 

Colonel  Martin’s  cavalry  corps  acted  during  the  day  principally  as 
pickets  and  vedettes,  the  colonel  himself  rendering  efficient  service  as 
my  aide-de-camx)  when  his  other  duties  permitted. 

Our  troops  evinced  from  first  to  last  a laudable  desire  to  meet  the 
enemy  whenever  and  wherever  it  could  be  done  upon  anything  like 
equal  terms.  On  every  occasion  of  his  attemj^t  to  advance  beyond  the 
cover  of  his  gunboats  he  was  driven  back  or  his  troops  dispersed.  At 
no  time  during  his  occui)ation  of  the  river  bank  did  he  leave  their  i)ro- 
tection,  and  finally,  when  withdrawing  to  the  island,  did  so  under  a fire 
from  his  vessels  almost  as  heavy  as  that  under  which  he  had  landed. 

I also  transmit  herewith  reports  of  killed  and  wounded ; many  of  the 
latier  were  slight,  by  far  the  larger  portion  of  the  casualties  being  from 
the  shells  of  the  fleet ; yet,  from  all  the  information  I have  been  able  to 
obtain,  I am  convinced  the  enemy’s  loss  at  least  equaled  our  own. 

My  aide-de-cami:),  Lieut.  J.  H.  Morrison,  Provisional  Army,  was  nec- 
essarily engaged  during  the  day  in  office  duties.  I am  much  indebted 
to  my  volunteer  aides-de-camp,  Messrs.  J.  Huguenin  and  George  Elliott. 

To  the  officers  whose  reports  are  transmitted  herewith  I have  to  return 
my  thanks,  and  through  them  to  those  under  their  immediate  command. 
Also  to  Surgeon  Turnipseed,  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Yolunteers,  for 
his  untiring  professional  zeal,  as  well  in  the  field  as  in  the  cami;). 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBEETOIS^, 

Brigadier- General  J Commanding  Fourth  MU.  I)ist.  8.  G. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Xo.  17. 

Rej)ort  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel.  8.  Donelson,  G.  8.  Army. 

Brigade  Headquarters, 

Poeotaligo^  8.  C.,  January  5,  1862. 

General  : I refer  you  to  the  inclosed  report  of  Col.  James  Jones,  of 
the  Fourteenth  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  which  I found  at 
my  quarters  last  night,  of  all  that  transpired  in  the  engagement  of  the 
forces  under  his  command  with  the  enemy  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  on  the 
1st  instant. 

I reached  the  encampment  of  Colonel  Jones  between  the  hours  of  4 
and  5 m.  the  1st  instant ; proceeded  about  200  yards,  after  a moment’s 
hair,  to  a point  in  the  woods  near  the  Kean’s  Keck  road.  Here  I halted 
my  command,  which  consisted  of  eight  companies  of  the  Eighth  Ten- 
nessee Eegiment,  the  Sixteenth  Tennessee  Eegiment  not  having  come 
up,  until  I could  make  a personal  reconnaissance  by  going  into  the  field 
in  which  the  Chaplin  house  was  situated,  with  the  view  to  taking  posi- 
tion and  to  co-operate  with  the  forces  of  Colonel  Jones.  I saw  upon 
entering  this  field  our  troops  falling  back  along  the  road  leading  from 
the  Chaplin  house  perpendicularly  to  the  Kean’s  Keck  road,  near  the 


CiiAr.  XV.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


69 


point  I Inid  stationed  the  Eighth  Tennessee  Itegimcnt.  The  troops  of 
Colonel  Jones,  without  halting,  passed  to  his  camp. 

Here,  after  making  the  acquaintanee  of  Colonel  Jones,  1 ordered  the 
whole  force  to  lialt.  I found  at  once  the  enemy’s  shells  could  do  us 
much  injury  without  any  ability  on  our  part  to  return  tlie  enemy’s  fire; 
they,  the  enemy  in  the  field,  having  previously  retired,  under  cover  of 
their  gunboats,  out  of  sight.. 

It  being  now  near  sundown,  I ordered  the  entire  command  to  fall 
back  to  a point  out  of  the  range  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats.  During  all 
this  time,  both  at  the  camj)  of  Colonel  Jones  and  on  the  march  to  the 
rear  to  take  position,  there  was  a quick  and  constant  firing  by  the  enemy. 
No  casualty  happened,  the  shells  falling  to  our  right.  They  ceased 
firing  just  at  dark. 

I have  omitted  to  say  that  before  getting  to  Colonel  Jones’  camp. 
Colonel  Martin,  commanding  regiment  of  cavalry,  rode  up,  introduced 
himself,  and  gave  me  the  direction  to  lead  my  Eighth  Eegiment  Tennes- 
see Volunteers  to  the  point  occupied  by  them  until  he  and  myself  could 
survey  the  open  field  through  which  Colonel  Jones’  regiment  was  then 
retiring.  We  thus  remained  until  they  i)assed  into  the  Kean’s  Neck 
road,  near  the  point  of  location  of  the  Eighth  Tennessee  Eegiment. 

. At  this  moment,  in  the  preparation  of  this  report,  I received  the  in- 
closed official  report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barnes,  of  the  Twelfth  Eegi- 
ment South  Carolina  Volunteers,  who  commanded  a detachment  of  four 
companies  of  said  regiment  in  the  action  with  the  enemy  on  the  1st 
instant  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I am,  with  high  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  S.  DONELSON, 

Brigadier-  Gefieral  First  Brigade^  Fourth  Mil.  Dist.  of  S.  C, 

Brigadier-General  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District  South  Carolina. 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Col.  James  Jones ^ Fourteenth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Fourteenth  Eegt.  S.  C.  Vols., 

Tornotley^  S.  0.,  January  4,  18G2. 

General  : In  obedience  to  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  report 
the  following  occurrences  of  the  1st  instant : 

My  cami)  was  pitched  on  the  road  from  Garden’s  Corner  to  Port 
Eoyal  Ferry,  1 mile  from  the  latter  x>lace,  and  where  a road  diverges 
eastward  at  nearly  a right  angle  with  the  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  road  lead- 
ing into  Kean’s  Neck,  and  nearly  parallel  with  and  about  a mile  distant 
from  Coosaw  Eiver.  At  the  termination  of  the  causeway  of  the  ferry, 
on  the  northern  bank  of  the  Coosaw  Eiver,  an  earthwork  was  thrown 
up  to  prevent  a crossing  at  that  point,  armed  with  two  siege  gnus  (a 
howitzer  and  12-pouiider  gun),  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Webb, 
tlie  12-ponnder  being  manned  by  an  inexperienced  detail  from  my  regi- 
ment, and  supported  by  a section  of  Captain  Leake’s  field  battery. 

Two  of  my  companies  were  sent  out  on  picket  duty — one  (Company 
B)  commanded  by  Captain  [A.  P.]  West,  at  Adams’  place,  two  and  a 
half  miles  distant,  on  the  Kean’s  Neck  road ; and  the  other  (Company 


70  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


H),  comiuauded  by  Captain  [Ed.]  Croft,  at  a cburch  2 miles  farther 
on  the  same  road,  and  near  the  bridge  and  causeway  leading  into  Chis- 
olm’s Island,  with  orders  to  guard  the  bridge  and  causeway  above 
referred  to,  and  with  orders  to  send  out  pickets  and  scouts  into  Chis- 
olm’s Island.  T\vo  other  companies  were  at  the  ferry,  to  support  the 
battery  tliere,  leaving  but  six  companies  at  my  camj). 

xAbout  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant.  Captain  Croft 
communicated  the  intelligence  to  me  that  the  enemy  had  landed  in 
force  on  Chisolm’s  Island.  He  estimated  the  number  at  two  regiments, 
as  he  saw  a long  column  advancing  with  two  regimental  stands  of  colors 
and  two  pieces  of  artillery.  Soon  after  this  (about  7.30  o’cloc.k)  Captain 
West  dispatched  a courier  to  me,  with  the  information  that  the  enemy 
had  landed  at  Adams’  place  and  were  advancing  in  strong  force  to  the 
Kean’s  iseck  road.  I ordered  forward  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Samuel]  Mc- 
Gowan, with  three  companies  of  my  regiment,  commanded  by  Captains 
[W.  J.]  Carter,  [A.]  Perrin,  and  [D.  C.]  Tomkins,  and  one  gun  of  Cap- 
tain Leake’s  section,  to  support  Captain  West,  whom  he  met  at  about 
one  and  a half  miles,  retiring  in  good  order  towards  my  camp,  when  he 
formed  his  line  of  battle.  I withdrew  my  two  companies  from  the  earth- 
work at  the  ferry,  and,  assisted  by  Major  [W.  H.]  Simpson,  with  the 
five  companies  commanded  by  Captains  [W.  L.J  Wood,  [J.  K.]  Brown, 
[E.  S.]  Owens,  [H.  H.]  Harper,  and  [M.  C.]  Taggart,  took  post  near 
Chaplin’s  house,  to  intercept  any  column  that  might  attempt  to  pass 
along  the  margin  of  the  river  to  the  ferry,  and  at  the  same  time  to  be 
in  supporting  distance  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  McGowan. 

^7o  attempt  was  made  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  advance  in  any 
direction — probably  waiting  for  a sufficient  tide  to  allow  his  gunboats 
to  advance — until  12.30  p.  m.,  when  the  gunboats  began  to  move  up 
slowly  towards  the  ferry  and  to  throw  shells  rapidly,  when  a message 
from  Lieutenant-Colonel  McGowan  informed  me  that  the  euenn^  were 
advancing  along  the  Kean’s  Keck  road. 

Eegarding  the  earthwork  at  the  ferry  now  unimportant,  as  the  enemy 
had  effected  a landing  at  another  iioint,  I ordered  Captain  Leake  and 
Lieutenant  Webb  to  withdraw  their  guns  from  that  position.  Captain 
Leake  to  bring  his  gun  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  McGowan’s  line,  and  I 
proceeded  with  my  five  companies  also  to  his  support. 

Soon  after  I arrived  at  Lieutenant  Colonel  McGowan’s  line  my  other 
company  (Captain  Croft’s) — which  had  been  posted  at  the  church  on  the 
Kean’s  Keck  road,  and,  on  account  of  the  landing  of  the  enemy  at  Adams’, 
could  not  return  by  that  road — made  a circuitous  march  by  another 
road,  in  obedience  to  my  instructions,  and  joined  the  regiment. 

The  whole  regiment  was  then  put  in  line  of  battle,  the  left  resting  on 
Captain  Leake’s  section  of  his  battery,  placed  in  the  road,  and  the  right 
extending  towards  the  river  as  far  as  I deemed  practicable.  I had  just 
got  into  position  when  Major  Oswald,  of  Colonel  Martin’s  regiment, 
reported  to  me  with  42  mounted  men,  and  I directed  him  to  take  post 
upon  my  left.  Almost  at  the  same  time  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barnes, 
of  the  Twelfth  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  reported  with  four 
companies  of  that  regiment,  and  I directed  him'  to  return  to  Chaplin’s 
house  (the  position  I had  left)  and  to  guard  to  the  river  bank. 

The  enemy,  instead  of  advancing,  as  I supposed  he  would  do,  along 
the  Kean’s  Keck  road,  to  attack  my  camj),  and  the  only  route  by  which 
he  could  bring  up  his  artillery,  left  his  artillery  in  his  rear,  and  advanced 
close  along  the  river  bank  and  across  the  adjacent  fields  and  woods, 
creeping  along  opposite  his  gunboats,  five  of  whic.h  steamed  slowly  on, 
throwing  shells  in  advance  of  and  over  his  troops. 


Chai\  XV.  I 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY. 


71 


As  soon  as  bis  column  advancing  by  the  margin  of  the  river  could  be 
seen  Captain  Leake  opened  upon  it,  scattering  it  right  and  left  and 
driving  it  out  of  view,  down  the  slope,  to  the  marsh  ; and  when  those 
advancing  across  the  fields  appeared  before  my  right  wing,  1 opened  fire 
upon  them  with  musketry,  dispersing  and  driving  them  back  to  the  river, 
under  shelter  of  their  gunboats. 

When  I became  satisfied  that  the  enemj'  would  not  advance  by  the 
Kean’s  Keck  road  I changed  my  position  to  Chaplin’s  house,  near  the 
ferry,  in  support  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barnes’  eommand ; but  when  1 
arrived  with  the  head  of  my  regiment  at  that  i^oint  I saw  that  I was  too 
late  to  aceomplish  any  useful  purpose.  The  enemy  had  reached  the 
earthwork  at  the  end  of  the  causeway  in  large  force,  and  were  protected 
by  the  guns  of  three  steamers  in  the  river  near  the  bulkheads  of  the 
ferry.  I then  withdrew  the  whole  command  to  my  camp,  to  wait  for 
further  orders  from  general  headquarters. 

On  arriving  at  my  camp  I met  you  at  the  head  of  the  Eighth  Eegi- 
ment  Tennessee  Volunteers,  and  placed  myself  under  your  orders. 

I cannot  state  with  certainty  the  loss  of  the  enemy,  but  I have  reason 
to  believe  it  was  considerable  in  killed  and  wounded.  Wherever  we 
met  him  we  invariably  drove  him  from  the  field  in  confusion  to  the  pro- 
teetion  of  his  gunbo  its.  We  saw  many  dead  upon  the  field  and  cap- 
tured 2 prisoners,  badly  wounded,  both  of  whom  have  since  died. 

I was  not  only  satisfied,  but  highly  gratified,  with  the  conduct  of  all 
my  officers  and  men  during  the  engagement.  Their  coolness  and  enthu- 
siasm were  admirable. 

I herewith  transmit  a complete  list  of  the  casualties*  in  my  regiment. 
I also  transmit  two  orders  receiv^ed  during  the  engagement  from  the 
general  commanding  the  Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina.! 

' I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfull}^,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

JAMES  JONES, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Fourteenth  Regiment  8.  G.  Vols,. 

Brig.  Gen.  D.  S.  Donelson, 

Commanding  First  Brigade^  Fourth  Military  District  8.  C. 


No.  19. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Dixon  Barnes^  Tioelflh  Regiment  South  Carolina  In- 
fantry. 

Tomotley,  S.  C.,  January  5,  1862. 
General  : I transmit  herewith  the  report  of  Lieut.  Col.  D.  Barnes  of 
the  affair  at  Port  Eoyal  on  the  1st  instant. 

I have  no  remarks  to  make  on  it  exeept  to  correct  the  distance  of  my 
line  from  my  eamp  at  the  time  the  lieutenant-colonel  reported  to  me, 
which  is  probably  immaterial;  but  the  line  was  about  1 mile  from  my 
camp  instead  of  half  a mile,  as  stated  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barnes. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfullv,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  JONES, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Fourteenth  Regiment  8.  C.  Vols. 
General  D.  S.  Donelson, 

First  Brigade,  Fourth  Military  District  South  Carolina. 

^Embodied  in  No.  2’2, p.  75. 


t Not  found. 


72  COASTS  (W  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  A.ND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XV. 


[Inclosure.  J 

Headquarters  Twelfth  Eegiment  S.  C.  Vols., 

January  4,  18G2. 

Sir  : I submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  ])erformed  in  the  recent 
affair  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  by  the  detachment  of  the  Twelfth  Eegiment, 
under  my  command : 

Between  1 and  2 p.  m.  of  the  1st  instant  I left  Camp  Pemberton,  near 
Garden’s  Corner,  with  Adjutant  Talley  and  four  companies  of  the  Twelfth 
Eegiment,  to  wit : Company  A,  Captain  [W.  H.]  McCorhle ; Company 
B,  Captain  [John  L.J  Miller 5 Company  G,  Lieutenant  [John  M.]  Moody; 
and  Company  I,  Lieutenant  [H.  W.]  Campbell,  under  orders  from  the 
brigadier- general  commanding  the  Fourth  Military  District  to  proceed 
to  join  the  Fourteenth  Eegiment  in  resisting  the  reported  advance  of  the 
enemy  from  Chisolm’s  Point,  Avhere  it  was  said  they  had  landed  in  force. 

On  reaching  the  camp  of  the  Fourteenth  Eegiment,  at  the  junction  of 
the  road  leading  to  Kean’s  Keck  with  the  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  road,  I ascer- 
tained that  the  earthworks  at  the  ferry  had  been  abandoned,  and  that 
the  Fourteenth  Eegiment,  w ith  some  of  the  pieces,  had  advanced  down 
the  former  road,  leaving  a small  guard,  with  a howitzer,  at  the  camp.  I 
followed  with  my  command,  the  direction  being  nearly  parallel  to  the 
river  and  within  easy  range  of  the  heavy  guns  of  the  enemy’s  vessels ; 
but  we  came  up  with  Colonel  Jones’  regiment  about  a half  mile  from 
their  camp  without  having  sustained  any  loss  from  the  few  shells  which 
were  fired.  That  regiment  was  then  filing  off  from  the  road  to  the  right, 
and  uiion  reporting  to  Colouel  Jones  I was  informed  that  the  enemy 
were  advancing  on  the  right,  and  was  ordered  to  countermarch  to  a 
gate- way  some  300  yards  to  the  rear,  from  which  a road  extended  directly 
towards  the  river,  and  thus  to  gain  a position  to  the  right  of  that  occu- 
pied by  the  Fourteenth  Eegiment.  On  reaching  the  gate- way  indicated 
I discovered  that  the  road  to  which  I had  been  directed  ran  through  the 
middle  of  an  extensive  cotton  field,  bounded  on  our  right  by  the  Port 
Eoyal  Ferry  road  and  on  the  left  for  some  200  yards  by  a wood  of  small 
pines,  into  which  the  Fourteenth  Eegiment  had  filed,  and  beyond  that 
wood,  on  the  left,  by  a rail  fence,  which  separated  the  cotton  field  from 
other  open  lauds.  Directly  iu  front  of  the  gate  way,  about  a quarter  of 
a mile  distant,  a ridge,  whereon  stood  a dwelling  and  outbuildings 
(known  as  Chaplin’s),  and  which  was  partially  covered  with  trees  and 
undergrowth,  extended  from  the  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  road,  on  the  right, 
to  a considerable  distance  be.yond  the  fence  referred  to,  on  our  left. 

My  detachment  marched  from  the  gate  to  the  left,  crossing  the  cotton 
field  diagonally,  so  as  to  advance  nearer  to  the  position  of  the  Four- 
teenth Eegiment,  and  at  the  same  time  gain  a i)oint  between  its  right 
and  the  river.  This  we  did,  and  formed  in  line  under  cover  of  the  fence, 
our  right  resting  near  the  ridge.  The  Fourteenth  Eegiment  was  hid- 
den from  us  by  the  intervening  growth  of  pines,  but  to  tlie  front  of  our 
line  the  view  was  unobstructed  for  a considerable  distance.  Through 
this  open  area  we  soon  saw  the  enemy  advancing  as  skirmishers  upon 
the  right  of  the  Fourteenth  Eegiment,  apparently  in  ignorance  of  our 
position.  That  regiment  opened  fire,  and  immediately  afterward  1 or- 
dered my  detachment  to  advance.  They  responded  promjitly,  with  a 
cheer,  and,  leaping  the  fence,  we  advanced  at  a run,  firing  upon  the 
enemy.  They  returned  the  fire,  wounding  2 of  our  men,  and  tied, 
screening  themselves  behind  a ])oint  of  woodland  to  our  right.  The 
firing  from  the  Fourteenth  Eegiment  also  ceased;  and  it  having  been 
reported  to  me  by  a few  men  of  Company  11,  posted  on  the  ridg(‘,  to  our 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  PORT  ROYAL  PERRY. 


73 


I 

Chap.  XV.  J 

rigiit'to  observe  the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  that  direction,  that  they 
were  moving  down  towards  the  ferry  between  onr  i*ight  and  tlie  river, 
I ])roceeded  to  deploy  one  company,  and  subsequently  the  remaining 
three,  along  the  ridge  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  our  former  position, 
and  about  100  yards  farther  to  the  right.  We  had  scarcely  gained  this 
ground  before  the  enemy  were  seen  advancing  directly  towards  our  new 
front,  and  shortly  afterwards  a body  of  them  appeared  towards  our  right, 
at  a gate  on  the  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  road.  The  right  of  our  line  fired  iq)on 
the  body  of  men  at  the  gate,  who  gave  way  and  ran  precipitately,  and 
about  the  same  time  our  left  fired  upon  those  near  our  front.  These 
latter  also  disappeared  among  the  thick  growth  of  pine,  and  the  fire  of 
the  enemy  ceased  entirely. 

I now  ordered  the  detachment  forward  into  the  wood  which  covered 
the  eminence.  We  had,  however,  advanced  but  a few  paces,  when  Col-, 
one!  Jones  rode  up  to  our  line,  and  I then  saw  the  regiment  of  the  latter 
and  another  regiment,  which  I afterwards  learned  was  the  Eighth  Ten- 
nessee, advancing  to  our  sui)port,  marching  by  a flank  along  the  road 
through  the  cotton  field  in  our  rear.  At  this  moment  the  enemy’s  gun- 
boats opened  a heavy  fire  of  shell,  and  the  whole  force  was  ordered  to 
fall  back.  While  returning  through  the  field  my  detachment  lost  1 killed 
and  2 wounded.  This  loss  resulted  from  the  enemy’s  shells  exclusively, 
their  infantry  making  no  further  demonstration  whatever. 

Throughout  the  affair  Adjutant  [W.  H.]  Talley  rendered  me  great 
assistance  in  the  execution  of  the  various  movements,  and  did  his  duty 
in  every  respect  in  a manner  entirely"  satisfactory  to  me. 

Surgeon  Turnipseed  joined  the  command  a short  time  before  we  first 
fired  upon  the  enemy,  and  entered  at  once  upon  the  discharge  of  the 
duties  of  his  position.  His  services  were  valuable,  especially  in  the  re- 
moval of  the  wounded  from  the  field  while  it  was  still  under  fire  of  the 
'enemy. 

The  conduct  of  the  whole  command  was  good.  They  obeyed  orders 
promptly,  and  exhibited  enthusiasm  when  the  prospect  was  presented 
of  meeting  the  foe  face  to  face  upon  a fair  field  of  battle. 

I forward  herewith  the  report  of  Surgeon  Turnipseed.* 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  BARNES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Detachment  Twelfth  Eegt.  8.  C.  Vols, 

Lieutenant  Ready, 

Adjutant  Fourteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 


No.  20. 

Report  of  Maj.  Cadwalader  Jones,  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Injayitry. 

Page’s  Point,  S.  C.,  January  — , 1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  orders  I i)roceeded  from  Camp  Pemberton, 
at  10  o’clock  on  the  1st  instant,  to  Page’s  Point,  and  took  command  ot 
the  forces  at  this  place.  They  consisted  of  three  companies  of  the 
Twelfth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (Colonel  Dunovant),  to 
wit:  Captain  [E.  F.]  Bookter’s,  Captain  H.  C.  Davis’  (Lieutenant  [J.  W.] 
Delleney  commanding),  and  Captain  T.  F.  Clyburn’s  company;  also 


Embodied  in  No.  22,  p.  75. 


74  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

one  section  of  Captain  Leake’s  Yii^^inia  artillery,  Lieutenant  Leake  com- 
manding. 

I found  the  command  well  placed,  under  direction  of  E.  F.  Bookter, 
senior  captain.  On  my  arrival  a heavy  cannonading  from  two  of  the 
enemy’s  gunboats,  chiefly  in  the  direction  of  the  Island  battery  (not 
yet  completed),  was  going  on.  T immediately  sent  a small  detachment 
to  this  battery,  which  reported  that  the  enemy  had  burned  it  and  made 
their  escape.  Very  soon  another  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  came  in  sight 
from  the  direction  of  Cunningham’s  Bluff  and  lay  ofl‘  Page’s  Point.  The 
three  gunboats  then  commenced* a heavy  fire  of  shells  in  all  directions — 
I supposed  with  a view  of  effecting  a landing.  I immediately  moved 
the  command  under  a considerable  shelling,  but  without  loss,  to  a poini 
of  safety  about  three-fourths  of  a mile  from  the  boats,  where  I remained 
during  the  day.  About  4 o’clock  the  enemy  threw  on  shore  some  20 
men,  under  protection  of  their  guns.  They  remained  a short  time  and 
returned  to  their  boats.  At  night  I fell  back  to  the  springs,  and  at 
about  2 o’clock  in  the  night  I sent  forward  a detachment  of  15  men, 
under  command  of  Lieutenant  Poseborough,  and  burned  all  the  cotton 
and  corn  on  the  Point.  Tliis  was  eftected  in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  who 
lay  in  their  gunboats  off  Page’s  Point  during  the  night. 

Ill  the  morning  I returned  to  my  former  position.  The  boats  of  the 
enemy  Avere  still  off  the  Point,  where  they  remained  without  attempting 
to  land,  but  passing  occasionally  in  the  direction  of  Cunningham’s  Bluff, 
until  the  afternoon,  when  they  left.  At  the  same  time  1 observed  the 
enemy  leave  Port  Eo^^al  Ferry,  as  reported  at  the  time. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

CAU’E  JONES, 

d/cpor.  Twelfth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

B ri gadier-General  Pembe rt on. 


No.  21. 

Reports  of  Col.  William  E.  Martin.^  Mounted  Regiment. 

Headquarters  Mounted  Kegiment, 

January  4,  18G1,  [18G2.] 

General  : I avail  myself  of  your  suggestion  to-day  relative  to  tho 
action  of  t lie  1st  merely  to  report  that  a detachment  of  my  regiment, 
under  iMaj.  G.  W.  Oswald,  reported  to  Colonel  Jones  early  in  the  day, 
and  participated  in  the  engagement  with  their  double-barreled  guns 
and  navy  revolvers  ; that  I was  detained  by  General  Pemberton  at  his 
headquarters,  and  it  was  in  carrying  orders  for  him  that  I had  the 
pleasure  of  meeting  you,  and  my  local  knowledge,  which  I have  diligently 
acquired,  enabled  me  to  point  out  the  Avay  through  the  woods  Avhich 
you  followed.  Further,  I have  only  to  add  that  after  the  engagement 
*1,  with  Colonel  McGowan,  rode  at  full  speed  to  the  causeway  near  the 
enemy’s  position,  ascertained  the  condition  of  the  Avounded,  and  Avith 
the  same  gentleman  and  Dr.  Turnipseed  and  some  soldiers  returned 
and  brought  away  the  wounded  in  a Avagou,  the  enemy  shelling  us  Avhile 
so  engaged. 

Bespectfully  submitted. 

\V.  E.  MARTIN, 

Colonel  Mounted  Regiment. 


Brigadier-General  Donelson. 


Chap.  XV.] 


NAVAL  DESCENT  ON  CEDAR  KEYS. 


75 


Headquarters  Moented  Hegiment, 

Hey  wood  ^ January  4,  1802. 

^ Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  tlie  1st  instant  1 received 
orders  from  Brigadier-General  Pemberton  to  send  a detachment  of  Ibrty 
cavalry  to  report  to  General  Jones,  near  the  ferry.  The  detachment 
was  under  Captain  Evans,  as  commander  of  the  company,  and  IMajor 
Oswald,  of  my  regiment.  The  detachment  continued  to  act  as  a reserve, 
though  engaged  occasionally  with  the  enemy\s  skirmishers,  whom  they 
assisted  in  driving  back,  the  double-barreled  gun  and  navy  revolver  hav- 
ing proved  useful.  General  Pemberton  directed  me  to  remain  at  his 
headquarters. 

At  3 p.  m.  he  sent  me  to  the  scene  of  action  to  observe  and  report. 
On  my  way  I overtook  General  Honelson  with  one  of  his  regiments  and 
led  them  to  position  by  the  generaPs  request.  I had  no  other  part  in 
the  affair,  except  that  soon  after  our  regiments  retired  to  the  cover  of 
the  wood  I proposed  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  McGowan,  of  Jones^  regiment, 
to  reconnoiter  the  field  in  search  of  our  wounded.  This  we  did,  advanc- 
ing on  horseback  at  [full]  speed  to  the  spot  in  the  causeway,  where  the 
shell  exploded  which  did  us  the  principal  damage. 

This  was  within  1 00  yards  of  the  enemy’s  position  at  Chaplin’s  house. 
Having  found  the  wounded,  we  returned  with  Dr.  Turnipseed,  of  Dun- 
ovant’s  regiment,  and  a few  soldiers,  and  with  a wagon  we  brought  the 
wounded  away  under  the  shells  of  the  enemy  aimed  at  us  and  the  wagon 
containing  the  wounded. 

I have  no  casualties  to  report  in  my  command. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

, WM.  E.  MAETIN, 

Colonel  Mounted  Regiment. 

Lieut.  J.  H.  Morrison, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Oeneral,  Fourth  Military  Distriet  S.  C. 


iS'o.  22. 


lieturn  of  casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  at  Port  Poyal  Ferry’  S.  C.,  January  1,  18G2. 


JANUARY  16,  1862. — Naval  descent  upon  Cedar  Keys,  Fla. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  R.  Trapier.,  C.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  Provisional  Forces, 

Department  East  a.nd  Middle  Florida, 

Fernandina,  Fla..,  January  20,  1862. 
Captain  : On  the  l^Gth  instant  the  enemy,  in  a steamer  armed  with 
five  guns,  made  a descent  upon  the  harbor  and  village  of  Cedar  Keys. 


76  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XV. 

Having  burned  seven  small  vessels  in  the  harbor,  which  were  loading 
with  cotton  and  turpentine  (with  the  intention,  information  of  which  had 
doubtless  been  conveyed  to  the  enemy,  of  running  the  blockade),  and 
also  the  wharf  of  the  Florida  Eailroad,  which  has  its  Gulf  terminus  at 
that  point,  and  several  flat  cars  belonging  to  the  same  road,  he  with- 
drew and  went  to  sea.  There  was  posted  at  this  place  a small  force, 
consisting  of  a lieutenant  and  22  men,  belonging  to  the  Fourth  Eegiment 
Florida  Volunteers,  placed  there  as  a sort  of  police  force,  to  protect  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Key  (some  80  or  100  persons)  against  any  disturb- 
ance from  bands  of  marauders.  The  lieutenant  and  14  privates  were 
taken  prisoners,  but  4 of  the  latter  were  subsequently  released  for  rea- 
sons set  forth  in  one  of  the  papers,*  which  I have  the  honor  to  forward 
herewith  (as  information)  to  the  commanding  general.  The  rest  of  the 
men  made  their  escape.  There  were  three  old  guns  which  had  been  in 
battery  on  one  of  the  Keys  of  the  group,  but  which  had  been  condemned 
after  inspection  by  Maj.  J.  G.  Barnwell,  inspector-general  of  this  mili- 
tary department,  as  unserviceble.  They  were  never  removed,  however, 
as  not  being  worth  the  removal,  neither  the  guns  nor  their  carriages. 
These  guns  the  enemy,  nevertheless,  is  said  to  have  spiked. 

It  is  said  that  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Kej^  were  required  to  sign 
an  oath  not  to  take  up  arms  against  the  Government  of  the  (so-called) 
United  States  during  the  present  war. 

1 must  not  omit  to  mention  a circumstance  which  reflects  high  credit 
upon  Commander  Emmons.  Three  negroes  escajied  from  the  Key  and 
went  out  to  his  steamer  j they  were  all  ordered  back  forthwith. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TEAPIEE, 
Brigadier -General^  Commanding. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Coosawliatcliie^  8.  C. 


' Headquarters  Provisional  Forces, 

Department  East  and  Middle  Florida, 

Tallahassee,  Fla.,  January  31,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  to-day  of  a 
letter  from  the  general  commanding,  under  date  January  27,  from  Coo- 
sawhatchie.  Eeferring  to  the  late  affair  at  Cedar  Keys,  the  general 
says : 

It  seems  that  the  commaudiiig  officer,  with  almost  his  entire  force,  were  taken  i3ris- 
onors  in  daylight  hy  the  crew  of  a man-of-war.  I desire  to  know  the  circumstances 
attending  the  capture.  Was  any  resistance  made  ? If  not,  why  did  not  the  guard 
escape  f 

In  re|)ly  to  all  which  I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  submit  the  fol- 
lowing statement : Ko  official  report  of  the  affair  has  reached  me  of 
course,  the  only  commissioned  officer  of  the  guard  having  been  taken 
i)risoner.  I learn,  however,  through  sources  entitled  to  credence,  that 
no  resistance  whatever  was  attemi)ted,  and  for  the  reason  that  protest 
against  it  was  made  by  a portion  of  the  citizens  of  the  Key  upon  the 
ground  that  it  would  be  hopeless,  and  could  only  result,  by  drawing  the 
Are  of  the  war  vessel,  in  a useless  destruction  of  property  and  shedding 
of  blood — perhaps  the  blood  of  women  and  children.  The  guard  did 
attempt  to  escape  and  was  captured  in  the  act.  They  embarked  on 

Inclosed  papers  not  of  sufficient  importance  for  publication. 


Chap.  XV.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  EDISTO  ISLAND. 


77 


board  of  a flat-boat,  with  no  other  means  of  ])ro])ulsiou  than  i)oles.  When 
they  had  reached  mid-channel,  their  poles  being  too  short  to  reach  the  bot- 
tom, they  were  left  at  the  mercy  of  the  tide,  by  which  they  were  swept 
out,  and  fell  easy  victims  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

If  it  is  said  that  better  and  surer  means  of  escape  ought  to  have  been 
furnished  them  in  the  event  of  an  attack  from  an  irresistible  force,  1 
answer  that  my  letter-book  contains  an  order,  dated  December  23, 1801, 
to  the  brigade  quartermaster,  to  charter  a steamer  of  125  tons  burden, 
for  i^urposes  of  transportation  between  the  Key  and  the  main-land,  ami 
the  records  of  this  oflSce  show  that  this  officer  did  ids  duty,  and  that 
the  boat  was  chartered.  Why  she  was  not  in  place  I know  not.  If  it 
be  asked  why  so  small  a force  was  left  upon  the  Key,  I answer  that  it 
was  all  that  could  be  spared  from  more  important  points,  and  that  even 
this  was  in  contravention,  to  some  extent,  of  the  instructions  (by  tele- 
graph) from  the  commanding  general.  By  these  instructions  I was 
directed  to  order  all  the  Florida  troops  to  Fernandina.  In  compliance 
with  them,  given  when  an  attack  was  hourly  expected  at  the  latter 
point,  I ordered  the  two  comiianies  then  stationed  at  Cedar  Keys  to 
Fernandina. 

In  a few  days  after  their  removal,  and  when  it  had  become  obvious 
that  Fernandina  was  not  then  to  be  the  object  of  attack,  I received  a 
paper  from  Cedar  Keys,  signed  by  a number  of  its  inhabitants,  setting 
forth  their  fears  that  certain  persons  who  had  been  arrested  there  as 
traitors,  and  released  afterwards  for  want  of  sufficient/ testimony  to  con- 
vict, would,  prompted  by  motives  of  rev^enge,  now  that  the  troops  were 
withdrawn,  avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity  thus  afforded  to  wreak 
their  vengeance  upon  their  accusers,  and  requesting,  therefore,  that  a 
guard  of  20  or  30  men  might  be  sent  for  their  protection,  I took  the 
responsibility  of  promptly  complying  with  the  petition. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant,. 

J.  H.  TEAPIEE, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.,  Coosaiohatchie,  8.  G. 


JANUARY  22-25,  1882. — Expedition  to  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

RIi:3?ORT:S,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gcii.  Natliau  G.  Evaus,  C.  S. 

No.  2. — Col.  P.  E.  Stevena,  Plolcombo  Logiou,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Inatructiono  from  General  Evans  to  Colonel  Stevena. 

Ko.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Brans,  C.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Adams  Run,  8.  C.,  January  25,  18G2. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  expedition  under  Col. 
P.  F.  Stevens,  Holcombe  Legion,  has  succeeded  in  capturing  about  50 
negroes  on  Edisto  Island,  several  of  whom  are  the  negroes  that  attacked 
my  pickets  at  Watt’s  Cut.  I think  after  a due  investigation,  should  any 
of  the  negroes  be  convicted,  they  should  be  hanged  as  soon  as  possible 


78  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


at  some  public  place  as  au  example.  The  negroes  have  evidently  been 
incited  to  insurrection  by  the  enemy.  I have  now  as  prisoners  several 
negroes,  who  say  they  can  identify  the  men  who  attacked  the  pickets. 
I will  keep  all  the  negroes  till  the  investigation  is  through,  and  would 
earnestly  request  instructions  from  the  general  commanding.  The  negro 
fellows  not  implicated  directly  I propose  to  iron  heavily  and  work  them 
under  guard  on  the  causeway  now  being  made  at  Church  Flats.  Colonel 
Stevens  will  probably  arrive  to-day  with  the  remainder  of  the  negroes. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- Geneva} j Commanding. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Ge7ier at j Charleston.^  IS.  C. 


No.  2. 


Report  of  Col.  P.  F.  StevenSy  Holeomhe  Legion,  C.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Adams  Run,  8.  C.,  January  28,  1862. 
Captain  : Inclosed  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  report  of  Col.  P. 
F.  Stevens,  Holcombe  Legion,  commanding  the  expedition  to  Edisto 
Island.  The  negro  men  captured  I have  now  under  guard  at  this  place. 
The  women  and  children  I have  sent  to  the  workhouse  in  Charleston. 
As  live  of  the  negroes  have  confessed  themselves  as  being  the  party 
that  attacked  my  pickets  on  Jehossee  Island,  I would  respectfully  ask 
instructions  as  to  their  disposition,  as  it  is  unsafe  to  return  them  to  their 
owners  unless  they  be  obligated  to  submit  them  to  a trial  for  their  lives, 
and  in  case  of  acquittal  to  be  removed  from  this  district. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 
Brigadier-  Ge^xera  l: 


Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Coosawhateliie,  8.  C. 


rinclo,u;e.l 


Headquarters  Holcombe  Legion, 

Camp  ^Yals^l,  January  27,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

Pursuant  to  orders  from  the  general  commanding,  at  6.30  a.  m.  on 
AVednesday,  the  22d  instant,  I proceeded  with  a detachment  to  cross 
the  Dawho  on  an  expedition  to  Edisto  Island.  My  force  was  120 
infantry  and  65  cavalry,  composed  of  detach  trents  from  Captain  Blair’s 
company  (attached  to  the  Legion),  Company  A and  Company  C of  the 
infantry,  and  Company  A and  Company  B of  the  cavalry.  Major 
Palmer  was  in  command  of  the  cavalry,  while  1 took  the  more  immedi- 
ate charge  of  the  infantry.  The  Bev.  Mr.  Baynard  accompanied  me  as 
guide. 

After  considerable  delay  at  the  inconvenient  ferry  near  Mr.  Grimball’s 
(three-quarters  of  a mile  long)  and  at  the  bridge  over  Watt’s  Cut, 
between  Jehossee  Island  and  Edisto,  I left  the  cut  about  3.30  p.  m.  and 
began  my  march  on  Edisto.  About  a mile  from  AVatt’s  Cut  we  passed 


Chap.  XV.) 


EXPEDITION  TO  EDISTO  ISLAND. 


79 


Dr.  William  Bailey’s  place — Old  Dominion;  found  some  i)otatoes;  corn- 
liouse  burnt,  together  with  two  or  three  other  outbuildings;  1 horse 
and  1 mule  shot,  supposecl  to  have  been  killed  by  the  ])ickets  on  Satur- 
day in  a field  near  by ; 1 horse  reported  wounded.  The  detachment  of 
cavalry  thrown  in  advance  examined  the  next  plantation  to  the  south- 
east of  the  road  and  reported  no  provisions,  but  the  ruins  of  the  corn- 
house  still  smoking.  About  3 miles  from  the  cut,  just  at  tlie  cross- 
ing of  the  Edisto  Ferry  road,  at  Mr.  William  Whaley’s  place,  found 
4 negroes — Joe  and  his  wife — belonging  to  Mr.  Wlialey,  and  in  charge 
of  the  place;  Bill,  belonging  to  W.  G.  Bayna^rd,  these  all  old  and  infirm, 
and  Peter,  belonging  to  Henry  Seabrook.  Peter’s  manner  being  very  in- 
subordinate, and  his  holding  one  hand  in  his  pocket  exciting  suspicion, 
he  was  seized,  searched,  and  tied  on  the  discovery  of  a sharp  knife  in 
the  pocket  where  he  had  kept  his  hand.  Old  Joe,  on  interrogation,  con- 
fessed to  having  heard  of  the  attack  of  Saturday,  and  said  he  could 
lead  us  to  the  rendezvous  of  the  attacking  party.  Mounting  some  30 
infantry  behind  as-many  cavalry,  I x)i‘Oceeded  with  this  force,  added  to 
the  cavalry,  to  the  point — Miss  Mary  Seabrook’s — under  guidance  of 
Joe,  but  no  trace  of  the  negroes  could  be  discovered.  The  dwelling- 
house  had  been  very  little  used  by  the  negroes,  and  their  own  houses 
deserted  for  a length  of  time.  Beturning  to  Whaley’s,  I spent  the  night 
there.  At  Mr.  Whaley’s  we  found  some  400  bushels  of  corn  and  a few 
pigs. 

On  the  23d  sent  Peter,  under  guard,  to  the  pickets  at  AVatt’s  Cut  with 
1 horse  and  saddle ; took  1 mule  and  cart  and  moved  down  the  main 
road  towards  Mr.  Townsend’s.  One  detachment  of  cavalry  covered 
my  front,  while  another  visited  the  xilaces  on  either  side  of  the  road. 
The  detachment  on  the  south  and  east  of  the  road  soon  found  a ])arty 
of  negroes,  some  10  in  number,  whom  I ordered  to  be  taken  into  custody, 
and,  through  a fortunate  misunderstanding  of  the  order,  they  were  sent 
immediately  back  to  Watt’s  Cut;  I therefore  cannot  report  their  names 
or  idace  of  capture.  Moving  slowly  until  past  the  Episcopal  Church, 
my  advanced  party  cai)tured  Paul,  belonging  to  the  estate  of  James 
Clark  ; Penny,  his  wife,  and  Victoria,  his  child,  belonging  to  Mr.  Henry 
Bailey,  and  on  his  idace.  One  mule  and  cart  were  taken  from  this 
place.  Under  guidance  of  Paul  I directed  my  march  towards  Point  of 
Pines,  in  which  locality  he  said  a number  of  negroes  were  assembled. 

Arrived  at  Mr.  Edward  Whaley’s  place,  a number  of  negroes  were 
taken  in  the  house  and  yard.  They  had  assembled  here  from  all  points. 
AVhile  securing  these  several  others  were  taken  in  the  adjoining  roads 
and  fields,  some  in  buggies,  some  on  horseback,  and  some  in  carts. 
Leaving  a guard  over  the  negroes  taken,  I moved  on,  under  guidance  of 
Paul,  to  Mr.  Hopkinson’s  place,  while  a small  party,  under  Messrs.  Elliott 
and  Curry  (I  omitted  to  state  that  at  Jehossee  these  gentlemen  reported 
to  me  by  order  of  the  general  commanding),  proceeded  to  Mr.  Berwick 
Legare’s  place. 

By  this  time  the  alarm  had  been  given,  and  the  negroes  were  on  the 
move  for  the  lower  part  of  the  island  ; the  number  captured  was  there- 
fore less  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.  A number  were  seen  by 
Messrs.  Elliott  and  Curry  making  their  escape.  Crossing  a long  foot- 
bridge from  Hopkinson’s  to  Mr.  Edward  Seabrook’s,  several  negroes 
were  taken  at  the  latter  place.  Our  party  was  there  joined  by  Major 
. Palmer,  who,  with  his  detachment,  had  passed  through  a number  of 
plantations,  among  others  those  of  Mr.  Evans  Eddings,  Mr.  Lastree, 
and  one  belonging  to  the  estate  of  Berwick  Legare.  At  these  places 
he  had  either  captured  or  pursued  negroes,  and  our  hands  were  now 


80  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND' EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  X\r. 

quite  full  of  prisoners.  The  iufautry  being  in  rear,  as  not  able  to  move 
with  the  celerity  of  the  cavalry,  compelled  to  move  rapidly  in  order  to 
be  ahead  of  the  alarm  which  was  now  spreading,  I could  not  stop  to 
take  notes  as  to  the  names  of  the  negroes  or  their  owners. 

The  alarm  must  have  been  communicated  in  some  way  to  the  gun- 
boat, which  was  now  seen  approaching  Mr.  Seabrook^s  place.  Leaving 
a picket  there  I proceeded  to  assemble  the  command,  which  was  scat- 
tered over  the  three  X)laces  last  mentioned,  and  covering  the  march  of 
the  captured  negroes,  I moved  back  to  Edward  Whaley’s,  where  I left 
the  negroes  under  guard,  and  taking  the  infantry  moved  ra^iidly 
back  to  Seabrook’s  to  resist  a landing,  which  seemed  imminent.  On 
the  march  two  shells  were  thrown  at  the  Seabrook  house,  but  by  the 
time  my  party  came  up  the  boat  had  retired.  Night  closing  in,  I 
quartered  the  infantry  at  Mr.  Seabrook’s  and  carried  the  cavalry  to 
Whaley’s. 

I regret  to  state  that  at  the  Legate  and  Seabrook  x>laces  3 negroes 
were  either  shot  or  drowned  and  a fourth  wounded ; 2 women  and  1 
man  ran  into  the  water,  and,  refusing  or  failing  to  come  out,  were 
fired  upon  and  disappeared  beneath  the  water. 

Early  on  the  24th  I dispatched  the  captured  negroes  under  guard, 
with  orders  to  the  lieutenant  that  they  were  to  be  reported  to  the  gen- 
eral commanding.  I then  proceeded  with  my  force  to  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Mr.  Townsend’s.  Stopxiing  at  Major  Murray’s,  I endeavored, 
with  a field  glass,  to  examine  Eddiiigsville,  but  could  discover  no  signs 
of  any  x^ersons  in  the  village. 

In  the  mean  time  Major  Palmer,  who  had  gone  to  Townsend’s,  re- 
turned with  5 negroes,  and  reported,  on  their  statement,  that  the 
enemy  were  landing  in  our  rear  at  Point  of  Pines.  As  I had  heard 
one  or  two  shells  fired  in  that  direction,  I xiresumed  they  had  thrown 
these  to  cover  the  landing,  and  thinking  it  xirndent  to  secure  my  retreat 
in  case  the  xiarty  should  be  greatly  superior  to  my  own,  I dispatched 
the  cavalry  to  cover  the  road  by  which  the  enemy  was  to  apx)roach, 
while  I endeavored  to  pass  it.  Having  x^assed  this  road,  and  the  cav- 
alry reporting  no  enemy  landed,  I concluded  that,  as  I had  visited, 
nearly  the  entire  island,  my  command  greatly  fatigued,  x^i’O visions 
scarce,  and  my  return  so  far  begun,  I had  better  continue  my  march 
home.  The  infantry  reached  Mr.  Aiken’s  summer  house  about  4 o’clock, 
after  a march  of  some  15  miles,  or  tliereabouts.  Sx)ending  the  night  on 
Jehossee,  I returned  to  camxi  about  4 o’clock  on  Saturday. 

The  result  of  the  exx)edition  was  the  caiiture  of  some  80  negroes,  men, 
women,  and  children.  I brought  oft  9 mules,  10  horses,  5 colts,  8 carts, 
1 two-horse  wagon,  2 carriages,  and  1 buggy.  The  mules  and  carts  I 
thought  might  do  for  xmblic  service,  and  the  same  for  the  horses.  The 
colts  were  bought  by  some  of  the  men.  Tlie  carriages  were  used  in 
transporting  the  sick  and  the  children.  The  buggy  was  bought  by  a 
Mr.  Price,  who  accomx)anied  the  exxDeditiou.  The  colts  and  some  of  the 
horses  not  being  available  for  x)ublic  service,  the  parties  capturing  them 
are  desirous  of  x)nrchasing  at  reasonable  x^rices. ' The  mules  will  make 
good  teams  for  army  trail  sxiortation. 

From  my  observation  and  the  rex^ort  of  my  men  1 think  there  is  very 
little  x>ro vision  on  the  island,  and  only  a small  x^ortion  of  that  can  be 
removed. 

1 burned  about  300  or  400  bushels  of  corn  and  a little  cotton,  as  fol- 
' fows : Mr.  Lastree’s,  about  200  bushels  of  corn  ; Mr.  Lerwick  Legare’s, 
near  Eddings’,  about  100  bushels  of  corn  ; Mrs.  Martha  M.  Whaley’s, 


Chap.  XV.]  EXPEDITION  TO  EDISTO  ISLAND.  81 


about  125  bushels  of  corn  j Mr.  W.  G.  Baynard’s,  small  quantity  of 
cotton  and  hay. 

The  upper  portion  of  the  island  is  completely  deserted,  and  this 
expedition  has,  1 think,  driven  off  the  island  nearly  all  the  able-bodied 
negroes,  according  to  the  information  gathered.  I think  the  negroes 
are  congregated  in  large  numbers  on  Botany  Bay,  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
fort.  They  have  destroyed  the  bridges  connecting  Botany  Bay  and 
Eddingsville  with  the  main  island.  Should  it  be  desirable,  I recommend 
that  a force  of  300  men  be  sent  to  Botany  Bay,  provided  with  the 
means  of  repairing  the  bridge  which  separates  it  from  Edisto,  and  under 
instructions  to  make  a surprise  at  night,  when  the  gunboats  cannot  use 
their  artillery.  By  this  means  I think  nearly  the  entire  force  of  negroes, 
numbering,  according  to  accounts,  some  thousand,  may  be  captured. 
From  the  confessions  of  some  of  the  negroes  taken,  I tliink  several  of 
the  party  were  concerned  in  the  attack  made  on  our  pickets  on  Satur- 
day last. 

By  permis.sion  of  the  general  commanding  I have  this  morning 
dispatched  a foraging  party  to  obtain  provisions  from  Mr.  William 
Whaley’s  place. 

The  stock  taken  in  the  expedition  is  now  in  the  hands  of  my  quar- 
termaster, subject  to  the  order  of  the  general  commanding. 

In  conclusion,  I beg  leave  to  mention  particularly  the  energy,  activ- 
ity, and  efficiency  of  Major  Palmer,  to  whose  exertions  1 think  the 
success  of  the  expedition  greatly  due. 

I also  mention  with  pleasure  the  patient  and  dieerful  endurance  of 
all  my  men,  who,  amid  cold,  rain,  and  a lack  of  provisions,  were  ready 
and  prompt  in  every  call  made  upon  them. 

Very  respectfully. 


Capt.  W.  H.  EoGtERS, 

Acting  Assistant  AdjntanP  General. 


P.  E.  STEVENS, 
Colonel  Holcombe  Legion. 


No.  3. 

Instructions  from  General  Evans  to  Colonel  Stevens. 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Adams  Eun,  January  21,  1862. 

Colonel  : I received  a report  last  night  that  the  negroes  on  Edisto 
Island  attacked  at  12  m.  yesterday  our  pickets  at  the  summer  house. 
I wish  to  capture  the  party  and  check  this  insurrection.  The  negroes 
have  evidently  been  armed  by  the  enemy,  who  are  no  doubt  lurking  in 
the  rear.  I send  you  an  order  to  go  to-morrow  with  100  infantry  and  a 
company  of  cavalry  to  attack  the  party.  Captain  Miller  has  been  in- 
structed to  furnish  every  assistance,  and  will  probably  have  the  flats  in 
position  for  you.  You  had  better  send  your  regimental  quartermaster 
to  fix  the  bridge  over  the  cut.  Should  you  not  be  able  to  cross  the 
cavalry,  you  can  dismount  a portion  and  leave  the  balance  as  a guard. 
Send  word  to  your  pickets  at  Bennett’s  Point  to  keep  a sharp  lookout 
and  to  send  word  to  Captain  Perrin.  The  battery  at  Pineberry  will 
receive  orders  to  fire  into  any  craft  that  should  attempt  to  cut  you  off*. 
I wish  you  to  take  four  days’  rations,  and  to  advance  with  caution  as  far 
on  the  island  as  possible,  making  a thorough  reconnaissance,  and  find  out 

G R R — YOL  VI 


82  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

the  position  of  the  enemy.  Should  yon  find  him  in  strength  and  posi- 
tion as  would  warrant  a successful  attack,  you  will  attack  and  drive  him 
at  least  under  cover  of  his  guns. 

Captain  Miller  reports  that  there  is  a considerable  quantity  of  pota- 
toes and  some  corn  on  the  island.  You  will  destroy  all  you  ])ossibly 
can  with  your  party.  All  negroes  taken  will  be  brought  over  to  the 
main-land  to  be  sent  to  jail.  Should  any  attempt  to  escape,  they  will 
be  shot.  On  your  return  make  a written  report  of  your  operations. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Col.  P.  F.  Stevens, 

Commanding  Holcombe  Legion. 

f Inclosure.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Second  Mil.  Hist.  S.  C., 

No.  10.  1 Charleston^  January  21,  1862. 

I.  An  expedition  to  act  against  the  enemy  in  North  Edisto  will  pro- 
ceed to  Seabrook’s  Island  without  delay. 

Cajitain  Ives,  engineer,  C.  S.  Army,  will  have  charge  of  the  attack,  be- 
ing informed  of  the  desires  of  the  brigadier- general  commanding,  and 
his  directions  will  be  obeyed  accordingly. 

Capt.  Alfred  Khett,  S.  C.  artillery,  will  have  charge  of  the  firing  party, 
and  will  receive  instruqtions  to  open  fire  from  Captain  Ives.  Col.  Clem- 
ent H.  Stevens,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  will  detail  from  the  unat- 
tached troops  in  camp  near  the  junction  of  Wappoo  and  Stono  Elvers 
such  infantry  force  as  is  requisite  for  support. 

II.  Lieut.  H.  K.  Stevens,  C.  S.  Navy,  is  detailed  as  ordnance  officer, 
and  will  report  and  communicate  with  Captains  Ives  and  Ehett. 

III.  The  commander  of  the  different  parties  will  report  to  Captain  Ives 
for  duty  on  engineer  service  until  in  action,  and  receive  instructions  from 
that  officer  in  the  absence  of  other  ordeis,  the  duty  having  been  per- 
formed. 

By  order  of  Brigadier- General  Eipley : 

LEO.  H.  WALKER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JANUARY  26-28,  1862. — Reconnaissance  to  Wilmington  Narrows,  Ga.,  and 

naval  engagement. 

REFORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — General  Robert  E.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright^  TJ.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  (7.,  January  29,  1862. 
Captain:  In  pursuance  of  the  instructions  of  the  general  command- 
ing, dated  the  21st  and  25th  instant,  I proceeded  on  the  morning  of  the 


CiiAr.  XV.]  RECONNAISSANCE  TO  WILMINGTON  NARROWS. 


83 


2Gtb,  witli  the  transports  carrying  my  command,  in  company  with  the 
gunboats,  to  Warsaw  Sound,  Ga.,  where  we  arrived  and  anchored  about 
2 o’clock  the  same  day.  The  naval  portion  ot  the  ex])edition,  commanded 
by  Capt  Charles  H.  Davis,  TJ.  S.  Navy,  was  composed  of  the  gunboats 
Ottawa,  Capt.  T.  II.  Stevens  5 the  Seneca,  Cajdain  Ammen;  tlie  Isaac 
II.  Smith,  Captain  Nicholson;  tlie  Potomska,  Captain  Watmough  ; the 
Ellen,  Captain  Budd  ; the  Western  World,  Captain  Gregory,  and  two 
armed  launches,  with  their  crews,  from  the  Wabash,  under  the  command 
of  Capt.  C.  B.  P.  Podgers,  U.  S.  Navy. 

It  was  arranged  between  Cai)tain  Davis  and  myself  that  two  comt)a- 
nies  of  troops  should  be  placed  onboard  the  gunboats,  and  that  the  latter 
should  prot;eed  to  reconnoiter  the  passage  known  on  our  ma])s  as  Wil- 
mington Narrows.  Accordingly  the  next  morning,  the  troops  having 
been  taken  on  board,  the  gunboats  proceeded  up  the  Narrows,  leaving 
the  transports  at  anchor  in  the  sound.  1 accompanied  Captain  Davis, 
in  the  Ottawa.  No  obstruction  to  our  ])rogress  was  met  with,  or  any 
signs  of  an  enemy  discovered,  before  reaching  a position  in  the  Narrows 
between  the  plantations  marked  on  our  sketches  as  Scriven’s  and  Gib- 
son’s. At  this  point  the  passage  forks,  and  it  was  discovered  that  the 
one  leading  to  the  right  was  obstructed  by  a double  line  of  piling  of 
heavy  timber,  near  which  we  anchored. 

Soon  after  anchoring  I went  on  shore  with  Captain  Podgers,  of  the 
Navy,  to  examine  the  lower  of  the  three  jdantations,  taking  with  us,  to 
cover  the  landing,  the  two  large  launches,  each  carrying  a boat  howitzer, 
and  to  serve  as  skirmishers  after  landing  20  men  from  the  troops  were 
taken,  to  act  in  connection  with  the  launches’  crews,  which  were  armed 
with  rifles.  The  place  was  found  to  be  utterly  deserted,  with  no  evi- 
dence of  its  having  been  occupied  for  weeks  and  perhaps  months.  All 
the  movable  property  of  every  description  had  b(en  carried  off.  No 
signs  of  life  were  visible.  Soon  alter  our  return  on  board,  however,  a 
party  of  some  5 or  G men  were  seen  from  one  of  the  gunboats,  who  were 
dispersed  by  a shot  from  the  vessel. 

The  following  morning,  the  28th,  I started  in  a small  boat  with  Lieu- 
tenant Barnes,  of  the  AVabash,  temporarily  with  the  launches,  to  examine 
the  Narrows  above  the  piles.  Lieutenant  Barnes  had  been  over  the 
same  ground  the  evening  before,  with  the  black  pilot  Isaac,  to  a point 
which  the  latter  represented  as  within  a short  distance  of  the  entrance 
into  Saint  Augustine  Creek.  We  proceeded  a little  farther  only,  as  we 
came  to  fast  land,  where  it  was  probable  that  pickets  would  be  stationed, 
and,  as  we  confident!}^  believed,  close  to  the  junction  of  the  two  creeks. 
The  banks  up  to  this  ])oint  were  of  soft  mud,  rendering  it  impracticable  to 
land,  and  overgrown  with  high  grass,  which  made  it  difficult  to  see  the 
surrounding  country.  We  took  carefully  the  bearings  of  the  different 
reaches  of  the  creek,  and,  as  often  as  we  could  see  them,  of  surrounding 
objects.  The  soundings  nowhere  showed  a less  depth  of  water  than  20 
feet,  and  the  width  is  sufficient  for  any  of  the  gunboats.  The  piling 
above  referred  to  was  therefore  the  only  obstacle  to  the  passage  of  the 
gunboats  so  Ihr  as  we  iienetrated,  and  this  it  is  no  doubt  practicable  to 
remove. 

Just  as  we  were  preparing  to  return  we  perceived  the  rebel  gunboats, 
five  in  number,  coming  down  from  yavttnuah,  and  soon  after  reaching  our 
vessels  the  enemy  ai)i)eared  to  be  within  the  Savannah  Piver.  Our  gun- 
boats at  once  opened  fire,  as  did  those  under  the  command  of  Capt.  John 
Podgers,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Savannah  Piver.  The  leading  rebel 
boat,  bearing  a flag-officer’s  pennant,  was  soon  apparently  quite  disabled, 
and,  turning  back,  made  her  way  slowly  to  Savannah  in  comi)any  with 


84  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

one  of  tlie  others.  The  remaining  three  proceeded  on  to  Fort  Pulaski. 
All  were  represented  to  have  had  barges  in  tow.  In  the  afternoon, 
while  Captain  Rodgers  and  myself  were  on  shore  at  the  plantation  of 
Scriven  and  Gibson,  the  three  rebel  boats  last  referred  to  returned  up 
the  river,  and  the  tiring  recommenced,  but  the  boats  got  past  apparently 
without  serious  damage,  and  reached  Savannah.  This  firing,  though  no 
part  of  the  plan,  was  very  instructive  in  connection  with  any  project  for 
cutting  off  Fort  Pulaski  by  batteries  on  Wilmington  Island  or  by  gun- 
boats lying  at  or  below  the  obstructions.  It  showed  conclusively  to  my 
mind  that  steamers  might  run  the  gauntlet,  not  without  danger,  but 
without  any  serious  risk,  even  under  so  heavy  and  well-directed  a fire  as 
that  delivered  by  our  gunboats.  The  position  from  which  to  cut  off' com- 
munication between  the  fort  and  Savannah  by  way  of  the  river  must 
therefore  be  sought  higher  up. 

The  plat  of  the  courses  of  the  stream  would  indicate  that  it  empties 
directly  into  the  Savannah  River,  and  not  into  Saint  Augustine  Creek, 
as  had  been  supposed,  and  other  circumstances  would  seem  to  confirm 
this  conclusion,  though  contrary  to  some  of  the  evidence  obtained. 
However  this  iimy  be,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  stream  we  followed 
gradually  approaches  the  river,  from  which  it  can  be  separated  only  by 
a narrow  strip  of  marsh  at  the  point  reached  by  us  in  the  boat.  A posi- 
tion might,  therefore,  be  taken  uii  by  the  gunboats,  after  removing  the 
obstructions,  from  which  the  river  might  be  commanded,  and  it  is  quite 
possible  that  the  headland  alluded  to  as  just  above  the  point  reached 
by  us  would  permit  the  establishment  of  a battery  which  would  com- 
mand both  the  Saint  Augustine  Creek  and  the  Savannah  River. 

Wilmington  Island,  as  a simple  military  position,  is,  in  my  judgment, 
of  no  importance  whatever,  and  any  troops  landed  there  could  be  of  no 
real  service.  But  should  it  be  decided  to  cut  off  all  communication  by 
the  Savannah  River,  either  by  gunboats  stationed  above  or  by  the 
establishment  of  the  battery  alluded  to,  or  by  both,  then  the  occupation 
of  the  island  becomes  a matter  of  high  importance,  as  in  this  way  onl^^ 
can  the  line  of  communication  with  our  base  be  kept  open.  Should  it 
therefore  be  decided  to  intercept  the  river  communication  in  this  waj^, 
or  to  use  the  passage  in  any  ulterior  movements  on  Savannah,  I would 
recommend  the  occupation  of  the  island  in  force;  otherwise  not.  The 
portion  of  the  island  above  Gibson’s  is  marshy  for  one  and  a half  to  two 
miles  back  from  the  bank  of  the  creek,  and  therefore  no  battery  could,  I 
think,  be  established  by  the  enemy  at  any  jioint  abov^e  Gibson’s  which 
could  seriously  annoy  our  gunboats.  The  portion  of  the  island  below 
the  plantation  is  also  marshy. 

Having  made  tlie  reconnaissance  as  above  detailed,  the  gunboats 
returned  to  Warsaw  Sound,  and  after  consultation  with  Captain  Davis, 
whose  orders  required  him  to  return  and  report,  I thought  it  best  to 
return  with  him  and  report  in  person.  I accordingly  arrived  here  in  the 
Ottawa  just  before  sunset  this  evening,  leaving  the  transports  and  the 
three  other  gunboats  at  anchor  in  the  sound.  I should  have  stated  our 
nearest  approach  to  Fort  Pulaski  was  within  long  range — say  2 miles — 
while  the  distance  from  the  fort  to  our  anchorage  near  the  obstructions 
was  much  greater  and  entirely  beyond  range. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 

Capt.  L.  H.  Pelouze, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Ildqrs.  ExpeW’y  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


Chap.  XV.l 


RECONNAISSANCE  TO  WRIGHT  RIVER. 


85 


NTo.  2. 

Report  of  General  Robert  E.  Lee^  C.  S.  Army. 

Savannah,  Ga.,  January  29,  18G2. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  Sec- 
retary of  War,  that  five  [!]  days  since  it  was  discovered  that  the  enemy 
were  at  work  removing  the  obstructions  placed  in  Wall’s  Cut.  This  cut 
is  the  pass  between  Daufuskie  Eiver  and  Wright  River,  in  South  Caro- 
lina, and  forms  part  of  the  inland  communication  between  Savannah 
River  and  Port  Royal  Harbor.  This  communication  traverses  an  exten- 
sive jnarsh,  is  crooked,  shallow,  and  difficult  of  navigation,  and  though 
it  was  apparent  that  unless  protected  by  batteries  any  artificial  obstruc- 
tions may  be  removed,  yet  as  the  marsh  is  too  soft  and  impassable  to 
admit  the  construction  of  a battery^  it  was  the  only  obstacle  that  could 
be  opposed  to  its  navigation.  The  obstruction  consisted  of  the  hull  of 
a large  schooner,  sunk  in  the  narrowest  and  shoalest  part  of  the  cut, 
with  rows  of  piles  driven  across  on  each  side.  A similar  obstruction 
was  placed  in  Wilmington  Narrows,  a small  creek  west  of  the  Savan- 
nah, connecting  Wilmington  River  and  Saint  Augustine  Creek.  Hay 
before  yesterday  seven  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  were  discovered  at 
Wall’s  Cut  and  six  in  Wilmington  Narrows.  They  had  reached  the 
obstructions  in  each  stream,  and  were  apparently  endeavoring  to  work 
through.  Plag  Officer  Tatnall,  with  his  gunboats,  descended  the  Savan- 
nah River  and  boldly  engaged  them,  but  the  range  and  caliber  of  their 
guns  were  so  superior  to  his,  that  after  an  hour’s  trial  he  had  to  haul  off’, 
as  he  found  that  while  their  shot  and  shell  were  falling  around  him,  his 
shot  fell  short  of  them.  His  boats  were,  however,  unharmed.  Their 
position  was  such  as  to  disturb  the  passage  of  the  Savannah,  and  the 
boat  plying  between  the  city  and  Fort  Pulaski  received  three  shots 
through  her  upper  works.  If  the  enemy  succeed  in  removing  the  obsta- 
cles in  Wall’s  Cut  and  Wilmington  Narrows,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
their  reaching  the  Savannah  River,  and  we  have  nothing  afloat  that 
can  contend  against  them.  The  communication  between  Savannah  and 
Fort  Pulaski  will  then  be  cut  off.  The  latter  is  supplied  with  four 
months’  provisions,  and  we  must  endeavor  to  defend  the  city.  To-day 
I have  caused  to  be  sunk  in  Wilmington  Narrows  the  floating  dock  of 
this  city.  I hope  this  passage  at  least  will  be  effectually  obstructed. 

1 am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General^  Riehmondj  Va. 


FEBRUARY  6,  1862.^Eeconnaissance  to  Wright  River,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Maj.  Oliver  T.  Beard^  Forty-eighth  Rew  Yorh  Infantry. 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  February  6,  1862. 
GENERTtL:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  reconnaissance  or- 
dered by  you  of  Wright  River,  its  tributary  creeks,  and  the  land  adjacent 


86 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XV. 


tliereto,  together  with  the  new  fortifications  and  raft  in  the  Savannah 
River,  lias  been  made. 

Accoin})anyiug  this  report  and  necessarily  forming  a part  thereof  are 
maps  of  the  section  of  country  embraced  in  the  reconnaissance.* 

The  soundings  or  depths  of  water  as  shown  in  these  maps  were  made 
with  a great  deal  of  care  and  noted  at  the  particular  part  of  the  rivers 
where  made,  so  that  there  might  be  no  error  as  to  the  particular  loca- 
tion of  any  soundings.  They  were  always  made  rather  under  than  over 
the  mark,  but  especial  care  was  taken  to  have  them  precise  and  so  note 
them. 

It  will  be  perceived  that  the  course  of  Wright  River  is  not  precisely 
as  laid  down  in  the  charts  in  the  engineers’  hands.  The  courses  as  they 
are  here  laid  down  are  made  up  from  notes  at  each  turn  and  bend  of 
the  river,  being  guided  solely  by  a pocket  compass.  I think  that  in  this 
manner  I have  been  enabled  to  show  very  nearly  the  true  course  of  the 
river  and  its  tributaries  much  more  accurately  than  they  are  laid  down 
in  other  maps.  There  are  many  laore  trees  on  Hog  Marsh  Island  than 
are  laid  down  on  the  accompanying  map,  but  all  those  not  so  laid  down 
are  palmetto,  and  those  on  that  island  grow  out  of  the  marsh,  their  base 
being  surrounded  by  water  during  high  tides.  The  trees  shown  on  this 
island  are  scrub  pines,  and  are  found  in  clumps  on  small  dry  spots  scat- 
tered about  through  the  marsh.  These  dry  spots  vary  in  diameter  from 
20  to  100  feet,  no  one  spot  being  found  larger  than  the  maximum  men- 
tioned. The  island  cannot  be  used  for  military  purposes. 

The  woods  laid  down  north  of  WTight  River  are  noted  as  taken  from 
three  points  of  observation — 1st,  from  the  top  of  a large  and  high  rice- 
barn  on  the  bank  of  the  Savannah  River;  2d,  from  the  several  ])oints  of 
Wright  River  and  its  upi^er  tributaries,  wliere  soundings  weie  made; 
and,  3d,  from  Red  Bank,  on  ^^ew  River.  These  observations  showed 
the  heavy  timber,  which  in  that  vicinity  always  grows  on  dry  ground, 
to  continue  in  an  irregular  line,  unbroken  except  by  plantations  from 
Red  Bank,  on  New  River,  to  the  Union  causeway  near  Lunbridge’s  plan- 
tation. There  are  a large  number  of  cotton  plantations  embraced  in 
this  region,  especially  in  that  portion  of  it  nearest  Nevv^  River.  Leaving 
this,  the  character  of  the  soil  gradually  changes,  until  from  being  a 
sandy  clay  at  Red  Bank  it  becomes  at  Lunbridge’s  a i)orous,  black,  light 
loam,  which  is  the  only  kind  of  soil  used  for  the  culture  of  rice. 

The  rice  plantations  which  are  noted  east  of  the  Union  causeway  are 
of  this  character.  An  examination  of  the  soil  here  shows  that  it  looks 
very  much  like  the  debris  of  decayed  trees  and  roots  ; very  much  of  it 
is  indeed  nothing  else.  All  this  land  is  below  the  level  of  high  tides, 
dikes  thrown  about  the  various  fields  preventing  overflow.  All  these 
fields  are  very  much  cut  up  with  ditches  and  canals ; so  much  so  as  to 
be  impassable  by  either  cavalry,  artillery,  or  infantry  in  face  of  an  enemy. 
The  ditches  are  useless  except  as  so  many  barriers,  but  all  the  canals 
might  be  used  as  rifle-pits,  and  all  the  dikes  for  the  same  purpose,  or  to 
plant  artillery  behind,  the  soil  being  dry  enough  for  this  pur])ose. 
Though  these  plantations  are  surrounded  on  the  front  and  rear  by 
swamps,  the  canals  entering  them  from  bordering  rivers  or  creeks  afl'ord 
easy  access  to  the  dry  ground  on  them. 

There  are  about  15,001)  bushels  of  rice  on  the  plantations  which  I visited. 
The  negroes  have  mostly  all  been  moved  u}>  the  country.  The  new  rebel 
earthworks  on  an  island  in  the  Savannah  River  is  completed.  Two 
guns  were  mounted  on  Sunday  last,  the  third  was  in  the  shears,  while  a 


^ Not  loimd. 


Chap.  XV.] 


RECONNAISSANCE  TO  WRIGHT  RIVER. 


87 


steamer  was  lying  alongside  the  island  with  two  more  gnns  evidently 
intended  to  be  landed.  All  the  i^ersons  seen  at  work  here  Avere  negroes. 

The  raft  which  is  nf*ar  this  point  I found  to  be  between  (JOO  and  800 
feet  long  and  from  20  to  30  feet  wide,  extending  across  the  channel  at 
this  part  of  the  river.  Portions  of  the  raft  have  been  danbed  with  some 
substance,  probably  tar  or  pitch.  On  the  entire  raft  there  is  perhaps  as 
much  as  six  or  eight  cords  of  what  is  commonly  called  cord- wood.  This 
has  become  scattered  about  the  raft  in  all  directions,  until  now  there  are 
scarcely  two  sticks  together  in  any  one  point.  Pour  piles  have  been 
driven  near  the  eastern  end  of  the  raft.  I could  see  none  on  the  western. 

The  pile-driver  which  was  reported  as  being  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
raft  for  about  two  weeks  was  doubtless  at  work  driving  piles  at  the 
Port  Jackson  wharf,  as  I could  plainly  see  that  new  piles  have  been 
recently  driven  there.  The  map  of  the  raft  and  fort  will  show  my  idea, 
but  1 am  firmly  convinced  that  this  raft  was  never  designed  to  be  used 
for  any  purpose  at  any  point  below  the  north  end  of  Elba  Island.  I 
am  also  of  the  opinion  that  it  is  not  intended  to  be  moved  from  the 
present  position  except  in  case  of  an  attack  upon  Port  Jackson.  It  is 
a harmless  thing  and  very  poorly  gotten  up. 

I think  that  an  addition  has  been  made  to  the  southerly  end  of  Port 
Jackson,  as  noted  by  the  line  A B 0,  on  map  No.  2.  This  seems  to  be 
a wall,  I think,  of  square  logs,  the  ends  buried  in  the  ground,  and  fitting 
A^ery  nicely  together.  The  face  A 0 has  eight  openings  in  it,  and  the 
face  0 B has  sixteen  openings  and  a door  j these,  I think,  are  for  rifle 
purposes. 

The  barbette  guns  on  the  fort  have  been  coAwed  oaw  with  logs  and 
dirt.  In  the  rebel  camp  below  Port  Jackson  I should  judge  there  are 
about  700  persons.  No  other  camps  could  be  seen  betAveen  that  and 
Augustine  Creek,  nor  aboA^e  the  fort  toward  Savannah,  nor  are  there  anj^ 
camps  on  the  Carolina  side  between  the  causeway  and  Wright  ItiA^er, 
on  the  SaAmnnah,  except  12  men  about  one  half  mile  up  the  causeway. 

The  rebel  camp  near  New  Eiver  does  not  probably  contain  over  200 
I)ersons,  as  there  were  not  fires  for  OA^er  that  number. 

On  New  Elver,  at  Box’s,  a blufi*  makes  in,  running  about  one-half  mile 
on  the  riAW  and  thence  extending  back,  according  to  the  report  of  a 
negro  on  the  place,  to  Blufi'ton.  This  is  the  only  dry  ground  met  on 
the  right  bank  of  New  Eiver,  as  far  as  I was  enabled  to  observe. 

Un  the  left  bank  of  the  riAW,  the  first  dry  firm  ground  is  met  at  Eed 
Bank,  extending  along  the  river  about  IJ  miles ; a swamp  borders  this 
on  the  north,  and  this  is  followed  by  another  bank  of  dry  land,  extend- 
ing about  three-fourths  of  a mile  along  the  river.  No  more  firm  ground 
is  met  for  5 miles  up  the  riAW.  At  Eed  Bank  there  is  a beautiful  open 
plain  of  about  600  acres;  this  is  skirted  by  a wood,  which  continues 
until  the  swamp  is  again  met,  about  If  miles  from  the  open  plain.  There 
are,  lioweA^er,  some  upland  cotton  plantations  in  this  area. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  T.  BEAED, 

Major ^ Forty-eighth  New  Yorh  Volunteers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps. 


88  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


FEBRUARY  10,  1862. — Skirmish  on  Bamv/ell’s  Island,  S.  C. 


No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Capt.  Gordon  Z.  Dimock,  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  1. 


Eeport  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens.^  U.  8.  Army. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Beaufort^' 8.  C.,  February  11,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  to  report  for  the  information  of  the  commanding;  general 
that  a party  of  the  enemj^  landed  on  Barnwell’s  Island  last  night  and 
made  an  attack  on  our  pickets.  Lieutenant  Foot,  in  command  of  the 
pickets,  held  his  ground  till  re-enforced  by  Captain  Dimock  with  a por- 
tion of  his  command  from  Seabrook,  when  the  whole  force  pushed  for- 
ward and  drove  the  enem^'  to  his  boats.  It  was  a very  handsome  affair, 
exceedingly  creditable  to  all  engaged,  and  gives  convincing  proof  that 
the  command  is  wide  awake  and  ready  for  emergencies. 

I will  particularly  call  the  attention  of  the  commanding  general  to 
the  good  conduct  of  Captain  Dimock  and  Lieutenant  Foot,  Fiftieth 
Begiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  on  the  occasion. 

A copy  of  Captain  Dimock’s  report  is  herewith  inclosed. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 


Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 

Capt.  L.  H.  Pelouze, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General  E.  (7.,  Hilton  Head,  8.  G. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  Gordon  Z.  Bimoelc,  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Seabrook,  February  11,  1862. 

Last  night  about  10  o’clock  I was  starrled  by  the  report  of  several 
guns  on  Barnwell’s  Island.  I took  a row-boat  full  of  Company  D and 
went  over,  leaving  word  for  my  command  to  follow — part  immediately 
and  part  should  there  be  more  liring.  Went  on  a double-quick  to  cause- 
way. Saw  men  on  the  farther  end  of-  the  causeway  in  the  underbrush 
and  the  glistening  of  several  bayonets.  As  we  came  they  retired  more 
into  the  shade.  Lieutenant  Foot,  with  3 men,  advanced  on  the  cause- 
way to  reconnoiter,  followed  by  10  or  15  more,  who  advanced  in  parties 
of  3,  at  intervals  of  one  or  two  rods,  with  directioiis,  if  fired  upon,  to  fire 
and  lie  down  on  the  sides  of  the  causeway  to  load.  As  they  approached 
the  farther  end  of  the  causeway  they  saw  3 or  4 men,  and  fired  upon 
them.  They  continued  to  advance,  while  I brought  up  the  main  force 
in  parties  of  9 and  10,  so  placed  in  the  shade  as  to  cover  the  retreat  of 
the  skirmishers  and  check  the  advance  of  the  rebels.  Having  ])assed 
beyond  the  trees  and  uuderbrnsh  at  the  farther  end  of  the  causeway, 
I left  a small  force  there  and  took  a double-quick  to  the  next  causeway. 
As  we  passed  the  negro  houses  one  negro  exclaimed,  ‘‘Gr(‘at  many 
rebels  down  there,  sir.”  As  we  approached  the  next  causeway  skir- 
mishers were  again  thrown  out,  led  by  Lieutenant  Foot.  Passing  cau- 


Chap.  XV.J 


OCCUPATION  OF  EDISTO  ISLAND. 


89 


tiously  through  the  bushes  at  this  end  of  the  causeway,  they  proceeded 
across  the  causeway  until  they  were  approaching  the  farther  end.  Tliey 
were  ordered  to  lialt  by  a voice  behind  the  bushes.  At  the  second  com- 
mand he  stepped  out  and  fired.  The  shot  was  promptly  returned,  and 
my  whole  command  started  forward  on  a double-quick.  Two  men  were 
seen  running  to  the  left  of  Little  Bull  Island,  and  seveial  were  lieaid  to 
run  forward  and  to  the  right.  We  then  proceeded  cautiously  through 
the  hedge  at  the  farther  end  of  the  causev/ay  into  the  oi)en  field,  and 
deployed  skirmishers  right  and  left  to  the  hedges,  while  a i)arty  took  a 
double  quick  for  the  next  causeway.  Sentinels  were  placed  at  each  end 
of  the  second  causewaiy,  and  the  third  causeway  crossed  in  the  same 
cautious  manner.  When  we  got  through  tbe  bushes  to  the  shore  of 
Broad  Biver  it  was  evident  that  two  boats  had  just  left  the  beach,  and 
their  wake  was  visible  on  the  surface  of  the  still  water.  One  very  large 
wake  was  seen,  very  rough  in  its  center,  and  the  sound  of  wheels  turn- 
ing in  the  water  could  be  heard  beyond  Mackay’s  Point.  Company  B 
was  left  in  detachments  at  the  Trescott  house,  first  causeway,  and  negro 
houses. 

The  pickets  heard  a noise  in  the  field  beyond  the  marsh  to  the  left  of 
the  road  before  the  firing,  and  the  negroes’  dogs,  which  are  usually  very 
noisy  at  the  least  stir,  were  not  heard  to  Ijark.  We  examined  the  field 
to  the  left  of  the  road,  and  could  find  numerous  tracks  in  the  soft  mud 
between  the  cotton  rows.  The  tracks  of  a bare  foot  were  also  seen,  sup- 
posed to  be  the  track  of  a negro  guide.  Tracks  in  the  field  south  of  the 
negro  houses  were  observed  going  both  east  and  west,  presumed  to  have 
been  made  by  the  rebel  party  having  turned  out  into  the  field  to  avoid 
the  negro  houses  and  the  dogs. 

When  the  attacking  party  appeared  on  the  farther  end  of  the  first 
causeway  they  were  halted  by  the  i)icket  three  times.  At  the  third  com- 
mand they  discharged  a whole  volley  at  the  pickets.  The  pickets  fired 
their  pieces,  and  continued  to  load  and  fire  whenever  a rebel  could  be 
seen. 

Fires  were  seen  on  the  main-land  in  the  field  west  of  the  fort,  as  if 
there  might  be  a small  encampment  there.  It  might  be  tire  in  the  woods. 

Nothing  else  of  interest  occurred. 

Bespectfully, 


Major  Overton. 


G.  Z.  DIMOCK, 
Captain^  Commanding  at  Seabrooh 


FEBRUARY  11, 1862. — Occupation  of  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  by  the  Union  forces. 

Report  of  Col.  Henry  Moore,  Forty -seventh  New  Yorlc  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-seventh  Kegt.  N.  Y.  S.  Y.  Troops, 
Edisto  Island,  8.  C.,  February  15,  1852. 

Sir:  Pursuant  to  Army  Regulations,  page  104,  paragraph  716, 1 take 
the  earliest  opportunity  to  inform  you,  both  by  letter  and  by  chart,  of 
the  occupation  of  this  island  by  the  force  under  my  command. 

Pursuant  to  Special  Orders,  No.  69,  I was  ordered  by  General  T.  W. 
Sherman,  of  the  expeditionary  corps,  to  proceed  to  this  point,  on  North 
Edisto  River,  and  establish  this  post.  After  some  reconnqitering  I 
finally  located  myself  at  this  place,  known  as  Point  of  Pines,  only  25 
miles  from  Charieston.  The  enemy  are  all  around  us.  By  the  aid  of 
light-draught  gunboats,  which  I am  expecting  daily  from  Port  Royal, 
to  keep  them  at  bay,  if  troops  sufficient,  say  at  the  most  10,000,  could 


90  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 


be  forwarded  here,  in  less  than  three  days  we  could  be  in  Charleston. 
I consider  this  point  the  great  key  to  Charleston,  and  trust  this  point 
will  meet  with  your  immediate  consideration,  as  time  may  be  everything 
to  us  in  the  premises. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfullv,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  MOORE, 
Colonel.,  Commanding  Post 

L.  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General,  Washington,  D.  C. 


FEBRUARY  15,  1862. — Action  at  Venus  Point,  Ga. 

REFORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele,  U.  S.  Arm3^ 

• No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  February  17,  1862. 
Sir  : A rebel  steamer,  the  Ida,  ran  by  our  battery  on  the  Savannah 
River  on  the  14th  instant  for  Fort  Pulaski.  The  guns  had  not  been 
worked  nor  the  ranges  obtained.  On  the  next  day  she  attempted  to 
return,  and  four  of  TatnalFs  gunboats  came  down  from  Savannah  to 
cover  her.  They  were  all  sent  back  to  their  places  of  departure,  and 
one  of  them  seriously  crippled. 

I inclose  herewith  the  copy  of  General  Yiele’s  report  on  the  subject. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

The  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington,  D.  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele,  TI.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Savannah  River,  February  16,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  batteries  on  Venus  Point 
were  attacked  at  3 o’clock  p.  m.  on  yesterday  by  four  rebel  gunboats 
with  a view  of  effecting  a i)assage  from  Fort  Pulaski  for  the  rebel 
steamer  then  at  that  place.  After  an  engagement  of  one  hour  the 
rebels  were  driven  off',  the  flag  steamer  being  disabled  and  taken  in 
tow,  and  the  steamer  that  attempted  the  passage  of  the  river  returning 
to  Fort  Pulaski.  The  guns  were  manned  by  the  Third  Rhode  Island 


Chap.  XV.] 


RECONNAISSANCE  UP  BULL  RIVER,  ETC. 


91 


detacliment,  under  Captain  Gould,  and  eflectively  worked.  There  was 
no  loss  on  our  side. 

Ver^^  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EGBEKT  L.  VIELE, 
Brigadier-  Generalj  Commanding, 

Capt.  L.'  H.  Pelouze, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


FEBRUARY  23-26,  1862. — Reconnaissance  up  Bull  River  and  Schooner 

Channel,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  JJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Second  Briuade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Beaufort^  S.  (7.,  February  27,  18G2. 

Sir  : I have  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  commanding  general, 
that  in  pursuance  to  instructions  from  these  headquarters  Captain  Ely, 
Eighth  Regiment  Michigan  Volunteers,  and  commanding  on  Ladies  and 
Saint  Helena  Islands,  with  22  men  of  his  own  company  and  that  of  Lieu- 
tenant Hoyle,  and  accompanied  by  Lieutenants  Doyle,  Badger,  and 
Brown,  all  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  Regiment,  left  Ladies  Island  on  the 
morning  of  Sunday,  February  23,  to  make  an  examination  of  Bull  River 
and  the  enemy’s  force  in  that  vicinity.  The  party  emi)loyed  three  row- 
boats. The  services  of  a negro  belonging  to  Robert  Barnwell,  who  had 
lately  come  down  the  river,  were  secured  as  guide.  From  Coosaw  Island 
another  negro,  named  Oyas,  was  obtained,  ^who  subsequently  proved  of 
great  service  from  the  intimate  knowledge  he  possessed  of  the  country 
under  examination. 

Captain  Ely  reports  substantially  as  follows : After  leaving  Ladies’ 
Island  at  Brick  yard  Point,  and  passing  down  the  Coosaw  to  the  mouth 
of  Bull  River,  a distance  of  9 miles,  he  ascended  the  stream  to  Schooner 
Channel.  He  then  proceeded  up  Schooner  Channel  until  he  Came  to  the 
mouth  of  the  creek  which  passes  by  Willmar’s  Island.  There  he  landed, 
idaced  his  men  under  cover  of  the  woods,  and  with  a small  party  passed 
over  the  island  and  found  it  entirely  uninhabited.  Starting  at  nightfall 
he  passed  up  the  creek  to  near  within  80  rods  of  its  intersection  with 
North  Wimbee  River,  which  is  about  12  miles  from  the  mouth  of  Bull 
River.  Here  he  left  the  bulk  of  his  party,  and  in  his  own  boat,  with  onl}" 
3 men,  jiassed  into  and  uj)  the  North  Wimbee  branch  to  the  landing 
at  Barnwell’s  plantation,  a mile  distant.  This  landing  is  on  the  right 
bank.  This  point  was  entirely  unguarded.  He  landed,  examined  the 
shore  for  some  distance,  and  visited  Robert  Barnwell’s  j)lantation. 
There  he  found  an  old  xdantation  negro,  who  came  to  Robert  Barnwell’s 
from  Pocotaligo  by  way  of  Garden’s  Corner  on  the  22d  instant,  and  who 
reported  that  he  saw  but  few  troops  at  the  latter  place,  probably  not  a 
hundred  all  told ; that  the  greater  i)art  of  the  troops  had  been  withdrawn 
to  Pocotaligo,  and  that  the  boats  at  the  bridge  near  Garden’s  Corner 
were  guarded  by  2 men.  These  boats  were  row-boats  and  flats,  at  least 
fifty  in  number  (some  negroes  estimated  the  number  as  high  as  one  hun- 
dred). Captain  Ely  also  met  another  negro,  who  had  come  down  from. 
Walterborough  the  same  day  with  a loaded  team.  From  him  he  learned 
that  the  nearest  picket,  com^iosed  of  0 men,  was  1 J miles  distant,  at  the 
fork  of  tlie  roads  connecting  respectively  with  Garden’s  Corner  and  Com- 
bahee  Ferry.  He  likewise  said  he  had  seen  no  soldiers  between  that 
l)oint  and  the  ferry. 

With  this  information  Cajjtain  Ely  brought  his  whole  party  together 


92 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


at  tlie  Eobert  Barnwell  Landing,  placed  them  under  cover,  and  with  his 
3 men  and  a negro  guide  started  for  the  Combahee  Ferry.  He  kept 
in  the  woods,  passed  within  40  or  50  rods  of  the  pickets  at  the  cross-roads, 
and  pushed  about  1 mile  beyond  there,  where  the  country  became  so 
densely  wooded  and  was  so  intersected  by  streams  and  marshes  that 
Captain  Ely  was  unable  to  proceed  farther.  He  learned,  however, 
that  the  principal  force  of  the  enemy,  estimated  at  possibly  300  men,  is 
stationed  at  Combahee  Church,  about  2 miles  from  the  ferry,  on  the 
Garden’s  Corner  road,  and  that  to  the  left  of  the  ferry  there  are  two 
pieces  of  artillery,  placed  behind  an  earthwork  and  covered  with  pine 
brush. 

On  his  return  he  proceeded  to  Bush  Church,  examined  the  country  in 
its  vicinity,  and,  favored  by  the  woods  in  its  immediate  vicinity,  passed 
entirely  around  it.  At  Bush  Church  he  found  only  about  30  men,  quar- 
tered in  the  church  itself  They  stationed  pickets  a quarter  of  a mile 
down  toward  the  Chisolm  Landing,  on  the  Coosaw,  and  about  the  same 
distance  uj)  the  road  toward  Port  Eoyal  Ferry.  Their  headquarters  are 
some  1 J miles  in  rear  of  the  Adams  Landing,  and  the  force  there  is  about 
the  same  as  at  Combahee  Church. 

Captain  Ely  also  examined  the  country  between  Stuart’s  plantation 
and  Bush  Church.  It  consists  of  open  woods  and  fields,  and  furnishes 
the  best  route  to  Bush  Church  from  the  river.  At  Stuart’s  troops  should 
be  landed  to  operate  against  Bush  Church.  The  distance  is  only  1 
mile.  Edward  Barnwell  lias  a plantation  a mile  below  Stuart’s.  All 
these  plantations  are  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river.  From  Eobert  Barn- 
well’s i)lace  a causeway  leads  to  Bush  Church.  A wide  gap  has  been 
made  in  it,  through  which  boats  can  pass,  and  which  compelled  Captain 
Ely  to  make  a long  detour  up  t he  river  to  reach  the  latter  place.  Boats 
can  go  above  Eobert  Barnwell’s  to  Potter’s. 

Captain  Ely  could  easily  have  surprised  and  captured  the  pickets  at 
Bush  Church,  and  both  he  and  his  command  felt  some  inclination  to 
attempt  it.  His  instructions  were,  however,  to  get  information,  and  he 
found  no  difficulty  in  controlling  his  command. 

In  the  morning,  before  the  break  of  day.  Captain  Ely  returned  to  his 
men  and  boats,  crossed  back  to  the  channel  from  whence  he  came 
undiscovered  by  any  of  the  enemy,  and  returning  came  in  sight  of 
Field’s  Point,  where  he  discovered  a few  men  at  work  apparently  repair- 
ing the  fort,  and  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Combahee  Eiver  were  extensive 
rice  fields  on  fire,  which  in  the  evening  were  visible  at  a long  distance. 

The  enemy’s  force,  as  far  as  Captain  Ely  could  learn,  is  in  that  direc- 
tion very  small  at  the  present  time.  Many  of  the  ])icket  stations  have 
been  taken  ui)  lately.  The  Combahee  Ferry  is  made  passable  by  flats, 
so  that  teams  pass  over  as  on  a bridge.  Captain  Ely  reached  Brick- 
yard Point  on  the  morning  of  February  26,  and  was  therefore  absent 
two  days  and  three  nights. 

The  reconnaissance  of  Captain  Ely  does  him  great  credit,  and  has 
resulted  both  in  verifying  and  adding  to  the  information  already 
obtained.  I have  instructed  him  to  continue  his  reconnaissances,  look- 
ing particularly  to  the  Ashepoo  Eiver.  The  above  account  is  nearly  in 
his  own  words,  and  I have  adopted  the  above  form  in  order  to  incor- 
porate with  the  details  of  his  written  report  details  which  I have  gath- 
ered from  him  on  a i)ersonal  conference. 

I am,  sir,  verv  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVEI^S, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Capt.  L.  H.  Pelouze, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Epedi’y  Corps,  Hilton  Read,  S.  C. 


Chap.  XV.l 


EVACUATION  OF  AMELIA  ISLAND. 


93 


MARCH  3,  1862.— Evacuation  of  Amelia  Island,  Fla.,  by  the  Confederate 

forces. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Geu.  James  H.  Trapier,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  Edward  Hopkius,  Fourth  Florida  Inlautry. 


Ko.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  IT.  Trapier^  C.  8.  Army. 

Headquaeters  Provisional  Force, 

Tallahassee.)  Fla.,  March  28,  18G2. 

Major  : In  consequence  of  the  illness  of  Col.  Edward  Hopkins,  Fourth 
Eegiment  Florida  Volunteers,  the  officer  in  command  of  the  post  at 
Amelia  Island  at  the  time  of  its  evacuation  by  our  troops,  I have  had 
no  official  report  from  him.  I have  the  honor,  however,  to  submit  for 
the  information  of  the  commanding  general  the  following  narrative  of 
the  events  attending  that  operation,  which,  derived  from  sources  enti- 
tled to  credence,  may  be  regarded  as  altogether  authentic  : 

On  the  evening  of  February  23  I received  by  telegraph  orders  from 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  then  commanding  the  military  department  in  which 
Middle  and  East  Florida  are  embraced,  dated  February  10,  to  withdraw^ 
from  the  islands,  securing  the  artillery,  &c.  This  order  was  extended 
forthwith,  at  the  hands  of  a special  messenger,  to  the  officer  command- 
ing the  i)ost  at  Amelia  and  Talbot  Islands  and  to  Col.  Charles  H.  Mc- 
Blair,  Provisional  Army,  commanding  the  batteries,  with  instructions 
to  dismantle  the  batteries  with  all  possible  expeditibn  and  caution,  and 
then  to  withdraw  the  troops  and  abandoir  the  post. 

On  the  fourth  day  after  this  order  was  received  at  Amelia  Island  the 
enemy  made  his  appearance  simultaneously  in  the  inland  passage  be- 
tween Cumberland  Island  and  the  main-land  (having  come  in  at  Saint 
Andrew^s  Sound)  and  off  the  main  entrance  into  Cumberland  Sound, 
the  principal  aiiproach  from  the  sea  to  the  town  of  Fernandina.  At  this 
time  there  had  been  dismounted,  and  in  great  part  removed  from  the 
island,  all  the  guns  that  bore  upon  this  approach.  These  were  the  most 
effective  batteries,  and  without  them  it  was  deemed  by  the  officers  in 
council  that  it  would  be  fruitless  to  attempt  the  defense  of  the  place. 
The  order  was  accordingly  given  for  the  troops  to  retire  from  the  island, 
which  they  did  in  good  order  and  without  the  loss  of  a single  man. 
The  garrison  from  the  adjacent  island  (Talbot)  was  withdrawn  with 
equal  success. 

Of  heavy  ordnance  upon  these  islands  there  were,  including  a battery 
of  field  pieces,  33  guns.  Of  these,  18  were  saved,  thus  showing  a loss  of 
but  15  guns,  a fact  which,  in  view’  of  our  very  limited  means  of  trans- 
portation and  the  extreme  difficulty  of  removing  heavy  ordnance,  or, 
indeed,  ordnance  of  any  descriiition,  over  sand  hills,  reflects,  in  my  judg- 
ment, high  credit  upon  the  officers  to  whom  was  assigned  this  arduous 
duty ; and  besides  the  guns,  there  were  saved  also  all  the  powder  and 
most  of  the  shot  and  shell,  some  of  the  carriages,  implements,  &c.  When 
it  is  remembered  that  all  this  was  accomiflished  in  four  days  and  nights, 
under  the  most  adverse  circumstances,  no  other  conclusion  can  be  formed 
than  thafi  the  utmost  energy,  industry,  and  vigor  were  exhibited  by  both 
officers  and  men. 

Five  of  the  guns  were,  however,  I regret  to  add,  subsequently  lost. 


94  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

They  had  been  placed  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  on  the  Saint  John’s  Eiver, 
with  the  imrpose  of  putting  them  in  battery  there  lor  the  defense  of  that 
river.  The  enemy’s  i)rompt  movements  in  that  direction  rendered  it 
impossible  to  remove  them,  as  it  was  my  intention  to  have  done,  in  pur- 
suance of  the  orders  from  headquarters,  dated  March  1,  18G2,  which 
required  that  all  the  troops  in  this  military  department,  except  such  as 
might  be  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  Apalachicola  Eiver,  should 
be  ordered  to  report  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston. 

From  the  above  it  appears  that  our  entire  loss  in  and  consequent  upon 
the  evacuation  of  Amelia  Island  is  20  guns  and  some  stores  of  the  quar- 
termaster and  commissary  departments,  though  no  considerable  amount 
of  either.  The  capture  under  false  pretenses  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hol- 
land and  5 men  and  his  subsequent  restoration  has  been  already  re- 
ported in  my  letter  of  the  19th  instant. 

1 am,  major,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

J.  II.  TEAPIEE, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Gejieral,  Pocotaligo,  8.  C. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Department  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

Pocotaligo,  8.  C.,  April  0,  1862. 

This  report  is  respectfully  referred  to  War  Department.  Although 
East  and  Middle  Florida  has  been  constituted  a separate  department, 
reports  and  returns  continue  to  be  made  to  these  headquarters. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETOFT, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  EopJcins,  Fourth  Florida  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Eegiment  Florida  Vols., 

Lahe  City,  Fla.,  Mar  eh  30,  1862. 

Sir  : Your  order  to  evacuate  the  island  of  Amelia  was  received  on 
Tuesday,  February  25.  In  accordance  with  that  order  I consulted  fully 
with  Colonel  McBlair,  commander  of  the  batteries,  as  to  the  best  method 
of  effecting  the  imxiortant  duty  specially  assigned  him.  I furnished  him 
such  details  of  men  as  were  deemed  necessary,  and,  in  short,  all  things 
which  our  position  would  admit  of. 

On  Saturday,  March  1,  I ordered  Capt.  J.  M.  Martin,  Marion  Artillery, 
to  place  his  battery  2 miles  beyond  the  railroacl  bridge,  on  the  main- 
land,'leaving  a strong  guard  to  protect  the  same,  and  to  return  with  the 
rest  of  his  command  to  the  island,  which  he  did,  and  rendered  me  im- 
portant service  to  the  end.  I also  directed  Captain  Owens,  command- 
ing, Marion  Dragoons,  to  take  his  horses  to  the  position  assigned  the 
artillery  and  return  (the  necessary  guard  excepted)  to  the  island.  This 
dismounted  corps,  under  its  efficient  commander,  was  useful  to  me 
throughout. 

I had  previously  caused  the  citizens  of  Fernandina  to  be  notified  that 
ample  transportation  would  be  furnished  all  who  desired  to  leave  the 
city ; that  orders  had  been  issued  for  that  purpose.  Finding  that  the 
citizens  ]iaid  no  attention  to  this  notice,  I issued,  on  Saturday,  March  1, 
a written  notice,  to  wit,  thaf  on  Sunday,  March  2,  at  10  a.  m.,  a special 


Chap.  XV.] 


EVACUATION  OF  AMELIA  ISLAND. 


95 


train  Avould  leave  the  city  expressly  for  the  transportation  of  all  women 
and  children  desirous  of  leaving’.  But  little  heed  seemed  to  have  been 
given  to  the  second  admonition. 

No  demonstration  beyond  the  usual  blockade  was  made  by  the  enemy 
until  Sunday,  March  2,  about  9 a.  rn.  A bark,  bearing  French  colors, 
appeared  in  the  offing  and  hoisted  signals  for  a pilot,  whereni)on  Lieut. 
Col.  D.  P.  Holland  went  out  to  her  with  a white  flag,  faking  with  him 
G soldiers  of  the  Fourth  Florida  Regiment.  She  i)roved  to  be  a Fed- 
eral v^essel,  and  they  were  captured  by  the  perfidious  craft  and  taken 
off.  I have  the  hapi)iness  to  state  that  they  have  since  been  released 
and  are  again  at  their  post. 

About  10  o’clock  the  same  day  several  ships  hove  in  sight,  bore  down 
near  the  bar,  and  anchored.  It  became  evident  that  an  attack  would 
be  made  on  Monday,  the  3d.  Our  position  was  critical.  As  the  enemy 
had  full  view  of  my  quarters,  it  was  necessary  that  the  usual  cam[)  quiet 
should  prevail. 

It  was  not  until  G.30  p.  m.  that  I issued  the  order  to  break  camp  and 
transport  everything  to  the  railroad  depot.  This  was  effected  by  2 
o’clock  next  morning. 

At  an  early  hour  in  the  night  I received  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Styles, 
saying  that  from  nineteen  to  twtmty-one  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  were 
in  Saint  Andrew’s  Sound,  of  which  fact  Colonel  McBlair  was  duly  noti- 
fied. In  consequence  of  this  information  he  very  pro])erly  placed  his 
command  en  route  lor  the  city,  where  it  arrived  about  1.30  o’clock  in  the 
morning. 

At  1 o’clock  on  Monday  morning  I repaired  to  town,  and  at  2.30  a.  m. 
ordered  all  the  troops  (three  companies  of  the  Fourth  Regiment  Florida 
Volunteers  excepted)  to  take  ui)  the  line  of  march  to  the  main-land. 
These  three  companies  I retained  for  the  protection  of  the  citizens  and 
for  the  more  speedy  removal  of  our  equipage.  No  trains  were  permitted 
to  go  beyond  2 miles  from  the  railroad  bridge.  The  rush  for  succnr  and 
aid  was  perplexing.  Duty  on  one  side  and  commiseration  for  the  suf- 
ferers rendered  my  position  very  distressing. 

At  12  m.  I was  informed  that  four  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  had  come 
around  the  north  end  of  Cumberland  Island  and  entered  the  sound. 

At  1 o’clock  it  was  reported  to  me  that  they  were  moving  across, 
whereupon  I ordered  the  companies  to  file  across  the  bridge,  and  at  2 p. 
m.,  in  company  with  Colonel  McBlair,  I left  Fernandina.  It  was  now 
that  all  trains  should  have  been  removed  to  a i^lace  of  safety,  and  no 
difficulty  would  have  occurred.  The  three  companies  behaved  well. 
There  was  no  confusion;  not  the  slightest.  The  train  fired  into  was  not 
injured. 

On  Tuesday,  at  4 a.  m.,  I ordered  Second  Lieutenant  Deakle,  of  Com- 
I)any  C,  Fourth  Regiment,  to  burn  the  trestle-work  on  the  side  next  the 
main  land,  which  he  accomplished,  under  fire  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats, 
without  loss.  You  are  aware,  sir,  ray  orders  restricted  me  entirely  to 
my  immediate  command.  Colonel  McBlair  having  full  charge  of  the  bat- 
teries. 

In  conclusion,  I will  add  that  nothing  was  lost  belonging  to  my  com- 
mand. My  ill-health  prevented  an  earlier  report,  as  well  as  one  more 
full  and  complete. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  HOPKINS, 

Colonel,  Coynmanding  Fourth  Regiment  Florida  Vohmteers, 

R.  H.  Anderson, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


96  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,\GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CnAr.  XV. 

MAECH  4,  1862. — Occupation  of  Amelia  Island,  Fla.,  by  the  Union  forces. 

Reports  oj  Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright.,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Fernandina.,  Fla.,  March  5,  1802. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  the  combined  navy 
and  army  expedition  is  in  possession  of  Fernandina  and  the  military 
defenses  on  Amelia  Island,  and  also  of  the  batteries  on  the  south  end 
of  Cumberland  Island. 

Our  occupation  was  a bloodless  one,  the  rebels  having  evacuated  on 
the  first  suspicion  of  our  approach  all  the  strong  defenses  on  which  they 
had  lavished  so  much  time  and  labor,  removing,  so  far  as  time  permitted, 
guns,  stores,  and  troops.  They,  however,  left  behind  no  less  than  four- 
teen guns,  all  of  large  caliber. 

The  town  is  nearly  deserted  of  inhabitants,  many  of  whom  left  reluc- 
tantly, in  obedience  to  the  orders  of  the  rebel  authorities. 

So  far  as  I can  gather  from  the  conflicting  statements  of  the  citizens 
left  behind,  the  rebel  force  here  has  exceeded  5,000  men.  A detailed 
report  will  be  submitted  hereafter. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

IT.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

General  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Fernandina,  Fla.,  March  13,  1862. 

General  : Your  letters  of  the  10th  and  12th  instant  were  received 
this  evening,  through  Mr.  Boutelle,  U.  S.  Coast  Survey,  and  I hasten 
to  reply  by  the  steamer  Ben  De  Ford,  which  leaves  early  to-morrow 
morning.  The  Saint  John’s  expedition  is  still  absent,  and  I have 
received  no  official  information  in  regard  to  it  since  the  11th,  at  which 
time  the  vessels  had  not  succeeded  in  passing  the  bar  of  that  river.  I 
learn,  however,  through  contrabands  and  others  who  have  come  in,  that 
the  enemy  has  deserted  everything  as  high  up  as  Jacksonville,  and  has 
burned  a portion  of  that  town;  that  there  are  no  troops  nearer  than 
Baldwin,  and  but  few  there,  the  Mississippi  regiment  having  been  sent 
to  Tennessee  and  most  of  the  Florida  troops  to  Tallahassee.  I infer, 
therefore,  that  the  capture  of  Saint  Augustine  will  not  require  a formi- 
dable demonstration,  but  that  the  place  will  surrender  on  the  approach 
of  the  gunboats.  Should  there  be  any  indications  of  resistance  there, 
which  I do  not  expect,  I will  add  to  the  land  force  already  sent.  As 
you  will  have  learned  by  one  of  my  late  letters,  it  is  doubtful  whether 
the  place  is  garrisoned  even.  The  ordnance  captured  here  amounts  to 
sixteen  pieces  in  all,  two  having  been  found  in  a battery  beyond  the 
railroad  bridge,  which  had  not,  however,  been  mounted.  The  battery 
w\as  nearly  completed.  NTo  powder  of  any  moment  was  left  behind. 
Three  large  sling-carts  were  left  in  good  condition  and  a fourth  ])artly 
burned.  We  shall  need  the  ammunition  and  other  stores  estimated  for 
by  Lieutenant  Tard3^  I shall  retain  the  whole  force  now  here  until 
the  result  of  the  expedition  now  absent  is  accomplished,  or  until  I hear 
further  from  you.  I believe,  from  present  information,  that  at  least 


Chap.  XV.]  RECONNAISSANCE  UP  SAVANNAH  RIVER,  ETC.  97 

one  regiment  and  the  battery  may  be  sent  back  soon,  if  you  desire  it, 
still  retaining  an  adequate  garrison  at  this  point. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

II.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

General  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Exped’y  Corps,  Ildqrs.  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


[Indorsement.  J 


General  Wright  will  be  instructed  to  put  the  place  in  as  good  a state 
of  defense  as  his  means  will  permit,  so  that  it  can  be  held  by  a regiment 
or  less.  He  is  also  instructed  to  have  a detailed  estimate  made  for  the 
thorough  completion  of  Fort  Clinch,  and  submit  the  same  at  as  early  a 
day  as  practicable. 

T.  W.  SHERMAK 


MARCH  7-11,  1862. — Reconnaissance  up  the  Savannah  River  and  to  Elba 

Island. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  H.  Jachson,  Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Third  Regiment  K H.  Yols., 

Port  Royal.  8.  C.,  March  13,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  compliance  with  instructions 
received  from  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman,  March  7,  I left  this  camp  at 
6 p.  m.  on  that  date,  and  proceeded  to  Seabrook  with  20  officers  and  371 
men,  with  Surgeon  Moulton  and  4 hospital  attendants.  I arrived  at 
Seabrook  at  8 p.  m.,  and  found  there  six  boats,  two  of  them  of  small 
size.  I made  every  effort  to  obtain  more  boats,  and  after  waiting  an 
hour  Captain  Dunbar  arrived  from  Hilton  Head  with  four  boats, 
making  ten  boats  with  which  to  transfer  my  command  to  Daufuskie 
Island.  The  boats  were  crowded  full,  and  I was  compelled  to  leave 
behind  Company  A,  with  2 officers,  and  a iiart  of  Company  F,  with 
1 officer,  a total  of  91  men  and  3 officers.  Just  as  we  were  about 
to  leave  Seabrook,  Captain  Dunbar  was  taken  sick,  and  I placed  the 
whole  charge  of  the  boats  and  boatmen  with  Lieutenant  Cornelius,  of 
Company  D,  who  discharged  his  duties  in  a prompt  and  efficient  man- 
ner during  the  whole  time  of  our  absence.  We  left  Seabrook  at  10  p. 
m.,  some  of  the  boats  leaking  badly.  When  I arrived  opposite  Buck- 
ingham’s Ferry,  and  several  times  before  reaching  there,  I was  fired  on 
by  rebel  pickets.  I found  we  had  lost  our  way,  and  having  no  counter- 
sign, were  being  fired  on  by  our  own  pickets  as  well  as  by  the  rebels. 
I thought  it  advisable  to  laud  and  wait  till  daylight,  it  then  being  very 
dark.  Quite  a number  of  shots  were  fired  at  us,  none  hitting  either  the 
men  or  boats. 

It  was  2 in  the  morning  when  I landed,  two  of  the  boats  not  coming 
up  till  daylight,  having  lost  their  way  during  the  night.  At  daylight 
I started  again,  having  procured  a guide — Private  Alonzo  Borden,  Com- 
pany I,  Forty-tifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers.  At  7.30  a.  m.  we  came 
up  with  the  two  boats  we  had  missed  during  the  night,  and  at  9 a.  m. 

7 R R — VOL  VI 


98  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AXD  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

I landed  on  Daufiiskie,  marcbed  5 miles,  to  General  Yiele's  quarters, 
and  reported  to  him  at  12  o’clock.  After  landing  I sent  the  boats  to 
Engineer’s  Wharf,  at  the  upper  end  of  the  island.  General  Yiele 
ordered  me  to  encamp  and  wait  further  orders.  During  the  evening 
Companies  A and  E arrived  from  Seabrook  on  the  Mayflower,  she  com- 
ing from  Hilton  Head  with  commissary  stores,  and  having  taken  them 
on  board  when  passing  Seabrook. 

The  next  morning  (Sunday,  the  9th)  I was  ordered  to  embark  and 
proceed  to  Savannah  liiver,  with  my  entire  command,  on  a reconnais- 
sance. I proceeded  to  Savannah  River  and  some  distance  up  the  river, 
without  seeing  any  signs  of  rebel  pickets.  I then  returned  and  lauded 
at  the  battery  opposite  Jones’  Island,  letting  the  men  leave  the  boats 
a short  time  to  rest  them.  While  there  a rebel  steamer  came  out  of 
San  Augustine  Creek  in  sight  of  our  batteries  and  steamed  up  the  river 
towards  Savannah.  Our  batteries  opened  on  them,  making  some  good 
line  shots,  though  they  did  not  appear  to  strike  the  steamer,  but  they, 
quickened  her  speed.  After  resting  a short  time  I crossed  to  Jones’ 
Island.  As  the  boats  were  heavily  laden  and  the  tide  low  I could  not 
pass  down  Mud  River.  I therefore  landed  the  men  and  sent  the  boats 
around  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  island  to  join  me  there.  From  there 
I again  embarked,  and  returned  to  Daufuskie. 

The  next  morning  (Monday,  10th)  1 received  orders  from  General 
Yiele  to  take  one  day’s  rations  and  with  all  my  command  make  a recon- 
naissance of  Elba  Island,  which  I proceeded  to  do,  accompanied  by 
Major  Gardiner,  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Yolunteers,  and  Captain 
Liebeuau,  of  General  Yiele’s  staff.  We  left  the  lauding  known  as  the 
Engineer’s  Wharf  at  9.45  a.  m.  in  small  boats,  which  weie  taken  in  tow 
by  the  steamer  Mayflower  to  the  point  of  Jones’  Island  (on  Mud  River) 
known  as  Sears’  Landing,  arriving  there  at  12  o’clock.  From  thence  we 
proceeded  in  our'boats,  heavily  laden  as  they  were,  against  wind  and 
tide,  through  Mud  River,  across  the  Savannah  River,  to  a point  on  Elba 
Island  opposite  to  and  below  the  mouth  of  Mud  River,  where  I landed, 
accompanied  by  Major  Bedel,  of  the  Third  Kew  Hampshire  Yolunteers, 
Major  Gardiner,  and  Captain  Liebeuau.  I at  once  saw  the  imiwactica- 
bility  of  lauding  my  whole  force,  as  the  tall  reeds  and  grass  on  the  lower 
portion  of  the  island  had  been  burned,  thus  leaving  us  a fair  mark  for 
any  of  the  enemy’s  steamers,  should  any  of  them  (attracted  by  the  large 
force  under  .my  command  in  small  boats  crossing  the  Savannah  in  day- 
light) have  thought  best  to  come  down  and  attack  us.  I left  the  force 
there  under  the  command  of  Captain  Plimpton,  with  instructions  to 
officers  in  command  of  the  several  diflerent  boats  to  allow  no  man  to 
land,  but  each  officer  and  soldier  to  remain  seated  in  the  boats,  covered 
by  the  shores  of  the  island,  and  instructing  the  officers  in  charge,  as  soon 
as  any  black  heavy  smoke  became  visible  beyond  them,  to  pull  directly 
for  Mud  River,  so  as  to  be  under  the  cover  of  the  guns  from  our  bat- 
teries and  those  of  the  Western  World;  to  leave  a small  boat  for 
us,  or  if  this  was  not  practicable,  to  take  all  the  boats,  leaving  us  on  the 
island. 

After  these  instructions  I dividefl  our  small  force  landed,  by  giving 
Major  Bedel  6 men,  and  instructions  to  proceed  across  to  the  opposite 
side  of  the  island,  scattering  his  men,  and  thence  to  the  upper  end, 
while  with  Major  Gardiner,  Captain  Liebeuau,  and  G men  I proceeded 
on  our  course  on  this  side,  expecting  to  join  Major  Bedel  at  the  upper 
end  of  the  island.  We  separated  to  start  upon  our  several  courses  at 
1.45  p.  m.,  and  after  traveling  two  hours  and  a quarter  and  crossing 


Chap.  XV.  1 RECONNAISSANCE  UP  SAVANNAH  RIVER,  ETC. 


99 


several  small  streams  we  came  to  tlie  point  of  land,  tlie  extreme  end  of 
the  island,  looking  towards  the  mouth  of  Wright  Eiver.  On  a point 
of  land  above  the  mouth  of  said  river  we  saw  a large  store-house,  or  fac- 
tory, with  the  windows  closed,  and  no  signs  of  any  i)icket,  although  2 
men  were  seen,  apparently  unarmed. 

From  this  point  we  proceeded  directly  across  the  island  to  the  oppo- 
site side.  Here  we  found  the  ruins  of  two  houses,  with  one  high  brick 
chimney  standing.  From  this  point  we  could  look  directly  up  a 
stream  across  which  there  seemed  to  be  a bridge,  with  heavy,  strong 
abutments,  as  if  intended  for  guns  to  be  placed  upon.  Upon  these 
abutments  men  could  be  distinctly  seen  at  work,  but  what  they  were 
doing  or  if  guns  were  in  position  at  this  place  we  were  unable  to  see, 
as  the  afternoon  sun  shone  directly  against  us  and,  shining  upon  the 
water,  impaired  our  view.  Near  the  bridge,  on  the  side  towards  us, 
were  three  steamers  lying  at  anchor  (these  were  black)  and  one  white 
steamer  under  way  inside  of  the  bridge.  On  the  right-hand  side  were 
two  vessels,  schooner-rigged.  It  was  impossible  to  tell  whether  they 
were  steamers  or  sailing  vessels.  I then  proceeded  to  the  above-men- 
tioned chimney,  from  which  point  I plainly  saw  houses,  appearing  to  be 
store-houses,  apparently  fdled  with  men,  some  of  whom  were  distinctly 
seen  lounging  in  the  windows,  but  could  see  no  signs  of  a battery.  While 
resting  ourselves,  we  saw  a sail-boat  well  filled  with  men — some  sailors 
and  some  soldiers,  about  20  in  all — leave  one  of  the  steamers  and 
shape  their  course  for  this  point.  We  at  once  proceeded  to  return  to 
our  boats.  After  a fatiguing  tramp  of  one  hour  and  a halt  one  of  the 
corporals  who  accompanied  us  saw  a sail  passing  down  the  river.  He 
reported  the  fact  to  me.  We  then  ascertained  that  it  was  a boat  from 
the  steamer  Western  World,  with  Captain  Gregory  and  Surgeon  Moul- 
ton, of  the  New  Hampshire  Third,  who  were  in  search  of  us  alongshore, 
thinking  from  our  protracted  absence  we  had  lost  our  way.  The  cap- 
tain immediately  took  us  on  board,  and  we  proceeded  to  join  the  forces 
of  my  command,  lying  in  boats  at  the  lower  end  of  the  island. 

On  arriving  there  we  found  Major  Bedel  returned  with  the  men  of  his 
command  and  4 of  those  of  mine.  He  reports  that  after  crossing  the 
island  and  proceeding  ui)  the  southerly  side  opposite  Saint  Augustine 
Creek,  on  the  upper  point  of  which  he  discovered  a picket  of  5 men, 
they  were  within  range,  but  his  instructions  were  not  to  fire  upon  any 
pickets,  but  to  keep  themselves  hidden.  After  traveling  an  hour  and  a 
half  he  found  a stream,  which  it  was  impossible  to  cross.  He  followed 
the  course  of  the  stream  inland  until  he  reached  the  head  of  the  stream, 
where  he  lost  his  way,  owing  to  the  thickness  and  height  of  the  rushes, 
when,  finding  evening  ax^proaching,  he  returned  to  the  boats.  Upon 
my  joiniug  the  forces  in  the  boats,  we  proceeded  to  camp,  where  we 
arrived  at  8 o’clock  p.  m. 

The  next  morning  (Tuesday,  11)  I received  orders  from  General  Yiele 
to  ])repare  to  return  to  Hilton  Head,  with  the  understanding  that  the 
Mayflower  was  to  bring  the  troops  and  tow  the  boats.  Between  3 and 
4 o’clock  1).  m.,  and  after  the  men  had  been  standing  in  the  rain  some 
time,  we  were  notified  that  we  must  return  in  our  boats,  and  as  it  was 
impossible  to  get  all  the  men  in  the  boats,  1 sent  the  boats  around  to  the 
point  (Egg  Point),  where  we  first  landed  on  the  island,  and  marched  the 
men  down  there.  It  was  dark  when  we  arrived  there,  and  the  tide  run- 
ning out  and  a strong  head  wind  blowing,  I found  it  impossible  to  get 
home  that  night.  I then  took  two  companies  across  the  river  to  Law- 
ton’s plantation,  on  Hilton  Head  Island,  and  sent  the  boats  back  to  join 


[Chap.  XV. 


100  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 

the  other  boats.  I left  Major  Bedel  with  the  remaining  four  companies, 
with  instructions  to  return  to  Hilton  Head  as  soon  as  practicable.  The 
next  morning  early  Major  Bedel  landed  with  two  companies  at  Lawton^s 
plantation.  The  remaining  two  companies  went  to  Seabrook  in  the 
boats,  and  ni arched  from  there  to  this  camp  yesterday  noon.  Between 
9 and  10  o’clock  a.  m.  I left  the  plantation  with  the  four  companies  there 
and  arrived  here  in  camp  at  1 p.  m.  Every  man  that  left  the  camp  with 
me  has  returned.  Five  men  are  sick  and  in  their  quarters,  and  1 was 
sent  to  the  hospital  on  our  return.  The  remainder  of  the  men  are  in 
good  health  and  spirits. 

With  great  respect,  this  report  is  respectfully  submitted. 

JOHK  H.  JACKSOlSr, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Third  New  Sampshire  Vols, 

To  Commanding  Officer, 

Port  Eoyalj  S.  G, 


MARCH  12,  1862. — Occupation  of  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  by  the  Union  forces. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright^  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Fernandina,  Fla.j  March  15,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  just  learned  from 
my  aide-de  camp,  Bieutenant  Hubbell,  who  accompanied  the  expedition 
to  the  Saint  John’s  Eiver,  that  the  batteries  at  the  mouth  of  the  river 
and  at  Saint  John’s  Blulf  were  abandoned  on  the  approach  of  the  gun- 
boats, and  that  Jacksonville  was  evacuated  by  the  rebels  before  our 
forces  reached  the  town.  Jacksonville  was  occupied  by  six  companies 
of  the  Fourth  New  Hampshire  on  the  12th  instant.  Seven  saw-mills, 
4,000,000  feet  of  lumber,  a large  hotel,  four  or  five  private  dwellings,  the 
railroad  depot,  and  the  gunboat  in  process  of  construction  and  nearly 
ready  for  launching  were  burned  by  the  rebels  on  their  evacuation  of 
the  place. 

A portion  of  the  gunboats,  having  with  them  one  company  of  the 
Fourth  New  Hampshire  Regiment,  went  to  Saint  Augustine,  which  the 
rebel  forces  had  deserted  on  the  first  appearance  of  the  expedition  on  the 
Florida  coast.  The  inhabitants  of  the  town  are  represented  to  have 
hailed  with  joy  the  arrival  of  our  forces  and  their  relief  from  the  oppress- 
ive rule  of  the  rebel  authorities.  At  Jacksonville  many  of  the  inhabit- 
ants are  still  remaining,  though  considerable  numbers  had  gone  when 
our  troops  landed.  y 

I shall  endeavor  to  visit  Jacksonville,  and  perhaps  Saint  Augustine, 
to-morrow,  after  which  I will  report  more  in  detail. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 

Capt.  L.  H.  Pelouze, 

Act.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  E.  C.,  Hilton  Head,  S.  G. 


CiiAP.XV.]  OPERATIONS  NEAR  CLUFFTON,  S.  C.,  ETC.  iDl 

MAUCH  20-24,  1882.— Operations  near  Bluffton,  S.  0.,  including  affairs  at 
Buckingham  and  Hunting  Island. 

REFOR-TS,  ETC. 

No.  1.— Lieut.  Col.  John  H.  Jackson,  Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Maj.  John  B.  Willcoxon,  Phillips  Legion. 

No.  4. — Capt.  Carlos  Tracy,  volunteer  aide-de-camp. 

No.  5. — Miscellaneous  orders  and  correspondence. 

]^0.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut  Col.  John  R.  Jackson,  Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  March  25,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  Special 
Orders,  No.  67,  March  18, 1862, 1 proceeded  on  the  19th,  with  24  officers 

and enlisted  men,  on  a reconnaissance  in  force  on  May  Eiver,  running 

between  the  islands  of  B nil  and  Savage  and  the  main  land.  Accompany- 
ing the  battalion  from  my  regiment  was  a detachment  from  the  Third 
Ehode  Island  Volunteers,  with  a 12-pounder  howitzer,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Morrow,  who  conducted  himself  in  a manner  deserv- 
ing my  thanks,  and  materially  assisted  me  in  all  my  movements  during 
the  five  days  I was  gone. 

I left  my  camp  at  this  place  at  2 p.  m.,  and  arrived  at  Seabrook  at 
3.80  p.  m.,  and  had  all  but  one  company  embarked  at  4 o’clock,  filling 
what  boats  I had,  fifteen  in  number,  one  leaking  so  badly  I had  to  leave 
it  behind.  The  field  piece  1 embarked  in  a scow  we  found  at  Seabrook 
and  towed  it  with  one  of  our  large  boats.  Soon  after  leaving  the  wharf 
it  began  to  grow  dark  and  to  rain,  and  the  wind  blew  hard,  so  as  to 
endanger  the  safety  of  our  field  piece,  the  scow  being  low  in  the  water. 
After  an  hour  and  a half’s  rowing,  I thought  best  to  land  a short  time 
until  the  weather  became  somewhat  calmer,  and  landed  at  Hr.  Frank 
Pope’s  plantation,  on  • Hilton  Head  Island.  The  men  found  shelter  in 
the  buildings,  and  at  2.30  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  Thursday,  the  20th, 
we  again  embarked,  and  about  daybreak  landed  on  a hard  beach  at  Dr. 
James  Kirk’s  plantation,  on  the  main -land,  and  1 mile  from  Bluffton. 

I had  previously  sent  two  companies  under  command  of  Captain 
Eandlett  to  the  White  house,  on  Ephraim  Baynard’s  plantation,  oppo- 
site the  lower  end  of  Pinckney  Island,  to  drive  in  or  capture  tbe  picket 
stationed  there.  Immediately  after  landing,  the  command  remaining 
with  me,  I threw  ou  j Captain  Plimpton’s  company  as  skirmishers  in 
the  direction  of  the  above  plantation,  to  assist  Captain  Eandlett,  and 
to  ascertain  what  other  pickets  there  were  near  there,  and,  if  possible, 
to  capture  them. 

Immediately  after  landing  we  could  see  cavalry  pickets  in  the  woods 
skirting  the  plantation.  I immediately  had  the  field  piece  brought  up 
and  fired  three  shells  into  the  wood,  scattering  the  enemy.  As  I had 
not  made  preparation  to  advance  far  into  the  interior,  I drew  off  my 
command,  and  dropped  down  to  Colonel  Seabrook’s  wharf  and  planta- 
tion, on  Bull  Island,  opposite  the  main-land.  After  landing  that  por- 
tion of  my  command  I proceeded  to  Baynard’s  plantation,  and  found 
that  4 rebel  pickets  had  been  captured.  - Captain  Plimpton’s  company, 


102  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


under  command  of  Lieutenant  Ela,  had  cut  off  their  retreat,  and  being 
hemmed  in  on  all  sides,  they  surrendered  without  resistance. 

On  arriving,  I disaraied  them  of  their  rifles  and  long  knives,  with 
which  they  were  armed,  and  carried  them  across  to  Buckingham’s 
rerr3^,  Hilton  Head  Island,  and  delivered  them  over  to  an  officer  of  the 
Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  commanding  the  picket  there  sta- 
tioned, and  requested  him  to  send  them  to  headquarters,  which  he  did. 
With  my  command  I then  proceeded  to  Bull  Island.  That  afternoon  I 
was  notified  that  there  was  a strong  force  on  the  main-land,  and  having 
made  up  my  mind  to  visit  Bluffton,  I sent  to  headquarters  for  another 
l)iece  of  artillery,  which  I received  Friday  afternoon. 

Friday  morning,  having  got  some  information  that  led  me  to  believe 
there  was  a picket  on  Savage  Islands,  on  the  side  towards  the  main-land, 
I determined  to  reconnoiter  those  islands  thoroughly^.  I embarked  my 
command  and  landed  them  on  Savage  Islands,  thoroughly  examined 
them,  but  found  no  pickets.  On  the  main  land  opposite,  the  cavalry 
pickets  were  visible  narrowlj^  watching  our  movements,  apparently" 
expecting  us  to  land  on  the  main-land  above  Bluffton.  At  1.30  o’clock, 
I started  on  my  return  to  Bull  Island.  In  the  morning,  before  starting, 
I was  notified  by  our  picket  that  the  enemy  had  that  morning  burned 
all  the  buildings  (about  fifteen  in  number)  on  Kirk’s  plantation,  where 
we  landed  yesterday.  On  our  passage  to  Savage  Islands  we  were  fre- 
quently fired  on  by  the  rebel  pickets.  On  our  return  they  again  fired 
on  us,  and  when  opposite  Kirk’s  I ordered  my  men  to  return  the  fire, 
which  they  did,  firing  as  each  boat  came  abreast  the  xfiantation.  After 
passing  beyond  rifle  range  we  could  see  a cluster  of  the  horsemen 
apparently  gathered  around  some  wounded  or  killed  companion,  as  they 
dismounted.  Most  of  our  shots  reached  the  shore,  but  whether  we 
succeeded  in  hitting  the  enemy  or  not  I could  not  ascertain. 

That  night  I received  another  piece  of  artillery  from  headquarters, 
with  men  to  man  it.  Kext  morning,  after  putting  one  of  the  guns  in  a 
position  to  command  the  landing  at  Kirk’s,  I embarked  the  men  and 
landed  at  the  same  place  as  on  Thursday,  the  20th,  driving  in  the 
pickets.  I then  threw  out  two  companies  as  skirmishers,  and  after 
advancing  a short  distance  into  the  wood  sent  forward  two  companies 
more  to  support  them,  under  command  of  Captain  Plimpton,  acting 
major.  Lieutenant  Morrow  having  got  his  field  piece  in  position,  I left 
a few  men.  with  an  officer,  to  assist  him,  and  advanced  the  remainder  of 
my^  force  towards  Bluffton.  In  advancing  I found  cross-roads,  where  I 
left  detachments  to  prevent  the  enemy  getting  into  our  rear. 

We  arrived  at  Bluffton  at  12  o’clock,  driving  the  pickets  through  the 
town  and  a short  distance  [beyond],  but  finding  it  impossible  to  cut 
them  o^,  abandoned  the  pursuit.  I found  the  town  entirely^  deserted, 
with  the  exception  of  3 old  negroes,  who  informed  me  there  had  been 
no  artillery  there,  and  there  was  no  evidence  of  any"  or  of  any  earth- 
works there  or  some  distance  up  the  river,  The  nearest  approach  to 
artillery  was  an  old  dismounted  iron  gun  on  the  bluff  near  the  church 
and  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  1 examined  the  town  thoroughly,  to  be 
sure  there  were  none  of  the  rebels  secreted.  I found  none,  and  neither 
arms  nor  ammunition.  The  town  had  been  apparently  only  occuxiitd  as 
a headquarters  for  pickets  during  the  past  three  months. 

One  of  the  rebel  pickets,  in  endeavoring  to  escape,  could  not  get  his 
horse  to  start  for  some  reason  or  other.  He  was  in  sight  of  our  advance, 
but  at  long-range  distance,  and  after  endeavoring  for  a few  minutes  to 
urge  his  horse  into  a run  and  being  unsuccessful,  left  his  horse  and 
blankets  and  ran  for  the  woods,  which  he  reached  without  further  harm 


CiiAr.  XV.  j 


OPERATIONS  NEAR  BLUFFTON,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


103 


from  us.  The  horse  was  a good  one,  and,  with  a mule  tahen  from  Bull 
Island,  I have  turned  over  to  Colonel  Beynolds,  Government  agent  at 
this  place,  and  have  his  receipt  for  them.  After  a thorough  examina- 
tion of  the  town  1 drew  in  my  command,  and  retired  rapidly  and  in  good 
order  without  any  attack  from  any  quarter,  and  returned  in  the  boats 
to  Bull  Island. 

The  officers  and  men  behaved  like  good  soldiers,  moving  steadily  and 
quietly  to  and  from  the  towu ; remained  in  ranks  while  in  the  town 
(with  the  exception  of  such  squads  as  were  ordered  to  examine  the 
various  houses),  and  in  every  way  conducted  themselves  in  a meritori- 
ous manner. 

I visited  the  islands  near  Bull  Island,  finding  a number  of  cattle, 
sheep,  and  hogs,  and  evidences  that  the  enemy  obtained  some  bf  their 
fresh  provisions  from  these  islands.  As  we  were  short  of  rations,  I 
had  a few  of  the  cattle  killed  and  properly  distributed  among  my  com- 
mand. 

On  Monday,  at  3 p.  m.,  I returned  to  Hilton  Head.  All  the  boats, 
with  the  exception  of  three,  are  at  Seabrook  in  good  order.  These  three 
leaked  badly  from  the  start,  and  I had  them  sent  to  the  wharf  at  Hilton 
Head  for  repairs.  All  my  command  have  returned  in  good  health  and 
without  one  accident. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  H.  JACKSOX, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Third  Neiv  Hampshire  Vols, 

Col.  Enoch  Q.  Fellows,  • 

Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers^  Commanding  Post, 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig,  Gen,  Thomas  F,  Drayton,  C,  S,  Army. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Military  District, 

Hardeeville,  S.  C,,  March  23,  1862. 

Captain  : Major  Willcoxon,  commanding  cavalry  of  Phillips  Legion 
at  Bluflton,  reported  to  me  yesterday  afternoon  [at]  3 p.  m.  that  he  had 
been  driven  back  from  Blufiton  about  3 miles,  and  the  enemy — could 
not  say  how  many — [were]  a mile  and  a half  in  his  front,  at  Mr.  James 
Pope’s  gate.  I immediately  sent  forward  to  ascertain  the  facts,  follow- 
ing on  myself  shortly  after.  The  enemy  were  in  the  position  stated  by 
Major  Willcoxon,  but  fell  back  again  upon  Blufiton  and  retired  thence 
about  9 p.  m.  ^ > 

I have  moved  troops  forward  and  will  take  such  position  with  others 
as  I hope  will  enable  me  to  cut  ofi'  or  drive  back  ^nto  the  river  any  of 
the  invaders,  should  they  venture  as  far  up  the  public  road  as  they  did 
yesterday.  The  enemy  came  up  to  Red  Blufi*  yesterday  in  a steamer 
and  shelled  the  woods  in  the  vicinity.  I have  no  further  official  .account 
than  this. 

Captain  Ives  informed  me  that  he  was  ready  to  suiiply  me  with  tor- 
pedoes, but  had  no  powder.  I have  made  a requisition  uiion  General 
Ripley  for  1,200  pounds  of  blasting  powder,  the  better  qualities  being 
so  scarce. 

The  telegram  of  the  major-general  commanding  has  been  received,  and 
I will  accordingly  apply  to  General  Lawton  for  the  two  regiments  from 
Georgia,  which  will  enable  me  to  move  forward  and  act  in  concert  with 


1 04  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA  , AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 


the  other  regiments  of  my  command,  who  are  known  to  each  other  and 
are  well  drilled. 

The  whole  command  has  been  very  much  fatigued  by  their  forced 
march  of  the  other  night — 20th  instant. 

Major  Willcoxon  reports  that  the  enemy  landed  at  Hunting  Island  in 
ten  barges. 

Kespectfully,  yours, 

THOS.  r.  DRAYTON, 


Brigauier- General^  Commanding. 

Capt.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 


Headquarters  Sixth  Military  District, 

Bardeevillej  8.  C.,  March  24,  1862. 

Sir  : I beg  to  submit  to  the  consideration  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding the  accompanying  papers  in  regard  to  the  enemy^s  landing  in 
the  vicinity  of  Bluftton  on  the  2()th  and  22d  instant. 

• No.  1,  report  of  Major  Willcoxon,  Phillips  Legion,  Georgia  Volunteers, 
at  Blufftou,  of  the  landing  on  the  20th  instant,  together  with  No.  2, 
additional  report  of  above,  stating  loss  of  4 pickets  j No.  3,  copies  of 
dispatches  from  Major  Willcoxon  concerning  landing  on  22d  instant; 
No.  4,  report  of  Major  Willcoxon  in  reference  to  landing  of  enemy  on 
22d  instant ; No.  5,  report  of  Capt.  Carlos  Tracy,  volunteer  aide-de-camp, 
of  the  landing,  &c.,  on  22d  instant. 

The  examination  of  witnesses  was  made  by  Captain  Tracy  in  the  pres- 
ence of  Major  Willcoxon  without  any  contradiction  by  that  officer  of  the 
testimony  given  by  the  officers  and  men  eye-witnesses  of  the  facts  and 
circumstances  stated. 

Major  Willcoxon  no  longer  occupies  a separate  command,  and  I trust 
that  under  a new  and  severer  discipline  no  such  confused  reports  of  the 
position  and  numbers  of  the  enemy  will  again  be  forwarded  like  those 
which  have  so  lately  ended  in  harassing  marches  and  disapiiointment  to 
the  troops. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv, 

THOS.  F.  DRAYTON, 

Brigadier-  General, 

Capt.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General^  Pocotaligo,  8.  G. 


No.  3. 

Reports  oj  Maj.  John  B.  Willcoxon^  Phillips  Legion. 

Bluffton,  S.  C.,  March  20,  1862. 

Dear  Sir  : This  morning  at  day  the  enemy  landed  a regiment  at  Buck- 
ingham and  one  at  Hunting  Island,  with  a battery  of  artillery.  As  we 
ai)proached  Hunting  Island  to  attack  the  enemy  they  opened  their  artil- 
lery on  us,  so  that  we  could  not  approach  them  nearer  than  the  gate. 
The  enemy  that  landed  at  Buckingham  advanced  to  the  church.  There 
our  skirmishers  met,  and  after  a few  shots  on  either  side  the  enemy  re- 
tired through  the  woods  towards  Hunting  Island.  The  enemy  lias 
made  no  advance  as  yet  from  Hunting  Island.  We  are  fearful  that 
we  lost  4 jiickets  (as  they  have  not  yet  returned),  belonging  to  Captain 
Daniels’  company.  I have  scouts  watching  the  movements  of  the  enemy. 


Chap.  XY.]  OPERATIONS  NEAR  BLUFFTON,  S.  C.,  ETC.  105 

Our  wagons  left  liere  this  morning  with  our  baggage  for  the  fork  of  the 
South  Alay  Kiver  road  or  Colonel  Jones’  camp. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

JNO.  B.  WILLCOXON^, 
MajoVy  Commanding  at  Bluffton. 

General  Drayton. 

Headquarters  Cavalry  Battalion  Phillips  Legion, 
Camp  at  iStony  Flace,  S.  0.,  March  23,  1802. 

Sir:  In  answer  to  the  communication  to  you  from  brigade  headquar- 
ters, dated  March  23,  asking  for  my  official  report  of  yesterday’s  engage- 
ment with  the  enemy,  &c.,  1 report  as  follows  : 

About  11  a.  m.  the  pickets  stationed  at  Hunting  Island  reported  that 
ten  or  twelve  boats  or  barges  had  lauded  (four  at  Hunting  Island  and 
six  or  eight  above),  and  that  each  of  said  boats  contained  50  to  100  men, 
and  that  they  were  advancing  on  Bluffton  in  two  columns,  one  column 
by  the  gate  and  one  around  by  the  beach  or  bluff*.  About  the  same  time, 
or  soon  thereafter,  another  picket  reported  that  lour  boats  had  landed 
at  Baynard’s  negro  quarters.  I then  dispatched  Captains  Du  Bignon’s 
and  Rich’s  companies,  consisting  of  some  20  men  each  (the  others  of  said 
companies  on  picket  and  sent  to  relieve  the  same),  to  meet  the  enemy  on 
Hunting  Island  road,  at  the  same  time  dispatching  Packet’s  company  to 
the  Seabrook  Church  to  supjiort  the  picket. 

Captains  Du  Bignon’s  and  Rich’s  companies  were  soon  engaged  by  the 
enemy,  and  not  having  force  sufficient  to  check  his  advance,  I,  after  sharp 
firing  for  a short  time,  ordered  them  to  fall  back,  at  the  same  time,  seeing 
that  Bucket’s  company  was  about  being  cut  off,  ordered  it  to  fall  back 
by  Fording  Island  road.  I then  fell  back  to  Pope’s  lane,  and,  dismount- 
ing, advanced  to  meet  the  enemy,  who  w'asnow  in  town  and  still  advanc- 
ing on  us;  and  seeing  that  our  horses  were  much  exposed  and  we  liable 
to  be  cut  off*  from  our  horses,  I ordered  my  men  to  mount,  and  then  re- 
treated to  the  end  of  Mr.  Crowell’s  lane,  at  which  point  our  horses  could 
be  sheltered  under  cover  of  the  wood,  and  we  having  the  benefit  of 
attacking  the  enemy  in  his  advance  through  an  open  field. 

Lieutenant  Milhollin  and  a few  men,  having  been  left  in  the  rear  to 
watch  and  report  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  reported  that  he  had  fallen 
back.  Lieutenant  Milhollin  was  then  ordered  to  follow  them  up  and 
report  their  movement;  and  after  returning  late  in  the  evening  reported 
no  enemy  in  or  about  Bluff*ton. 

During  the  skirmish  the  enemy  wounded  two  of  our  horses,  one  of 
which  has  since  died  and  the  other  rendered  unfit  for  duty,  and  during 
the  time  captured  a horse  belonging  to  one  of  the  recruits  of  Captain 
Rich’s  company ; the  said  recruit  not  being  with  the  company,  he  hav- 
ing no  arms. 

Mr.  Farr’s  store-house  and  dwelling-house  broken  open  ; also  the  post- 
office  and  dwelling  on  the  same  lot ; but  do  not  know  anything  about 
what  was  taken  out,  not  knowing  what  was  in  either  house;  no  public 
stores  being  [were]  lost.  Some  50  or  60  bushels  of  corn  were  left  in 
town,  but  no  damage  other  than  stated  heard  of.  This  morning  at  day 
Lieu teuanP Milhollin,  with  20  men,  was  sent  out  and  recOimoitered  to 
Hunting  Island,  but  found  no  enemy. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  B.  WILLCOXOX, 

Major,  Commanding  Cavalry  Phillips  Legion, 

Lieut.  Col.  S.  Jones,  Jr., 

Commanding  Legion. 


106  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


Cavalry  Battalion  Phillips  Legion, 

March  24,  18G2.. 

You  are  hereby  notified  that  four  pickets  belonging  to  the  Green 
Rifles,  lately  under  my  command  at  Bluflton,  are  missing,  and  I am 
feartul  they  were  captured  by  the  enemy  on  the  morning  of  the  20th 
instant. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

jjsro.  B.  willcoxo:n^. 

Major,  Commanding  Cavalry  Fhillips  Legion. 


Lieut.  Col.  S.  Jones,  Jr. 


Hdqrs.  Cavalry  Battalion  Phillips  Legion,  Ga.  Vols., 

Stony  Place,  S.  C.,  March  24,  18G2. 

Sir  : In  answer  to  the  request  of  Brigadier-General  Drayton,  as  per 
note  of  J.  I.  Middleton,  aide-de-camp,  23d  instant,  I report  the  follow- 
ing : 

About  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  20th  instant  the  pickets  from 
Hunting  Islands  and  Buckingham  reported  the  enemy  landing  at  those 
two  points,  as  verbally  reported.  I then  ordered  Captain  Du  Bignon’s 
company  to  Hunting  Island,  the  officer  in  command  of  which  dispatched 
a courier  to  inform  me  that  one  regiment  and  one  piece  of  artillery  had 
landed.  Tlie  courier  reported  one  regiment  and  one  battery.  The  offi- 
cer of  the  pickets,  after  relieving  them,  reported  to  me  (cannot  state  at 
what  hour)  that  about  one  regiment  had  landed  at -Buckingham.  I then 
made  my  written  report  from  that  of  those  two  officers. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JXO.  B.  WILLCOXOX, 

Major,  Commajiding  Cavalry  Phillips  Legion. 

Henry  A.  Young, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Xo.  4. 

Report  of  Capt.  Carlos  Tracy,  volunteer  aide-de-camp. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Military  District, 

Camp  Lee,  March  23,  18G2. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  instructions  from  Brigadier- General  Drayton, 
delivered  at  Xew  River  Bridge  about  8 p.  m.  yesterday,  that  I should 
proceed  to  Major  Willcoxon,  commanding  in  the  vicinity  of  Bluflton, 
and  acquaint  myself  as  accurately  as  I could  with  the  facts  of  the  reported 
landing  and  advance  of  the  enemy  on  that  day  into  and  from  the  vil- 
lage of  Bluflton,  I proceeded  towards  that  place,  and  found  Major  Will- 
coxon, with  his  command,  2 miles  this  side  of  Bluflton.  I learned 
from  Major  Willcoxon  that  the  enemy — reported  shortly  before  by  his 
scouts  to  him  and  by  him  to  the  major-general  commanding  as  having 
retired  from  Bluflton — had  returned.  I inquired  if  this  fact  had  been 
reported  to  Brigadier-General  Drayton,  but  found  it  had  not  been, 
because,  as  Major  Willcoxon  stated,  he  had  not  the  countersign,  and 
besides  did  not  know  if  the  report  was  true. 

I got  Major  Willcoxon  to  call  before  me  the  men  of  his  command 


Chap.  XV.l 


OPERATIONS  NEAR  BLUFFTON,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


107 


who  could  give  me  iiiformatiou  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  since 
the  afternoon  of  the  21st  instant.  A commissioned  and  a non-commis- 
sioned officer  and  several  i)rivates  were  examined  by  me  in  the  pres- 
ence of  Major  A¥illcoxou.  I learned  from  these  that  on  the  afternoon 
of  the  21st  eight  boats  had  returned  from  the  direction  of  Box^s  (eight 
had  been  reported  at  Box’s  on  that  morning),  and  that  two  steamers 
(scouts  could  not  say  if  they  were  gunboats)  had  come  up  to  one  of  the 
islands  near  the  Hunting  Islands  with  four  small  boats  with  some  men  in 
them  in  tow;  that  the  enemy  that  night  had  burned  a small  house  at  or 
near  Buckingham  Point;  that  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  eleven  small 
boats  proceeded  up  towards  the  Hunting  Islands.  Eight  of  these  kept 
the  opposite  shore,  passed  the  Hunting  Islands,  and  were  not  seen  after- 
wards. They  probably  landed  at  or  near  the  edge  of  Bluffton.  Three 
landed  at  the  Hunting  Islands.  The  vedettes  rapidly  retired  to  Bluff- 
ton  from  the  Hunting  Islands  and  the  enemy  entered  the  village.  Soon 
after  that  some  of  our  men  were  fired  upon  without  knowing  that  the 
enemy  was  coming.  One  man,  who  was  near,  said  about  100  of  the  enemy 
had  been  seen  by  him  advancing  by  the  bluff*.  Another  said  he  had 
seen  about  12  men  at  the  back  of  the  yillage,  and  that  there  were  others, 
how  many  he  could  not  say ; that  our  men  rapidly  retired ; that  the 
enemy  advanced  at  the  double  quick  until  they  reached  the  edge  of  the 
village  on  this  side,  and  last  fired  upon  us,  as  Major  Willcoxon  stated, 
from  a grist-mill,  which  is  said  to  be  about  the  last  house  this  end  of  the 
village  and  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  the  farther  end  of  Pope’s 
lane;  that  the  enemy,  after  firing  upon  us,  retired  at  the  double-quick 
from  this  end  of  the  village,  and  were  not  seen,  as  far  as  1 could  learn, 
from  this  time,  which  must  have  been  about  9.20  a.  m.  At  that  hour 
they  had  entered  the  village;  that  a detachment  of  20  men,  under  Lieu- 
tenant MilhoUin,  had  late  in  the  evening  entered  the  village,  found  no 
damage  done,  except  to  the  contents  of  two  stores,  said  to  have  had  in 
them  liquor  and  tobacco,  and  conversed  with  a negro  man,  who  had 
some  of  their  property  in  his  charge,  who  stated,  on  delivering  up  these 
articles  safely,  that  he  had  never  seen  any  Yankees.  The  negro  lived 
at  this  end  of  the  village;  that  this  detachment  had  commenced  seout- 
ing  towards  the  Hunting  Islands  (it  was  then  dark),  when  a sergeant 
and  two  men  saw  a man  lying  in  the  road  with  his  head  towards  them  ; 
that  he  was  snapped  at  by  the  sergeant  and  a man,  when  he  turned 
across  the  road  and  another  man  then  joined  him  from  the  bushes  and 
laid  himself  down  alongside  of  him.  Our  men  then  fired  and  retired. 
One  of  them  declared  (this  was  reported  of  him ; he  was  on  picket  at 
the  investigation)  that  he  saw  two  more  of  the  enemy  come  up  to  the 
men  lying  in  the  road,  and  that  one  gun  was  fired  by  the  enemy.  The 
sergeant  evidently  did  not  believe  that  a gun  had  been  fired  or  that 
two  others  had  joined  those  in  the  road. 

Yo  further  scouting  was  done  up  to  the  time  of  my  arrival  at  Major 
Willcoxon’s  camp. 

Being  satisfied  that  if  these  objects  in  the  road  were  men  they  were 
drunken  stragglers  of  the  enemy,  I advised  Major  Willcoxon  to  send  an 
intelligent  officer  and  20  or  more  men  to  reach  Bluffton  by  daylight  and 
rapidly  scout  towards  the  Hunting  Islands,  and  stated  that  I thought 
by  so  doing  he  could  capture  such  drunken  stragglers  of  the  enemy  as 
had  not  gone  off  in  their  boats.  I had  no  doubt  the  sober  men  of  the 
expedition  had  left  the  evening  before.  Major  Willcoxon  said  he  had 
already  determined  to  send  out  such  a party  in  the  morning.  I learned 
who  was  to  lead  the  party,  and  got  him  to  say  that  he  would  rejiort  to 
me  in  person  at  New  Elver  Bridge  this  morning. 


108  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


1 returned  to  ^tew  Eiver  Bridge,  where  I was  to  report  to  you,  last 
night  at  2 a.  m. 

This  morning  Lieutenant  Milholliii,  who  led  the  scouting  partj^, 
reported  to  me  that  he  made  the  scout  as  expected;  that  no  enemy 
was  on  the  main  land  anywhere  near  Bluttton,  and  that  he  had  ascer- 
tained from  satisfactory  evidence  that  the  objects  seen  and  fired  at  by 
the  sergeants  and  the  two  men  last  night,  and  on  which  was  based  the 
supposition  that  the  enemy  had  returned  to  Blufi'ton,  were  branches  of 
trees. 


Eespectfully, 

Henry  E.  Young, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Generals 


0AEL03  TEAOY, 
Aide-de-Camp. 


P.  S. — Major  Willcoxon  stated  that  he  supposed  the  force  of  the 
enemy  to  be  from  300  to  400  men. 


No.  5. 

Miscellaneous  orders  and  correspondence, 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Souih  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

PocotalifjOj  S,  (7.,  March  20,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District^  Jericho^  8.  C. : 
General:  The  general  commanding  the  department  directs  that  you 
will  hold  the  Fourteenth  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Jones,  prepared  and  ready  to  move  at  a moment’s,  notice.  He  also 
directs  that  the  regiment  should  i)e  lightly  equipped  and  not  encum- 
bered by  equipage,  &c.  You  will,  if  possible,  hold  them  in  readiness, 
with  three  days’  rations  in  their  knapsacks. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligoj  8.  0.,  March  20,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg: 

The  major-general  ccUnmanding  the  department  directs  that  you  move 
forward  Colonel  Jones’  five  companies  near  Tomotley,  to  the  works  on 
Bee  Creek.  They  will  proceed  from  Pocotaligo  Station  to  Coosaw- 
hatchie  by  railroad.  Transportation  will  be  furnished  immediately  at 
Coosa whatchie.  They  will  leave  the  cars  and  proceed  by  road  to  Bee 
Creek.  Captain  Thornton’s  light  battery  of  artillery,  Virginia  volun- 
teers, has  been  ordered  to  Graham ville,  S.  C.  Eeplace  Colonel  Jones’ 
five  companies  by  a corresponding  number  from  Colonel  Dunovant’s 
Twelfth  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

[J.  E.  WADDY,] 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Chap.  XY.] 


OPERATIONS  NEAR  BLUFFTON,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


109. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  8.  C.j  March  20,  1802. 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District : 

General  : If  the  Tennessee  regiment  has  moved  yon  need  not  move 
Colonel  Jones’  regiment,  but  hold  it  in  readiness  in  case  it  is  wanted, 
and  relieve  the  pickets  by  cavalry  and  such  other  troops  as  may  be 
most  convenient,  if  you  are  required  to  move  Colonel  Jones.  If  said 
regiment  should  be  moved  the  general  will  endeavor  to  move  it  by  rail. 

The  general  leaves  in  a few  moments  for  Hardeeville,  S.  C.  Com- 
municate by  telegraph. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfullv, 

J.  B.  WADDY, 

. Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Focotaligo,  8.  0.,  March  20,  18G2. 

Brigadier-General  Donblson, 

Commanding  Fifth  Military  District^  8tony  Creelc,  8.  C.  : 
General:  The  major-general  commanding  department  directs  that 
all  the  Tennessee  troops,  except  the  ones  at  the  heavy  guns  on  the 
Coosawhatchie  River,  advance  at  once  by  the  public  road  towards  New 
River  Bridge.  Those  advancing  from  Grahamville,  if  forced  to  fall  back, 
will  do  so  by  the  same  road  on  which  they  advanced  to  the  intrench- 
ments  on  the  Honey  Hill  road. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

[J.  R.  WADDY,] 
Assista^it  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Focotaligo,  8.  (7.,  March  20,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Gregu, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District^  Jericho.  8.  C.: 

General:  I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  the  de- 
partment to  countermand  the  order  just  issued  in  reference  to  move- 
ments of  troops  in  your  district.  Captain  Thornton  will  be  advised 
accordingly. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton  : 

[J.  R.  WADDY,] 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Hardeeville^  8.  (7.,  Mareh  20,  1862 — 8.45  p.  m. 
Brigadier-General  Donelson, 

Commanding  Fifth  Military  Distriet  of  8outh  Carolina: 

General:  I wish  you  to  move  forward  to  the  head  of  the  Pording 
Island  road,  leading  from  Buckingham  Ferry,  with  Captain  Latham’s 
battery.  One  company  will  be  left  at  the  heavy  guns  on  Coosawhatchie 
River.  Colonel  Jones  is  ordered  to  move  five  companies  to  the  intreuch- 
ment  near  Bee  Creek.  You  will  not,  however,  await  his  arrival,  but 


110  COAfeTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

move  at  once.  The  five  companies  of  your  brigade  now  at  Camp  Pem- 
berton will  proceed  to  Grahamville  and  occupy  the  camp  now  established. 
No  tents  will  be  taken  except  those  from  Camp  Pemberton.  Leave  the 
one  company  at  Coosawhatchie,  as  also  those  in  Grahamville.  I wish 
you  to  move  as  speedily  as  possible.  If  the  companies  have  arrived 
from  Camp  Pemberton  you  can  take  them  with  you  also. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

, J.  C.  PEMBEKTON, 

Major-General^  Commanding, 

/ 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Cakolina  and  Georgia, 

Eardeeville,-  8.  C.,  March  21,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  E.  Drayton, 

Commanding  Sixth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina : 

General  : I consider  that  there  is  a sufficient  number  of  troops  now 
in  hand  and  near  Bluffton  to  capture  or  drive  the  enemy  from  his  posi- 
tion at  Hunting  Island.  This  you  will  endeavor  to  do,  if  not  already 
done,  on  the  receipt  of  this  communication.  In  consequence  of  the  rep- 
resentations of  a courier  (dispatched  to  me  by  telegraph)  and  subsequent 
statements  by  Major  Willcoxon,  Georgia  volunteers,  I have  been  induced 
to  order  forward  many  more  troops  than  enough  to  accomplish  this 
object,  and  I desire  you  to  carry  out  my  orders,  though  this  should  not 
reach  you  until  after  daylight. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[J.  C.  PEMBEETON,] 
Major- General,,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Hardeeville,  S.  0.,  March  21,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Donelson, 

Comdg.  Fifth  Mil.  Dist.  8.  (7.,  Head  of  Fording  Island  Road: 
General  : The  general  commanding  directs  that  as  soon  as  your  men 
are  rested  you  return  with  your  command  to  the  positions  previously 
designated  for  your  brigade. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' Captain  and  Ordnance  Officer. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  8.  (7.,  March  22,  1862. 

Col.  E.  G.  M.  Dunovant, 

Ticelfth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Stony  Creelc,  8.  C.: 
Colonel  : The  major-general  commanding  the  department  directs 
that  you  move  the  eight  companies  of  your  regiment  now  stationed 
near  Stony  Creek  immediately  to  Pocotaligo  Station,  where  they  will 
take  the  cars  and  proceed  to  Grahamville  Station,  S.  C.  j from  thence 
you  will  proceed  as  speedily  as  possible  to  Grahamville  by  public  road. 
You  will  equip  your  men  with  arms,  ammunition,  and  three  days^  pro- 


Chap.  XV.] 


AFFAIR  AT  SMYRNA. 


Ill 


vision  in  their  haversacks.  The  enemy  are  reported  advancing  from 
Bluftton,  S.  0. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

11.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  iS.  C.,  March  22,  18G2. 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District: 

General  : As  information  has  again  been  received  of  the  landing  of 
the  enemy  at  Bluffton,  the  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you 
hold  your  command  in  readiness  to  move,  if  necessary.  Colonel  Dun- 
ovant^s  regiment  will  move  by  railroad. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligoj  8.  C.,  March  22,  18G2. 

Brigadier-General  Donelson, 

Commanding  Fifth  Military  District: 

General  : As  information  has  been  again  received  of  the  landing  of 
the  enemy  at  Bluffton,  the  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you 
hold  your  command  in  readiness  to  move,  if  required,  at  once. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


MARCH  23,  1862. — Affair  at  Smyrna,  Fla. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  8.  Dilworth,  commanding  forces  of  the  Department 
of  East  and  Middle  Florida. 

Hdqrs.  Provisional  Forces,  Dept.  E.  and  M.  Fla., 

, Tallahassee^  Fla.,  April  4,  18(52. 

Major  : I have  to  report  a most  successful  skirmish,  which  took  place 
at  Smyrna  on  [the]  23d  ultimo — Capt.  D.  B.  Bird,  Third  Regiment  Flor- 
ida Volunteers,  C.  S.  [Army],  commanding  post,  the  skirmishers  com- 
manded by  Captain  Strain,  Third  Regiment,  and  Lieutenant  Chambers, 
of  Captain  Owens’  independent  troop  of  cavalry. 

The  enemy  landed,  or  attempted  to  land,  from  gunboats  Penguin  and 
Henry  Andrew  in  launches,  when  our  men  fired  into  them.  The  enemy 
retreated  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  and  abandoned | their  launches, 
five  in  number. 

Captain  Bird  reports  7 killed,  3 prisoners,  and  about  30  wounded. 
Among  the  killed  were  Captain  Mather,  of  the  Henry  Andrew,  and 
Lieutenant  Budd,  of  the  Penguin.  A runaway  negro  also  was  captured, 
who  had  piloted  the  enemy  into  the  inlet  to  Smyrna,  and  who  was  to  be 
hanged. 


112  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

This  skirmish  I regard  as  quite  a success;  not  a man  on  our  side 
killed  or  wounded. 

Smyrna  is  the  place  where  arms,  &c.,  for  [thej  Confederate  States 
have  been  landed,  and  the  enemy  were  seeking  to  capture  them.  The 
enemy  are  preparing  to  advance  from  Jacksonville  to  Baldwin  to  cut 
them  off  there. 

I have  the  honor  to  subscribe  myself,  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

W.  S.  DILWOBTH, 
Colonel^  Commanding, 

Maj.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Oeneral,  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 


MARCH  28,  1862. — Reconnaissance  near  the  Mouth  of  Saint  Augustine 

Creek,  Ga. 

REFORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Oliver  T.  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele,  TJ.  S.  Army. 

Daufuskie  Island,  S.  0.,  March  30,  1862. 
General:  I inclose  a report  from  Major  Beard.  This  is  the  third 
report  on  the  iron-clad  vessels.  In  case  the  vessels  of  the  Navy  are 
withdrawn,  I can  suggest  no  other  plan  than  supplying  their  place  with 
schooners  armed  with  rifled  guns  and  howitzers,  and  occupied  by  an 
infantry  force — one  in  Mud  Kiver,  one  in  Wright  River,  one  at  mouth 
of  New  River,  and  one  in  Cooper  River.  No  batteries  on  land  can  pos- 
sibly be  erected  to  accomplish  the  results  that  would  be  obtained  by 
these  floating  batteries. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EGBERT  L.  YIELE, 

Brigadier- Genera  1. 

General  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Oliver  T.  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  YorJc  Infantry. 

Battery  Hamilton,  Ga.,  March  28,  1802. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I this  day  made  a recon- 
naissance of  the  land  about  the  mouth  of  Saint  Augustine  Creek.  The 
best  view  was  obtained  from  the  summit  of  the  upper  Coast  Survey 
station,  on  Elba  Island.  I send  you  a sketch  of  observations.  The  only 
rebel  pickets  about  the  mouth  of  Saint  Augustine  are  stationed  at  the 
points  indicated.  In  case  of  an  attempt  to  cut  them  off  their  only  chance 
of  escape  would  be  by  swimming  the  bayou. 


Chap.  XV.J 


AFFAIR  ON  EDISTO  ISLAND. 


113 


The  rebels  clearly  visit  Elba  Island,  coming  low  down.  The  following 
is  an  exact  copy  of  a document  found  on  the  island : ‘‘The  Glynn  Guards 
have  been  in  gunshot  of  you,  you  damned  scoundrels,  and  examined 
your  quarters.  We  invite  you  ashore ; we  have  no  navy.”  I give  it  for 
what  it  is  worth.  The  rebels  have  no  fort  erected  at  the  head  of  Wilming- 
ton Narrows.  A large  black  square  object  is  to  be  seen  in  the  river 
opposite  Fort  Jackson.  It  looks  like  a floating  battery.  Anchored  in 
the  stream,  below  the  fort,  there  is  a steamer  with  two  large  schooners, 
one  on  either  side.  I think  they  are  both  armed,  and  intended  to  be  towed 
into  action  in  that  shape,  as  the  schooners  would  in  a measure  protect 
the  machinery  of  the  steamer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X O.  T.  BEARD, 

Majorj  Commanding, 

Capt.  J.  H.  Liebenau, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


MARCH  29, 1862. — Affair  on  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Evans,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Military  District 
of  South  Carolina. 

No.  2. — Col.  P.  F.  Stevens,  Holcombe  Legion. 

No.  3. — Maj.  F.  G.  Palmer,  Holcombe  Legion. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  James  Salvo,  Washington  Light  Artillery. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Evans ^ C.  8.  Army,  commanding  Third 
Military  District  of  South  Carolina.  ^ 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District  S.  C., 

Adams  Run,  8.  C.,  March  30,  1862. 

Captain  : About  two  weeks  since  it  was  reported  to  me  that  the  enemy 
had  advanced  from  Edisto  Island  and  had  occupied  Little  Edisto  Island, 
with  the  probable  intention  of  effecting  a crossing  at  the  Edisto  Ferry  or 
at  Pineberry.  I sent  a reconnoitering  party,  consisting  of  Henry  Sea- 
brook,  Edward  W.  Seabrook,  Joseph  S.  Whaley,  Joseph  Seabrook,  and 
Dr.  Hanahan,  privates  in  the  Marion  Artillery,  who  willingly  undertook 
to  ascertain  the  position  and  strength  of  the  enemy. 

After  three  days’  work  Edward  Seabrook  reported  to  me  that  the 
enemy  had  a grand  guard  of  four  companies  stationed  on  the  northern 
extremity  of  Edisto  and  Little  Edisto  Islands.  This  position  of  the 
enemy  was  also  reported  to  me  by  Col.  P.  F.  Stevens,  commanding  the 
Holcombe  Legion,  after  a conference  with  whom  I determined  to  attack 
the  enemy,  and  directed  Colonel  Stevens  to  make  the  n'ecessary  arrange- 
ments, and  that  the  expedition  would  be  under  his  immediate  command. 

On  Thursday  morning,  27th  instant.  Colonel  Stevens  reported  that  the 
arrangements  for  crossing  the  river,  &c.,  were  ready. 

On  the  morning  of  the  28th  instant  I gave  Colonel  Stevens  the  written 

8 R R — VOL  VI 


114  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

instructions  (a  copy  of  wliich  is  herewith  transmitted,  marked  A).  About 
dark  the  entire  force — the  infantry  of  the  Holcombe  Legion  (343) ; cav- 
alry, dismounted  (75) ; the  Enfield  Battalion  (230) ; and  the  reserve  (four 
companies).  Lieutenant- Colonel  Moore’s  battalion — crossed  the  Dawho 
Kiver  on  a bridge  of  flats  at  Pineberry.  The  section  of  the  Washington 
Artillery  and  cavalry  detachment,  mounted,  crossed  in  a flat  at  Aiken’s 
Mill  before  sunset,  and  the  force  assembled  at  Governor  Aiken’s  winter 
residence  on  Jehossee  Island. 

After  duly  organizing  his  command.  Colonel  Stevens,  leaving  the  four 
companies  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore’s  battalion  as  a reserve  at  Aiken’s 
residence,  marchefl  his  command  to  Edisto  Island  about  3 a.  m. 

On  the  morning  of  the  29th  instant,  crossing  Watt’s  Cut,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  a place  known  as  the  Old  Dominion,  where  the  first  pickets  of 
the  enemy  wero  met,  who  were  immediately  attacked,  killing  one  and 
mortally  wounding  another  (since  dead). 

Agreeably  to  my  instructions,  he  divided  his  command  into  three  col- 
umns, one  with  orders  to  charge  the  bridge  over  the  Little  Edisto  Kiver 
and  capture  the  company  stationed  on  Little  Edisto  Island,  one  in  direc- 
tion of  Baynard’s,  to  prevent  being  cut  oft,  as  well  as  to  prevent  re- 
enforcements coming  from  the  main  body  of  the  enemy,  and  another  to 
attack  the  company  at  Mr.  Whaley’s  place.  These  dispositions  were 
faithfully  and  gallantly  executed  by  Colonel  Stevens,  who  had  admirably 
effected  all  his  arrangements  before  the  movement  commenced.  I also 
placed  a reserve  of  four  companies  of  Colonel  Moore’s  battalion  at  Pine- 
berry,  on  the  main-land,  to  guard  the  bridge  of  flats,  as  well  as  to  be  ready 
to  support  the  attacking  force  if  required. 

About  sunrise  I crossed  over  the  Edisto  River  and  took  my  position 
on  Jehossee  Island,  to  be  convenient  to  throw  over  more  troops  and  to 
take  command  should  the  necessity  occur.  About  7 a.m.  Colonel  Stevens 
sent  me  a/lispatch  that  he  had  progressed  as  far  as  Mr.  Whaley’s  place, 
and  had  driven  the  . enemy  to  their  artillery,  and  would  await  further 
instructions. 

Thinking  the  enemy  were  in  too  large  a force  to  be  met  by  his  divided 
command,  I immediately  ordered  him  to  effect  his  retreat,  and  sent  for- 
ward four  companies  of  the  reserve  to  cover  his  crossing  over  Watt’s 
Cut.  The  retreat  was  conducted  in  good  order,  and  the  majority  of  his 
command  had  arrived  at  Pineberry  by  9 a.  m.  On  account  of  the  non- 
arrival  of  the  flats  sent  for  his  use.  Major  Palmer  and  his  command  were 
retarded,  and  did  not  arrive  until  near  11  a.  m. 

In  closing  my  report  I would  call  the  attention  of  the  general  com- 
manding to  the  dauntless  conduct  of  Major  Palmer  and  his  command. 
Crossing  the  bridge  over  the  Little  Edisto  Kiver,  in  obedience  to  his  in- 
structions he  burned  the  bridge  in  his  rear  and  vigorously  charged  the 
enemy,  determined  to  conquer  or  die  in  the  defense  of  his  country. 

To  Col.  P.  F.  Stevens  I am  greatly  indebted  for  the  skill  and  gallantry 
with  which  he  conducted  the  expedition,  to  which  is  due  its  entire  suc- 
cess. 

For  individual  instances  of  gallantry  and  devotion  to  our  cause  I beg 
leave  to  refer  to  the  accompanying  reports. 

To  my  personal  staff  great  credit  is  due.  Capts.  Ralph  Elliott  and 
W.  Seabrook  and  Mr.  Samuel  Cary  were  engaged  during  the  night  in 
transmitting,  under  great  difficulty,  my  orders.  Asst.  Surg.  James 
Evans  was  on  Jehossee  Island,  prepared  to  render  every  assistance  to  the 
wounded.  The  guides  (Edward  W.  Seabrook,  Henry  Seabrook,  Joseph 
Seabrook,  Joseph  S.  Whaley,  and  Dr.  Hauahan,  of  the  Marion  Artillery) 


Chap.  XV.]  AFFAIR  ON  EDISTO  ISLAND.  115 

conducted  tlie  several  columns  and  rendered  valuable  assistance  by 
their  thorough  knowledge  of  the  country. 

. Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier  Qeneralj  Commanding  Third  Military  JJist.  8.  C, 

Capt.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Pocotaligo,  8.  G, 

[Inclosure  A.] 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District  S.  G., 

Adams  Run^  8.  C.,  March  28,  18G2. 

Colonel  : Proceed  to-night  to  Edisto  Island  with  the  infantry  force 
of  your  Legion,  the  Enfield  Battalion,  a section  of  the  Washington  Artil- 
lery, and  a small  detachment  of  cavalry,  and  attack  the  companies  of 
the  enemy  said  to  be  on  Little  Edisto  Island  at  the  Old  Dominion,  and 
also  at  the  places  of  Messrs.  Bailey  and  Whaley.  You  will  attack  these 
companies  vigorously,  charge  the  force  on  Little  Edisto,  destroying  the 
bridge  over  the  Little  Edisto  River  after  your  passage,  and  drive  the 
enemy  off  the  island.  You  will  place  a reserve  at  Aiken’s  Mill,  with 
orders  to  join  you  at  the  shortest  notice.  Another  reserve  will  be  held 
to  assist  you  at  Pineberry.  You  will  use  every  precaution  not  to  be  cut 
off.  For  this  purpose  send  a strong  picket  in  the  direction  of  Baynard’s. 
Send  also  word  to  the  pickets  at  Bear  Island  to  inform  you  of  the  ap- 
proach of  any  vessel  coming  up  the  South  Edisto.  Should  you  capture 
any  prisoners,  you  will  hurry  them  off'  to  the  reserve  at  Pineberry. 
Should  you  deem  it  practicable  to  pursue  the  enemy  beyond  Whaley’s, 
at  the  forks  of  the  roads,  you  will  immediately  advise  me  at  Pineberry, 
stating  the  coudition  and  position  of  the  enemy.  Should  you  encounter 
a suxierior  force  in  numbers  too  great  to  engage,  you  will  effect  your 
retreat  in  good  order  to  Aiken’s  Mill  or  to  Pineberry,  either  way  you 
should  deem  advisable  and  the  most  safe. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier-  Oeneralj  Commanding. 

Col.  P.  F.  Stevens, 

Commanding  Expedition. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  P.  F.  8tevenSj  Eolcomhe  Legion. 

^ Hi'Adquarters  Holcombe  Leghon, 

March  29,  i862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  pursuant  to  orders  from 
Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  commanding,  I last  night  moved  from  Jehossee, 
about  3 a.  m.,  on  an  expedition  to  Edisto  Island,  with  the  following  force, 
viz:  The  Enfield  Battalion,  230  strong,  Maj.  P.  Nelson,  commanding;  a 
detachment  of  cavalry,  Holcombe  Legion,  dismounted,  75  men;  Com- 
panies B and  F,  Holcombe  Legion,  81  men ; Companies  A,  C,  D,  E,  G, 
and  H,  or  rather  portions  of  each,  261  men,  commanded  by  Majors 
Palmer  and  Garlington. 

Major  Nelson,  throwing  out  skirmishers  from  Captain  Blair’s  com- 


116  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AXD  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

pany  (A)  of  bis  battalion,  crossed  Watt’s  Cut  first,  supported  by  Lieu- 
teuant-Oolonel  Sbingler,  with  whose  command  I was  principally  in 
position.  Moving  forward  without  opposition  until  near  Old  Dominion, 
the  enemy’s  picket  there  first  challenged,  when  an  interchange  of  shots 
took  place  between  them  and  our  advance.  Moving  on  past  Old  Domin- 
ion, if  I remember  aright,  a second  interchange  of  shots  took  place  be- 
tween our  advance  and  the  enemy,  when  I discovered  that  the  head  of 
the  column  had  taken  the  wrong  direction  for  Bailey’s  house,  which  1 
had  determined  to  attack  with  this  portion  of  my  force. 

After  the  delay  thus  caused,  our  guide  having  placed  the  advance  on 
the  correct  road,  the  march  was  continued  to  Bailey’s  without  interrup- 
tion. On  reaching  that  place  it  was  found  deserted.  The  alarm  of  the 
picket  and  the  delay  incident  to  missing  the  way  probably  gave  tlio 
enemy  time  to  escape,  as  one  of  the  prisoners,  subsequently  taken,  stated 
that  there  was  a company  at  that  point  and  two  companies  at  Baynard's. 
Moving  on  from  Bailey’s  to  W^haley’s,  on  reaching  the  main  road  we 
were  fired  on  from  the  woods  on  the  road-side,  but  fortunately  without 
any  loss  on  our  side.  The  enemy  retiring  from  the  woods,  we  moved  ou 
until  near  Whaley’s,  when,  several  discharges  of  artillery  being  heard  at 
that  point  and  the  roll  of  the  enemy’s  drums  being  also  heard  from  two 
points  beyond  Whaley’s,  I deemed  it  prudent  to  retire,  as  my  retreat 
over  the  long  causeway  would  have  been  very  disastrous  in  the  face  of 
artillery. 

Eeturning  to  the  cut,  we  found  that  at  the  first  fire  our  skirmishei  s 
had  killed  one  of  the  pickets  and  wounded  a secoud.  We  there  found 
four  muskets.  Bringing  the  wounded  and  the  dead  man  to  Jehossee,  I 
buried  the  latter  and  dispatched  the  wounded  man  to  Pineberry.  1 
understand  that  he  has  since  died. 

The  second  part  of  the  command,  under  the  guidance  of  Mr.  Seabrook, 
and  the  command  of  Majors  Palmer  and  Garliugton,  taking  a by-path, 
moved  rapidly  to  Little  Edisto  Bridge,  receiving  the  fire  of  pickets  and 
moving  steadily  forward.  At  the  bridge  the  enemy  offered  considerable 
resistance,  but  charging  in  the  face  of  the  fire  the  bridge  was  carried. 
Leaving  a detachment  to  destroy  the  bridge,  the  main  party  pushed  on 
for  the  house  of  Hauahan.  There  was  considerable  resistance  on  the 
part  of  the  enemy,  but  being  finally  broken,  our  party  captured  19,  as 
follows:  First  Lieut.  John  McElhaney,  Corporal  Samuel  Moorhead,  and 
Eoah  Fisher,  Samuel  Campbell,  James  Stefiey,  Andy  Farren,  John  L. 
Taylor,  Abr.  D.  Coy,  Nicholas  Cameron,  Westley  Cameron,  Bobert  Cryt- 
zer,  and  L.  L.  Thompson,  all  members  of  Company  F,  Fifty-fifth  Penn- 
sylvania Kegiment;  Issac  Beam,  W.  E.  Gaiiinger,  John  Mars,  John 
Werniug,  Thomas  Lockard,  Christian  Whitaker,  and  a sergeant  * (name 
unknown,  sent  to  hospital  wounded),  of  Company  H,  same  regiment. 
One  man  was  found  killed  on  the  field,  said  to  be  a non  commisioned 
ofiicer. 

Of  our  entire  command,  one  private  in  the  cavalry,  Kinsler  Davis,  of 
Company  B,  was  slightly  wounded  in  the  leg ; Private  Henderson,  of 
Company  I,  was  shot  through  the  arm,  and  Private  Chapman,  of  Coiii- 
I>any  C,  was  slightly  wounded  in  the  head. 

Crossing  his  men  and  prisoners  in  a small  boat  found  at  Hanahan’s, 
Major  Palmer  got  ofi*  safely  to  Jehossee.  The  flats  sent  by  Lieutenant 
Bates  did  not  arrive  until  late,  thereby  greatly  retarding  the  retreat  of 
Major  Palmer. 

i cannot  too  highly  commend  the  gallantry  and  daring  of  Majors 
Palmer  and  Garliugton,  crossing  to  an  island  and  shutting  themselves 


Silas  Gollii>Lier. 


Chap.  XV.J 


AFFAIR  OX  EDISTO  ISLAND. 


117 


thereon,  determined  to  conquer  the  enemy,  no  matter  what  liis  force. 
The  duty  assii^ned  them  was  most  handsomely  performed. 

Eespectfully,  P.  F.  STEVENS, 

Colonel  Holcombe  Legion. 


Capt.  A.  L.  Evans, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  . 


p.  s. — I omitted  to  mention  that  there  was  a strong  reserve  posted 
partly  at  Pineberry  and  partly  at  Aiken’s  Mill,  on  Jehossee.  Tiiis  reserve 
consisted  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore’s  second  battalion  South  Carolina 
volunteers.  I will  send  Major  Palmer’s  report.  Moore’s  battalion  had 
four  companies  at  Pineberry  and  four  companies  at  Aiken’s  Mill. 

Eespectfully, 


[In  closure.] 

Headquarters  Holcombe  Leuion, 

Camp  Blair.,  S.  (7.,  March  31,  18G2. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  articles  captured 
in  the  late  expedition  to  Edisto : 9 muskets  and  7 bayonets ; 2 rilled 
muskets  and  2 bayonets;  17  sets  of  accouterments;  39/  cartridges  and 
caps;  9 nipple-wrenches;  12  wipers;  1 sword  of  First  Lieutenant  McEl- 
haney,  now  in  possession  of  Capt.  W.  J.  Smith,  to  wliom  it  was  surren- 
dered; 1 sword,  now  in  possession  of  Captain  Crawley. 

Eespectfully,  P.  1^  STEVENS, 

Colonel  Holcomhe  Legion. 

Capt.  A.  L.  Evans, 

Assistant  A djutanP  General. 

P.  S. — I forward  also  one  letter  mentioning  the  force  on  the  island 
and  the  descriptive  list  of  Company  F,  Fifty-fifth  Eegiment  Pennsyl- 
vania Volunteers. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Maj.  F.  G.  Palmer.,  Holcomhe  Legion. 

Headquarters  Holcombe  Leoion, 

Caynp  Blair.,  8.  C.,  March  30,  1862. 

Colonel  : In  pursuance  of  your  orders,  as  soon  as  Colonel  Shingler’s 
command  crossed  Watt’s  Cut,  I moved  my  command,  composed  of  the 
following  companies.  Captains  Smith’s,  Crawley’s,  Bomar’s,  Maffett’s, 
Heller’s,  Eoebuck’s,  and  Bishop’s,  the  two  latter  under  the  command  of 
Lieutenants  Wright  and  Bishop,  numbering  in  all  260  men,  across  the 
cut,  and  moved  rapidly  forward  until  I arrived  near  the  Old  Dominion 
house,  when,  under  the  guidance  of  Edward  and  Henry  Seabrook,  I filed 
to  the  left  and  rear  of  the  house,  throwing  out  Captain  Smith’s  company, 
of  22  men,  as  an  advance,  and  one  platoon  of  Captain  Crawley’s  com- 
pany to  support  it.  Striking  a direct  course  through  the  field  for  the 
bridge  across  Little  Edisto  Eiver  by  a path  known  only  to  the  Seabrooks, 
we  moved  forward  as  rapidly  as  the  darkness  of  the  night  and  the  nature 
of  the  ground  would  admit.  Arriving  at  the  bridge,  we  drove  in  the 
enemy’s  pickets,  which  1 found  stationed  there,  and  having  crossed  over 
I left  our  chaplain,  the  Eev.  Mr.  McCollough,  and  ]\1r.  Irwin,  who  had 
volunteered  to  me  for  the  expedition,  with  Captain  Bishop’s  company, 
under  tue  command  of  Lieutenant  Bishop,  to  destroy  it,  and  ordered 
Lieutenant  Wright  to  remain  there  as  a support  until  the  destruction  of 


118  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

tbe  bridge  bad  sufficiently  progressed  to  cause  any  attempt  at  throwing 
re  enforcements  across  both  difficult  and  hazardous;  then  be  (Lieutenant 
Wright)  was  to  rejoin  me  with  his  command.  It  was  my  intention,  after 
crossing  the  bridge,  to  divide  my  force,  and  to  place  one  portion  under 
the  command  of  Major  Garlington,  which  would  proceed  up  the  main 
road  to  Hanahan’s  house,  the  headquarters  of  the  enemy,  on  Little 
Edisto,  and  I,  with  the  other  portion,  would  move  along  a by-path  across 
the  field  by  a more  direct  route ; but  after  a consultation  with  Major 
Garlington  we  deemed  it  prudent  not  to  divide  our  force,  as  it  was  nec- 
essary to  leave  two  companies  at  the  bridge,  in  consequence  of  the  com- 
bustible material  which  had  been  prepared  for  setting  it  on  fire  failing 
to  reach  us  in  time. 

Striking  a direct  course  for  Hanahan’s  house  we  pushed  forward  at 
the  double-quick,  but  had  not  proceeded  more  than  a quarter  of  a mile 
before  we  succeeded  in  capturing  3 prisoners,  who,  upon  being  ques- 
tioned, asserted  that  they  had  one  regiment  upon  Little  Edisto  Island. 
Having  Captains  Smith’s  and  Crawley’s  companies  in  front,  and  not  know- 
ing where  the  enemy  was  stationed,  I ordered  Captain  Bomar  to  throw  his 
company  to  the  right  and  make  a reconnaissance  in  that  direction.  He 
had  not  proceeded  far  when  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  him  from  behind 
a ditch  and  bank  about  100  or  150  yards  off,  wffiich  fire  was  promptly 
returned  by  his  company.  I immediately  ordered  Captains  Maffett  and 
Heller  to  the  support  of  Captain  Bomar.  Our  men,  succeeding  in  get- 
ting under  cover  of  the  bank,  o])ened  a sharp  fire  upon  the  place  from 
which  the  fire  of  the  enemy  proceeded,  and  soon  drove  them  from  their 
position ; but  not  being  able  to  see,  on  account  of  the  density  of  the  fog, 
and  supposing  their  main  force  at  the  house  when  they  retired,  I took 
it  for  granted  they  had  fallen  back  to  that  position,  and  in  the  mean  time 
Captains  Smith  and  Crawley  came  up  with  14  other  prisoners,  wffiich 
they  had  captured. 

I then  ordered  Major  Garlington,  with  Captains  Maffett’s  and  Heller’s 
companies,  to  attack  the  house,  and  the  remainder  of  the  force  to  sup- 
port the  attack.  With  a yell  and  at  the  double-quick  they  charged  the 
house,  but  to  their  astonishment  found  only  two  or  three  of  the  enemy, 
who  fled  at  their  approach  and  escaped  under  cover  of  a dense  fog. 

The  forces  left  for  the  destruction  of  the  bridge,  having  accomplished 
their  object,  rejoined  me  shortly  after  I had  taken  possession  of  the 
house,  but  too  late  to  take  part  in  the  skirmish. 

Having  executed  your  orders  in  reference  to  the  attack  upon  the 
enemy,  and  not  seeing  the  flats  which  were  ordered  to  be  sent  to  me 
there,  I immediately  commenced  crossing  the  prisoners  and  troops  in  a 
small  boat,  capable  of  carrying  only  5 persons,  which  I found  at  the 
landing.  1 was  therefore  obliged  to  land  on  the  opposite  shore,  from 
which  place  we  had  to  march  through  a marsh  about  three-fourths  of  a 
mile  in  length. 

Kot  being  able  to  make  an  examination  of  the  ground  on  which  the 
skirmish  took  place,  I am  unable  to  give  an  exact  account  of  the  loss  the 
enemy  sustained.  I know  only  of  1 being  killed,  1 wounded  and  cap- 
tured, together  with  18  privates  and  non-commissioned  officers  and  1 
first  lieutenant,  all  of  the  Eifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Kegiment;  making  a 
total  of  21  in  killed,  wounded,  and  captured.  We  also  took  some  arms, 
accouterments,  and  baggage,  but  not  being  able  to  bring  them  off*,  most 
of  the  things  were  destroyed.  I was  obliged,  on  account  of  the  sickness 
of  one  of  the  prisoners,  to  leave  him. 

I have  the  satisfaction  of  reporting  that  my  command  sustained  no 
loss,  and  only  2 men  slightly  wounded,  1 belonging  to  Captain  Bomar’s 
and  the  other  to  Captain  Bishox)’s  companies. 


Chap.  XV.] 


AFFAIR  ON  EDISTO  ISLAND. 


119 


I take  pleasure  in  stating  that  the  officers  and  men  under  iny  com- 
mand behaved  in  a prompt,  gallant,  and  meritorious  manner,  and  upon 
which  the  success  of  the  expedition  depended. 

Before  closing  my  report  I must  call  your  attention  particularly  to  tlie 
gallant  part  taken  by  Maj.  A.  0.  Garlington,  not  only  in  rendering  me 
invaluable  assistance  by  his  counsels,  but  by  being  prominently  engaged 
in  extending  and  attending  to  the  prompt  execution  of  every  order  1 
gave;  also  "to  the  active  part  taken  by  Mr.  McOollough  and  Mr.  Irwin 
in  the  faithful  discharge  of  the  duty  I assigned  them,  upon  which  the 
safety  of  the  command  depended. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  yours,  respectfully, 

F.  G.  PALMER, 
Major  Holcombe  Legion. 

Col.  P.  F.  Stevens, 

Commanding  Expedition  to  Edisto,  S.  G. 

P.  S. — The  Seabrooks  not  only  rendered  me  invaluable  assistance  as 
guides,  but  took  an  activ^e  part  in  the  skirmish  we  had  with  the  enemy. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Holcombe  Leoion,  Camp  Blair,  S.  C., 

. . Mar  ell  31,  1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  above  report  of  Major 
Palmer.  In  explanation  of  one  or  two  points  I would  state  that  among 
the  21  killed,  wounded,  and  captured,  as  mentioned  by  Major  Palmer, 
there  was  1 prisoner  sick  in  the  house,  and  he  was  the  one  left. 

I would  also  call  especial  attention  to  the  gallantry  of  Messrs.  McCol- 
lough  and  Irwin  at  the  bridge.  \Yhile  they  were  engaged  in  destroying 
the  bridge  a portion  of  the  enemy,  escaping  from  Major  PalmeFs  party, 
attempted  to  cross  the  bridge,  but  were  driven  back,  Messrs.  McCol- 
lough  and  Irwin  encouraging  and  directing  Company  I during  the  skir- 
mish. While  holding  the  bridge  two  officers  approached  from  Whaley’s 
side  (Big  Edisto).  They  were  fired  on  by  a party  under  charge  of  Mr. 
Irwin,  and  one  of  the  officers  was  seen  to  fall  and  struggle  upon  the 
side  of  the  road.  He  was  not  seen  to  rise  again.  The  other  fled.  Mr. 
Irwin  is  under  the  impression  the  officer  was  of  high  rank,  as  indicated 
by  his  dress,  and  his  impression  is  that  he  was  killed. 

I forward  the  report  of  Lieutenant  Salvo,  commanding  detachment  of 
Washington  Artillery. 

Respectfully,  P.  F.  STEVENS, 

Colonel  Holcombe  Legion, 

Capt.  A.  L.  Evans, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  James  Salvo^  Washington  Light  Artillery. 

Camp  Salvo,  S.  C.,  March  30,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  having  received  orders  from 
Colonel  Stevens  at  Ip.  m.  Friday,  28th  instant,  to  cross  with  my  sec- 
tion of  the  Washington  Light  Artillery  to  Jehossee  Island,  in  compli- 
ance therewith  I left  this  camp  at  1.30  p.  m.  with  the  two  pieces,  one 
6-pounder  gun  and  one  12-pounder  hov/itzer,  for  Grimball’s  Landing, 
which  we  reached  at  2.30  p.  m. 


120  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

There  I waited  till  sunset  with  the  view  of  precluding  the  enemy  from 
observing  our  movements,  and  also  because  the  tide  was  more  favorable 
at  that  liour  for  effecting  a landing  on  the  other  side.  I then  passed 
my  command  over  in  three  flats  to  Governor  Aiken’s  Landing,  on  Jehos- 
see  Island. 

Here,  moving  a short  distance  along  the  road,  I halted  till  2.30  a.  m. 
of  Saturday,  the  29th  instant,  and  then  taking  a negro  guide  moved 
down  to  the  Little  Edisto  Eiver,  and  took  up  a position  directly  oi^posite 
to  Hanahan’s  house,  on  Little  Edisto  Island.  In  this  position  I waited 
for  the  burning  of  the  bridge  which  joined  Big  Edisto  to  Little  Edisto, 
the  signal  for  me  to  take  my  part  in  the  engagement,  which  the  rattle 
of  musketry  and  the  shouts  of  the  combatants  soon  gave  me  to  under- 
stand had  now  commenced. 

Darkness  seemed  to  linger  later  than  usual,  and  I was  afraid  that  the 
contest  would  be  decided  before  it  became  light  enough  for  me  to  render 
any  assistance  with  the  artillery.  And  when  at  last  the  daylight  shone 
I found  that  a dense  fog  prevailed  and  entirely  intercepted  my  view  of 
the  opposite  shore,  so  tliat  even  the  tops  of  the  trees  on  Little  Edisto 
were  invisible.  Tliis  unfortunate  condition  of  affairs  lasted  until  tbe 
engagement  was  over,  efiectually  cutting  me  off  from  taking  any  share 
in  it,  and  preventing  my  seeing  even  the  signal  for  me  to  open  fire. 

After  the  firing  had  all  ceased,  having  previously  heard  it  in  the 
direction  of  Hanahan’s  house,  besides  much  shouting  there,  too,  showing 
.that  our  men  had  got  there,  I came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  fight  at 
tliis  point  had  been  decided  in  our  favor,  and  so,  according  to  ]>revious 
instructions,  I sent  the  howitzer  with  orders  to  report  to  Colonel  iShing- 
ler  at  Watt’s  Cut;  but  before  it  got  there  our  troops  had  all  recrossed 
to  Jehossee  Island,  and  being  met  by  Colonel  Shingler  on  the  road,  he 
ordered  it  to  cross  over  to  the  main. 

Shortly  afterwards  I received  orders  to  the  same  effect,  and  in  com- 
jiliance  therewith  returned  to  Aiken’s  Landing  with  the  other  iiiece,  and 
embarking  the  se.ction,  reached  Grimball’s  Landing  at  11.30  a.  m.  and 
this  camxi  at  2 p.  m.,  the  pieces,  horses,  and  men  unscathed  and  in  good 
condition. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  SALVO, 

Lieut. ^ Commanding  First  Section  Washington  Light  Artillery, 

Adjutant  Du  Bose,  Rolcomhe  Legion. 


MARCH  30-31, 1862. — Affairs  on  Wilmington  and  WMtemarch  Islands,  Ga. 

REFOriTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Col.  Rndolpli  Rosa,  Forty-sixtli  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  R.  Lawton,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Bc^port  of  Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore.,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Tybee  Island,  Ga.,  April  1,  18G2. 
General:  I send  herewith  a report  from  Colonel  Bosa,  commanding 
the  Forty-sixth  New  York,  from  which  regiment  the  hulk  in  Lazaretto 


Chap.  XV.] 


WILMINGTON  AND  WIIITEMARSII  ISLANDS. 


121 


Creek  receives  its  crew.  Ooe  of  bis  guard  boats  and  17  men,  sent  out 
daily  from  tbe  bulk,  have  been  taken  by  tbe  enemy.  They  were  attacked 
apparently  by  a large  scouting  party.  I have  always  recommended  that 
position  to  be  beld  by  a gunboat.  At  tbe  time  tbe  very  poor  substitute 
of  an  old  bulk  was  resorted  to  no  gunboat  was  available,  I suppose.  Tbe 
position  is  by  no  means  secure  from  attack  in  small  boats,  of  wbicb  tbe 
enemy  is  known  to  have  a good  supi)ly  in  Saint  Augustine  Creek  and  ad- 
jacent waters.  Tbe  bulk  Avben  first  sent  there  was  intended  princi])ally 
to  prevent  small  steamers  communicating  witb  Fort  Pulaski  tbrougb 
Turner’s  Creek,  and  not  to  guard  McQueen’s  Island  Marsb  against  tbe 
approach  of  foot  passengers,  on  wbicb  extra  and  extended  duty  tbe 
boat  and  guard  were  lost.  I urgently  recommend  that  tbe  services  of 
a gunboat  in  Wilmington  lilarrows  be  at  once  secured.  I do  not  consider 
the  property  (guns  and  ammunition)  on  Goat’s  Point  safe  from  a foray 
without  this  ijrecaution. 

I recommended  some  days  ago  to  General  Viele  and  also  to  General 
Sherman  to  picket  McQueen’s  Islaud  from  Bird  Island  battery,  to  wbicb 
place  it  is  convenient.  I could  init  some  siege  and  field  guns  in  posi- 
tion on  Goat’s  Point  (screened  from  view  from  tbe  fort)  to  cover  Laza- 
retto Creek  and  send  out  every  evening  a boat  guard  from  that  point 
up  the  creek  to  remain  out  twenty-four  hours.  A small  steamer  like 
tbe  Mayflower  or  Honduras  is  wanted  here  very  much,  if  no  gunboats 
can  be  bad  tbe  steamer  is  indispensably  necessary,  and  could  be  armed. 
This  would  help  matters  some  by  placing  her  near  tbe  bulk.  I have 
made  repeated  applications  for  a steamer,  but  thus  far  without  success. 
I sent  this  afternoon  to  Warsaw  Sound,  requesting  that  a gunboat  from 
that  place  be  sent  up  Wilmington  Narrows  until  advices  can  be  bad 
from  division  headquarters.  Tbe  messenger  has  not  returned.  Should 
tbe  bulk  be  overpowered  our  batteries  against  Fort  Pulaski  would  be 
exposed  to  a very  annoying  fire  from  her.  Tbe  place  should  be  beld 
by  us  securely. 

I trust  these  matters  will  command  your  immediate  attention. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMOEE, 
Brigadier-General^  Commanding  Post, 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham, 

Comdg.  First  Division^  Dept,  of  the  South,  Beaufort,  S.  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Rudolph  Rosa,  Forty-sixth  Ffeio  Yorlc  Infantry. 

Ship  Montezuma, 
Gibson  Cut,  April  1,  1862. 

General  : In  accordance  with  your  orders,  I arrived  here  on  Satur- 
day evening  with  a detachment  of  30  men  and  2 commissioned  officers 
from  the  Forty-sixth  Eegiment.  On  Sunday  I made  a reconnaissance 
on  Whitemarsb  and  Wilmington  Islands,  pushing  in  both  cases  out  to 
Thunderbolt  and  Saint  Augustine  Creeks,  opposite  to  Thunderbolt  and 
Carston  Bluffi  batteries.  Nothing  remarkable  occurred,  exce])tiug  that 
tbe  small  stern-wheel  steamer  did  show  herself  near  to  our  boats  left  at 
Gibson’s,  in  tbe  Oatland  Creek,  wbicb  is  not  spiked,  and  turned  back 
after  receiving  three  of  our  musket  shots  from  a i)oiut  of  land.  For 
particulars  apply  preliminary  to  Lieutenant  Metzner. 

On  returning,  I learned  that,  by  an  unaccountable  hallucination  of 


122  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai’.  XV. 

the  lieutenant  left  in  command  of  the  Montezuma,  the  German  Dan- 
nenfelser  and  2 men  had  been  allowed  to  visit  Wilmington  Island,  and 
were  missing.  On  Monday  morning  it  was  ascertained  by  a patrol  that 
tliey  had  been  on  Dannenfelser’s  farm,  and  left  there  at  12  o’clock,  Sun- 
day, for  the  Montezuma.  The  usual  boat  guard  was  then  left  opposite 
Hunter’s  farm,  and  a relief  was  sent  for  them  towards  the  afternoon. 
Guard  boat  and  relief  are  now  missing  unaccouiitabiy,  together  with  2 
commissioned  officers  and  35  enlisted  men.  I shall  stay  here  until  fur- 
ther news.  I just  sent  Captain  Hinckel  to  the  three  gunboats  in  Warsaw 
Sound  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  one  of  them  to  make  a trip  up  to 
Gibson’s  farm  and  the  spikes  across  Wilmington  Narrows. 

I most  respectfully  propose  to  send  50  men,  with  2 commissioned  offi- 
cers and  two  days’  rations,  to-night  for  another  reconnaissance  in  Wil- 
mington, and  for  ascertaining  the  fate  of  the  guard  boat.  If  the  Forty- 
sixth  Eegiment  is  to  give  the  men,  then  I most  respectfully  suggest 
Captains  Schwickart  and  Paulsackel,  with  25  men,  from  their  respect- 
ive companies  each.  By  the  sayings  of  Dannenfelser  and  of  the  negro 
whom  I sent  along  great  rewards  ($12,000)  have  been  offered  for  remov- 
ing from  the  fort  the  garrison.  Perhaps  an  organized  great  patrol  of 
row-boats  lays  in  Turner’s  Creek,  and  it  would  be  desirable  to  have  a 
steamboat  there  doing  duty  during  the  last  iJeriod  of  the  siege.  Our 
boats  are  transports,  but  not  swift  enough  for  military  service,  and  the 
distance  is  too  great. 

By  reconnaissances  I have  got  the  conviction  that  the  intercourse 
between  the  fort  and  Savannah  can  be  stopped  only  by  taking  a por- 
tion on  the  water  between  Turner’s  and  Scriven’s,  near  to  the  spikes. 
All  the  other  terrain  is  a net  work  of  creeks,  passable  for  small  boats, 
and  of  the  most  complicated  features.  To  have  a picket  on  the  shore 
of  the  south  channel,  relieved  from  this  place,  I found  entirely  unfea- 
sible, useless,  and  dangerous.  Perhaps  from  Bird’s  Point  it  would  be 
more  suitable. 

Please  find  inclosed  some  papers.  The  one  referring  to  Dannenfelser 
shows  all  traces  of  genuineness,  and  talks  greatly  for  the  presumxjtion 
that  he  is  no  traitor. 

If  one  or  two  spacious  and  easy-moving  row-boats  could  be  sent — if  so, 
at  once.  Send  also  a dozen  of  good  oars. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

EUDOLPH  EOSA, 
Colonel  Forty- Sixth  Regiment, 

Brigadier-General  Gillmore, 

Commanding  Fost,  Tyhee  Island^  Ga, 

[Indorsement.] 

Since  I received  the  above.  Colonel  Eosa  sends  word  that  the  2 officers 
and  17  of  the  men  (one  boat  partv)  have  returned  to  the  hulk.  The 
other  boat  party  was  fired  into  and  taken. 

Q.  A.  GILLMOEE. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  R.  Lawton.^  C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Department  [Dist.J  of  Georgia, 

Savannah^  Ga.^  April  5,  18G2. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  two  successive  nighis, 
March  30  and  31,  scouting  ijarties  were  sent  to  Whitemarsh  and  Wilming- 


Chap.  XV.] 


OCCUPATION  OF  EDISTO  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


123 


ton  Islands  from  the  Tliirteenth  Georgia  Eegiment,  Colonel  Douglass, 
which  were  entirely  successful,  killing  1 and  capturing  18  of  the  enemy, 
2 of  whom  have  since  died.  They  also  captured  a barge  with  a 0-pounder. 
We  had  but  1 man  wounded,  and  it  is  feared  that  he  will  not  recover. 
The  scouting  ])artv  was  under  the  immediate  command  of  Ca])tain  Craw- 
ford, Thirteenth  Georgia  Eegiment,  who  conducted  it  with  skill  and 
gallantry,  and  all  the  ofOcers  and  men  under  his  command  exhibited 
the  most  commendable  courage  and  enterprise. 

I regret  further  to  report  that  on  the  occasion  of  a subsequent  expe- 
dition  to  Wilmington  Island,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  i)osition 
of  the  enemy  and  attacking  him  if  there.  Assistant  Surgeon  Beasly  was 
shot  through  the  leg  by  a mistake  of  our  own  men  and  had  both  bones 
broken.  There  is  reason  to  hope,  however,  that  he  will  recover  with  as 
little  injury  as  possible. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  LAWTON, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 

Capt.  J.  E.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


APRIL  5,  1862. — Occupation  of  Edioto  Island,  S.  C.,  by  Union  forces. 

Report  of  Col.  Enoch  Q.  Fellows^  Third  'New  Hampshire  Infantry, 

Headquaeters  U.  S.  Forces, 

North  Edisto,  tS.  (7.,  April  5,  18G2. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  reconnaissance  contem- 
plated last  evening  for  to-day  has  been  made  and  proved  very  satisfac- 
tory. I have  taken  possession  of  the  entire  island,  and  have  not  as  yet 
seen  the  enemy.  The  Third  Eegiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  and 
two  pieces  of  artiller^^  are  stationed  at  the  farther  p>art  of  the  island. 
I think  our  position  is  secure,  and  do  not  apprehend  any  danger.  The 
Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  will  be  re-enforced  immediately  by 
the  Forty-seventh  New  York  Volunteers,  the  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers  being  held  in  reserve.  Two  gunboats  of  light  draught  would 
be  of  great  value  to  us  here  as  a means  of  defense.  The  Crusader  draws 
too  much  water  to  be  able  to  run  around  in  the  creeks.  Gunboats  of 
light  draught  will  be  able  to  pass  around  the  island,  therefore  keeping  the 
enemy  at  bay,  and  securing  all  necessary  positions.  The  steamer  Boston 
arrived  at  this  post  this  p.  m.  The  sloop  of  war  Dale  is  still  in  Saint 
Helena  Sound.  I am  not  fully  prepared  to  give  you  a full  detail  of  the 
different  positions  now  held  by  our  forces,  but  will  make  a full  report 
soon.  Colonel  Moore  has  permission  to  visit  Hilton  Head,  leaving 
Major  Kane  in  command,  who  is  fully  competent.  The  Ben  DeFord 
returns  to  Hilton  Head  early  to-morrow.  A line  of  communication  is 
kept  up  with  the  outposts  by  means  of  the  cavalry.  I will  make  a fur- 
ther report  to-morrow. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  Q.  FELLOWS, 

Colonel  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers^  Commanding  Post, 


124  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


APRIL  9,  1862. — Evacuation  of  Jackson villo,  Fia.,  by  Union  forces. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright,  U.  S.  Army,  with  orders, &c. 

No.  2. — Socretary  of  War  to  the  House  of  liepresentatives. 

No.  3. — Col.  W.  S.  Dilworth,  commanding  District  of  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

:n"o.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright U.  S.  Armyj  ivith  orders^  &c. 


Headquarters,  Steamer  Cosmopolitan, 

Fort  Royal  Harbor^  8.  (7.,  April  13,  1802. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  tlie  information  of  the 
general  commanding  the  Northern  District,  that,  in  obedience  to  the 
instructions  contained  in  his  letter  of  the  2d  instant  [following],  I have 
withdrawn  the  troops  from  Jacksonville,  taking  with  me  all  the  stores 
and  other  i)ublic  firoperty,  and  likewise  removing  property  belonging 
to  the  enemy,  consisting  in  part  of  two  8-incIi  columbiads,  with  chassis 
and  carriages,  and  three  field  pieces,  with  their  carriages.  Some  few 
captured  articles,  for  which  we  had  not  room  on  the  transports,  were 
destroyed. 

General  Benham’s  letter  was  received  by  me  on  the  Gth  instant.  On 
the  7th,  preparations  for  withdrawing  were  begun  by  embarking  the 
public  stores,  and  on  the  8th,  at  12  m.,  the  troops  were  marched  on 
board,  and  the  embarkation  was  completed  by  about  2 p.  m.  the  same 
day.  Owing  to  the  heavy  wind  w’hich  had  sprung  up  during  the  morn- 
ing, it  was  impossible  to  get  all  the  transports  clear  of  the  wharf  until 
near  sunset — too  late  to  move  safely  very  far  down  the  intricate  channel 
of  the  river  that  night — and  it  was  therefore  determined  by  the  senior 
naval  officer  and  myself  to  lay  oft*  the  town  until  morning.  This  I was 
more  willing  to  do  as  it  took  from  our  movement  all  appearance  of  a 
hasty  retreat. 

At  0 a.  m.  on  the  9th  the  transports,  convoyed  by  the  gunboats 
Ottawa,  Capt.  Thomas  H.  Stevens,  senior  naval  officer  ; Pembina,  Capt. 
J.  P.  Bankhead,  and  the  Ellen,  Captain  Bndd,  proceeded  down  the  river, 
reaching  Mayport,  near  the  mouth,  at  about  2 p.  m.,  but  too  late  for 
])assing  over  the  bar,  on  account  of  the  state  of  the  tide.  Here  I took 
on  board  one  company  of  the  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Pegiment,  which 
had  been  stationed  at  the  batteries  abandoned  by  the  enemy,  and 
as  our  means  of  transportation  did  not  permit  of  our  carrying  otf  the 
guns,  they  were  destroyc'd  and  their  carriages  and  platforms  burned, 
as  were  also  the  small  buildings  thereat. 

At  3 ]).  m.  on  the  lOth,  the  tide  serving,  the  transports  passed  the  bar, 
the  steamer  Belvidere  jiroceeding  to  Saint  Augustine  and  the  Cosmo- 
liolitan  to  Feriuaidlna.  Stormy  weather  detained  the  steamers  at  Fer- 
nandina  until  this  morning,  which  place  we  left  at  about  7.30  o’clock. 

The  troops  in  garrison  at  Jacksonville  were  the  Ninety-seventh  Penn- 
sylvania Eegiment,  six  comiianies  of  the  Fourth  New  Hamiishire  Begi- 
ment,  and  two  sections  of  Hamilton’s  battery,  under  the  command  of 
Captain  Eansom.  Under  the  general  instructions  of  General  Benham,  I 
have  disposed  the  force  as  follows  : The  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania 
Eegiment  and  Eansom’s  battery  to  Hilton  Head,  four  companies  of  the 
Fourth  New  Hampshire  Eegiment,  including  the  one  at  Saint  John’s 


Chap.  XV.] 


EVACUATION  OF  JACKSONVILLE,  FLA. 


125 


Bar,  to  Saint  Aiigiistiue,  and  the  remaining  three  companies  of  the 
regiment  to  Fernandina.  The  garrison  at  Saint  Augustine  now  consists 
of  seven  companies  of  the  Fourth  iTew  Ilampsliire  Begiment,  and  that 
at  Fernandiua  of  the  Ninth  Maine  Begiment,  three  companies  of  the 
Fourth  New  Uampshire  Begiment,  and  one  company  of  the  volunteer 
engineers.  The  necessity  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  troo])s  from  Jack- 
sonville is  to  he  regretted.  A considerable  number  of  the  inhabitants 
had  avowed  themselves  publicly  in  favor  of  our  cause,  and,  encouraged 
by  the  proclamation  issued  by  General  Sherman  to  the  peoi)le  of  East 
Florida,  had  been  active  in  their  efforts  to  organize  a State  and  city 
government.  These  persons  could  not  remain  behind  with  their  families 
with  any  safety,  the  enemy  having  threatened  the  lives  of  all  who 
should  show  us  the  least  favor  or  even  remain  in  town  after  our  occu- 
pation, and  I accordingly  brought  off*  all  such  as  desired  to  go,  taking 
also  such  of  their  property  as  the  limited  transportation  at  my  commaiKl 
permitted.  Many  of  these  people  have  abandoned  all,  and  are  without 
other  means  than  the  worthless  paper  currency  in  circulation  before  our 
arrival.  Their  condition  not  only  appeals  strongly  to  our  sympathies, 
but  they  have  a claim  to  present  assistance  from  the  Government  to 
which  they  profess  to  be  attached,  and  which  owes  them  aid  and  protec- 
tion. I could  see  no  way  in  which  these  peoi)le  could  be  subsisted  at 
Fernandina,  where  most  of  them  were  lauded,  except  by  issues  li-om 
Government  supplies,  for  the  purchase  of  which  many  of  them,  as  before 
remarked,  have  no  money.  I have  accordingly  instructed  the  com- 
mander of  the  post  to  cause  provisions  to  be  issued  to  such  as  need 
them,  not  exceeding  one  ration  per  day  to  each  person  of  twelve  yeai's 
old  and  over,  and  a half  ration  to  those  under  that  age,  the  provisions 
thus  issued  to  be  paid  for  by  those  having  money.  This  arrangement 
^ill,  I hope,  be  continued  so  long  as  the  necessity  for  it  exists. 

To  Oapt.  Thomas  H.  Stevens,  senior  naval  officer  in  the  Saint  John’s 
Biver,  I desire  to  express  my  obligations  for  his  efficient  aid  in  the 
embarkation  of  the  troops  and  in  convoying  them  down  the  Saint  John’s 
Bivei  , and  to  Capt.  J.  P.  Bankhead,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  gunboat 
Pembina,  for  his  valuable  assistance  in  hauling  the  transports  off  the 
wharf  at  Jacksonville  after  the  troops  were  on  board,  which,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  wind,  could  not  have  been  accomplished  without  assistance. 
I would  also  acknowledge  the  obligations  I am  under  to  Captain  Stevens 
for  his  cordial  co-operation  during  the  time  the  trooi)s  were  in  o(;cupa- 
tion  of  Jacksonville. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WBIGHT, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Third  Brigade. 

Capt.  A.  B.  Ely, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  A.  Bist.,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


Headquarters,  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  March  31,  1862. 
Capt.  Louis  II.  Pelouze, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  E.  C.,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.  : 

Captain  : Beports  from  various  sources  more  or  less  reliable  have 
been  received  within  the  past  few  days  of  an  intention  upon  the  part  of 
the  enemy  to  make  an  attack  upon  this  place,  and  on  Saturday,  the 
29th,  it  was  reported  by  persons  coming  into  the  lines  that  his  forces 
were  at  Three  Mile  Creeli  and  prepared  to  attack  the  town.  To  ascer- 
tain the  truth  of  the  report  I ordered  five  companies  of  the  Fourth  New 


126  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Hampsliire  Eegiment  to  make  a reconnaissance  of  that  vicinity,  and  in 
order  to  see  that  nothing  which  should  be  done  should  be  omitted  t 
accompanied  the  party  myself.  We  examined  the  country  as  far  as  the 
creek  and  pushed  the  advance  some  three-quarters  of  a mile  beyond 
without  seeing  anything  of  the  enemy,  but  we  learned  that  a party 
(horse  and  foot,  numbering  100  perhai^sin  all)  had  been  in  that  vicinity 
earlier  in  the  day  and  had  turned  oh’  to  their  right. 

Yesterday  two  companies  sent  out  from  the  isinety-seventh  Pennsyl- 
vania Regiment  scoured  the  country  up  to  and  somewhat  beyond  the 
run  without  meeting  any  signs  of  the  enemy. 

To-day  reports  of  a concentration  of  troops  in  our  front  have  come  in 
from  various  persons.  At  tirst  I was  inclined  to  view  them  as  repetitions 
of  previous  rumors,  but  I have  since  received  intelligence  in  which  I 
place  considerable  confidence  to  this  effect : 

1st.  That  the  order  for  the  evacuation  of  East  Florida  and  the  trans- 
fer of  the  troops  to  other  localities  has  been  rescinded,  and  that  Governor 
Milton  has  been  placed  in  comidand  of  all  the  rebel  forces  within  the 
State. 

2d.  That  troops  were  being  assembled  at  the  Six  Mile  Run,  or  Creek, 
and  that  they  were  to  move  to  the  Three  Mile  Run  and  take  up  position 
at  once. 

3d.  That  the  forces  just  alluded  to  are  as  follows : 


The  3d  Florida  Eegiment > 700 

The  4th  Florida  Regiment 1,  000 

The  5th  Davis  Cavalry 650 

The  1st  Florida  Battalion 350 


Total 2, 7 00 


4th.  That  orders  had  been  issued  to  return  to  this  section  of  the  State 
the  First  and  Second  Florida  Regiments,  relieving  them  by  Georgia 
troops.  Where  these  regiments  are  I am  unable  to  ascertain  with  cer- 
tainty ; some  say  at  Pensacola,  others  in  Virginia. 

I shall,  of  course,  hold  this  point  to  the  last  against  any  force  that 
may  be  brought  by  the  enemy,  and  am  entirely  confident,  with  the  aid 
of  the  gunboats  now  here,  of  making  a successful  defense;  yet  I must 
impress  upon  the  general  commanding  our  isolated  condition  and  the 
disparity  between  the  forces  numerically  which  the  enemy  can  bring 
against  us,  as  detailed  above,  and  the  troops  under  my  command  at  this 
point.  I would  therefore  most  urgently  applj^  to  the  general  command- 
ing for  dn  increase  to  the  force  now  at  this  post  of  at  least  two  regiments. 
Should  this  re-enforcement  be  sent,  it  should  be  furnished  with  the  neces- 
sary subsistence.  The  two  sections  of  the  light  battery  under  Captain 
Ransom  are  already  here. 

We  are  getting  up  a work  on  the  approaches  to  mount  three  or  four 
guns,  but  it  cannot  be  in  condition  for  defense  for  several  days. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  Jaclcsonville^  Fla..,  April  2,  18G2. 
Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Oenl..,  Rdqrs.  E.  (7.,  Hilton  Head.,  8.  G.: 
Captain  : Since  the  date  of  my  last  report  I have  used  every  effort 
to  ascertain,  through  individuals  coming  in,  the  strength  and  position 


Chap.  XY.] 


EVACUATION  OF  JACKSONVILLE,  FLA. 


127 


of  the  enemy’s  forces  in  this  vicinity,  and  after  siftin<?  and  comparinj]^ 
the  inforaiation  obtained  1 am  pretty  well  satistied  that  the  estimate 
then  presented  is  not  far  from  the  truth.  I wonld,  however,  state  that 
instead  of  First  and  Second  Regiments  of  Florida  troops  being  returned 
to  the  State,  two  Georgia  regiments  are  to  be  sent  liere  in  their  i)lace, 
and  that  General  Anderson,  who  has  been  at  Pensacola  under  Bragg,  is 
to  command  the  rebel  forces  in  East  Florida.  I trust  the  commanding 
general  may  be  able  to  send  the  re-enforcements  I asked  for,  and  if  a few 
cavalry  could  be  added  it  would  leave  nothing  to  be  wished  for. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

n.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Hdqes.  Third  Brigade,  Expeditionary  Corps, 

JacJcsonviUej  Fla.,  April  2,  1802. 

Col.  W.  G.  M.  Davis, 

Commanding  Provisional  Forces  of  Fast  Florida, 

Camp  Langford,  East  Florida: 

Colonel:  After  a careful  consideration  of  the  propositions  presented 
in  your  communication  of  the  1st  instant,  brought  in  by  Mr.  Oscar  Hart, 
under  a flag  of  truce,  I have  to  make  the  following  reply  : 

1st.  That  permission  to  Mr.  Hart  to  have  interviews  with  any  citizens 
of  Jacksonville  in  regard  to  their  leaving  the  city  cannot  be  granted, 
nor  can  I i)ermii  him  to  collect  transportation  for  the  conveyance  cf  per- 
sons desirous  to  leave  our  lines.  Tbe  propriety  of  this  decision  you,  as 
a military  man,  will  readily  recognize. 

2d.  That  the  policy  announced  in  my  note  of  yesterday,  of  permit- 
ting the  removal  from  Jacksonville  of  such  iiersous  as  may  desire  to 
leave  our  lines  to  join  their  families  or  to  reside  in  the  interior  of  the 
State,  will  be  continued,  and  that  on  application  to  these  headquarters 
su(,'h  permission  will  be  granted  as  will  carry  them  safely  beyond  our 
lines.  We  do  not  profess  to  wage  war  upon  women  and  children,  nor 
upon  quiet,  unoffending  citizens ; but,  on  the  contrary,  have  (lone  all 
in  our  power  for  the  protection  of  their  persons  and  i)roperty. 

In  announcing  this  policy  1 have  to  express  the  hope  that  it  will  be 
reciprocated  by  yourself  in  i)ermittiog  the  free  return  to  Jacksonville 
of  such  persons  as  may  desire  to  come  back  to  their  homes.  I desire 
further  to  say  that  the  forces  under  my  command  are  instructed  to  (iarry 
on  all  operations  according  to  the  rules  of  civilized  warfare,  and  that  any 
outrages  upon  unarmed  and  unoffending  citizens  will  be  punished  to  the 
full  extent  of  the  law. 

From  the  representation  made  to  me  of  your  character  as  an  officer 
and  a gentleman  I am  sure  you  will  be  governed  by  a similar  spirit. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General,  Command Ing, 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  April  2,  18G2. 
Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Weight, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces,  Jaclcsonville,  Fla.  : 

Sir  : In  view  of  the  fact  of  the  already  too  extended  line  of  opera- 
tions of  our  forces  in  this  district,  the  major-general  commanding  the 


128  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


department  directs  that  you  make  preparations  for  the  early  withdrawal 
of  your  forces  from  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  the  exact  time  and  manner  of 
which  is  left  to  your  own  judgment,  the  proper  precautions  being  taken 
to  avoid  the  appearance  of  a retreat ; to  bring  off  all  your  stores  and 
supplies,  and  have  the  withdrawal  completed  within  some  two  or  three 
days  after  the  receipt  of  this  order.  Yonr  attention  will  then  be  directed 
to  the  proper  re-enforcing  of  Saint  Augustine  and  Fernandina.  At  the 
former  place  it  is  believed  that  at  least  GOO  men  may  be  necessary’, 
though  perhaps  you  may  deem  it  expedient  that  700  or  800  should 
be  left,  or,  say,  a small  regiment,  if  you  have  one,  under  a judicious  and 
reliable  commander. 

At  Fernandina  it  is  believed  that  900  to  1,000  men  will  be  sufficient, 
but  1,200  may,  in  your  judgment,  be  necessary;  which  force  you  will 
select  and  place  under  a proper  commander.  Eeturn  yourself  to  this 
place  with  the  balance  of  your  command,  unless  you  should  feel  that 
it  was  of  great  importance  to  the  safety  of  Fernandina  that  you  should 
continue  for  the  present  at  that  post.  It  being  the  intention  to  hold 
permanently  the  i)Osts  of  Saint  Augustine  and  Fernandina,  you  will  dis- 
tribute your  supidies  of  i>rovisious,  ammunition,  &c.,  between  these 
two  posts,  leaving  the  supply  for  the  longer  time  at  Saint  Augustine,  if 
practicable,  to  the  extent  of  some  50  or  60  days  for  the  provisions, 
your  troops,  if  possible,  being  so  shix)ped  at  Jacksonville  as  to  avoid 
any  necessity  for  a transfer  before  reaching  that  place.  It  is  the  desire 
of  the  co:nmander  of  the  department  that  you  should  notify  the  people 
of  Jacksonville  on  leaving  that  place  that  it  is  his  intention  to  have  all 
the  aid  and  i)rotection  afforded  to  the  loyal  inhabitants  of  the  interior 
of  Florida  that  is  practicable  from  the  posts  above  named  for  the 
security  of  their  persons  and  property  and  for  the  punishment  of  out- 
rages, and  that  you  should  notify  all  persons  in  that  vicinity  that  we 
hold  them  responsible  for  the  x)reservation  of  order  and  quiet,  being  fully 
determined  that  any  outrages  upon  persons  or  property  contrary  to  the 
laws  and  usages  of  war  shall  be  visited  fourfold  upon  the  inhabitants 
of  disloyal  or  doubtful  character  nearest  the  scene  of  any  such  wrongs 
when  the  actual  and  known  i^erx^etrators  cannot  be  discovered.  As 
Commodore  DuPont  promises  that  his  gunboats  shall  remain  in  the 
Saint  John’s  Kiver,  it  is  very  possible  that  this  force  may  be  sufficient, 
with  proper  efforts  on  the  i)art  of  the  inhabitants  themselves,  for  the 
security  of  that  city. 

Lieutenant  Tardy  is  directed  to  go  in  the  boat  which  carries  this,  for 
the  purpose  of  accompanying  the  re-enforcements  to  Saint  Augustine, 
that  he  may  there  put  such  repairs  as  can  be  conveniently  added  for  its 
defense,  change  traverse  circles  from  the  water  battery  to  the  interior 
work,  &c. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM. 

Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  April  3,  18G2. 
Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Ex.  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. : 

Captain  : If  East  Florida  is  to  be  iiermanently  occupied  by  United 
States  forces,  it  is  desirable  and,  indeed,  necessary  that  certain  civil 
offices  should  be  promptly  filled.  Questions  are  constantly  arising 
which  should  not  be  left  to  the  decision  of  the  military  commander,  as 
they  belong  to  a civil  and  not  a military  jurisdiction,  and  require  a 


Chap.  XV.l  EVACUATION  OF  JACKSONVILLE,  FLA.  129 

knowledge  of  law  which  officers  commanding  troops  are  not  presumed 
to  possess.  I would  therefore  suggest  that  the  Go  vein  merit  be  recom- 
mended to  appoint  a district  judge  and  marslial,  to  reside  at  Jackson- 
ville, to  take  cognizance  of  all  cases  arising  under  the  civil  Federal  juris- 
diction; and  as  a convenience  to  the  ildiabitants  of  the  place  and  the 
United  States  troopsin  the  vicinity,  1 would  suggest  the  propriety  of 
the  appointment  of  a postmaster  for  Jacksonville,  for  FernaiKlina,  and 
for  Saint  Augustine,  all  of  which  places  are  in  possession  of  our  land 
and  naval  forces.  I presume  that  the  necessity  for  the  establishment 
of  a proper  civil  authority  by  the  Federal  Government  is  as  fully  appre- 
ciated by  the  commander  of  the  naval  forces  as  by  myself;  indeed,  I 
understand  from  him  that  he  will  address  a communication  to  the  flag- 
officer  upon  that  subject. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  state  what  is  only  an  act  of  justice  to  Captain 
Stevens,  of  the  Ottawa,  commanding  the  naval  forces  in  the  Saint  John’s, 
that  he  has  rendered  every  aid  in  his  power  to  my  command,  and  that  in 
our  counsels  and  our  acts  there  has  been  an  entire  harmony  of  sentiment. 

Some  of  the  citizens  of  the  vicinity,  whom  I believe  to  be  loyal  to  the 
Union,  have  already  brought  or  desire  soon  to  bring  in  cotton  and  other 
products  of  their  plantations  and  ship  them  to  the  Korth  for  sale.  The 
orders  so  far  received  do  not  seem  to  be  applicable  to  such  cases,  and  I 
have  the  honor  to  request  specific  instructions  in  the  matter. 

Very  respectfuilv,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General^  Comynanding. 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade, 
Kotice.]  JacksonvUlGj  Fla.,  April  7,  I8G2. 

In  accordance  with  orders  issued  by  the  general  commanding  the 
Department  of  the  South,  the  troops  will  be  withdrawn  from  this  plare, 
and  I am  directed  by  him  to  notify  the  people  of  Jacksonville  that  it  is 
his  intention  to  have  all  the  aid  and  protection  afforded  to  the  loyal 
inhabitants  of  the  interior  of  Florida  that  is  practicable  lor  the  security 
of  their  persons  and  property  and  for  the  punishment  of  outrages,  and 
that  he  holds  all  persons  in  that  vicinity  responsible  for  the  preservation 
of  order  and  quiet,  being  fully  determined  that  any  outrages  upon  per- 
sons or  property  contrary  to  the  laws  and  usages  of  war  shall  be  visited 
fourfold  upon  the  inhabitants  of  disloyal  or  doubtful  character  nearest 
the  scene  of  any  such  wrongs,  when  the  actual  and  known  perpetrators 
cannot  be  discovered.  The  undersigned  trusts  that,  inasmiuffi  as  the 
unoffending  citizens  of  this  place  have  been  treated  with  the  utmost  for- 
bearance by  our  forces,  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  carry  out  the  inten- 
tion expressed  in  the  last  clause  of  the  above  notice. 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade, 

Jacksonville,  Fla,,  April  8,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  Louis  Bell, 

Comdg.  Fourth  N.  S.  Regiment,  Saint  Augustine^  Fla.: 
Colonel:  The  major-general  commanding  the  department  having 
directed  the  abandonment  of  Jacksonville  as  a military  ])Ost  and  the 
re-enforcement  of  the  garrison  at  Saint  Augustine,  I send  by  the  Belvi- 
9 R R — VOL  VI 


130  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

dere  four  companies  of  your  regiment  and  tlie  regimental  quartermaster 
to  rei)ort  to  you.  There  will  also  be  delivered  at  the  same  time  subsist- 
ence and  forage  for  about  sixty  days  and  GO, 000  rounds  of  cartridges 
(caliber  .09),  for  all  of  which  Quartermaster  Kelly  has  receipted.  The 
remaining  three  comi^anies  of  your  regiment,  under  Major  Drew,  will  go 
to  Fernandina,  to  re-enforce  the  garrison  at  that  point.  The  post  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Saint  John’s,  at  which  Captain  Sleeper,  Fourth  New  Hami>- 
shire  Volunteers,  with  his  company,  is  now  stationed,  will  also  be  aban- 
doned. What  the  arrangements  in  regard  to  command}^  and  brigades 
will  be  I am  unable  to  say  at  present.  Until  further  instructions  are 
received  you  will  therefore  consider  yourself  as  the  Commander  of  the 
post  at  Saint  Augustine,  and  make  your  reports  to  the  headquarters  of 
General  Benham,  commanding  the  Northern  District.  Captain  Ean- 
som’s  battery,  likewise  on  the  Belvidere,  is  to  proceed  to  Hilton  Head 
on  that  vessel  without  delay.  Please  afford  the  steamer  all  dispatch  in 
unloading.  I shall  advise  that  the  Belvidere  or  some  other  light-draught 
steamer  be  sent  back  to  ply  between  Fernandina  and  Saint  Augustine. 
I go  to  Hilton  Head  with  the  Ninety  seventh  Pennsylvania  Regiment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


Headquaeters  Third  Brigade, 

Fernandina^  Fla.,  April  10,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  H.  Bisbee,  Jr., 

Ninth  Maine  Regiment,  Commanding  Post,  Fernandina,  Fla.: 

Colonel  : Three  companies  of  the  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Regiment, 
now  on  board  the  Cosmopolitan,  are  to  be  added  to  the  garrison  of  your 
post,  and  I have  instructed  their  commander,  Maj.  J.  D.  Drew,  to  report 
to  you.  As  it  is  desirable  that  companies  of  the  same  regiment  be  kept 
together  so  far  as  possible,  you  will  relieve  those  of  the  Ninth  Maine, 
now  at  Fort  Clinch,  by  these  three  companies  of  the  Fourth  New  Hamp- 
shire Regiment.  In  withdrawing  the  forces  from  Jacksonville  it  was 
necessary  for  the  security  of  such  of  the  inhabitants  as  had  given  free 
exhibition  to  their  Union  sentiments  to  remove  also,  and  I have  brought 
them  with  me,  with  such  of  their  effects  as  our  means  of  transportation 
permitted.  To  these  people  you  will  assign  such  of  the  vacant  houses 
in  Fernandina  as  may  be  needed  for  their  temporary  homes,  and,  as 
many  of  these  people  have  lost  their  all  and  will  not  have  the  means  of 
purchasing  provisions,  you  are  authorized  to  furnish  them  from  the 
Government  suiiplies  at  the  x>ost  to  the  extent  necessary,  not  exceeding 
one  ration  to  each  person  of  twelve  years  old  and  over  and  a half  ration 
to  those  under  that  age.  Sucli  persons  among  them  as  have  the  means 
of  paying  for  their  subsistence  must  of  course  do  so.  Provisions  sup- 
I)lied  under  this  authority  must  be  regularly  issued,  and  you  should 
appoint  an  officer  to  superintend  the  same,  if  necessary,  and  to  make  the 
proper  returns  therefor. 

1 shall  proceed  to  Hilton  Head  with  the  Ninetj^-seventh  Pennsylvania 
Regiment,  and  as  I am  not  sure  what  arrangements  will  be  adopted  in 
regard  to  commands,  brigades,  &c.,  you  will  make  your  reports  and 
returns,  till  further  orders,  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Northern  District. 
Requisitions  for  supplies  will  be  made  to  the  same  headquarters. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


131 


Chap.  XV.]  EVACUATION  OF  JACKSONVILLE,  FLA. 

No.  2. 

Report  of  the  Secretary  of  War  to  the  House  of  Representatives, 

Wak  Department, 
Washington,,  D,  0.,  April  28,  18G2. 

Sir  : In  answer  to  the  resolution  of  the  House  of  Eepresentatives, 
passed  on  the  24th  instant,  directing  the  Secretary  of  War  to  communi- 
cate to  the  House  all  the  facts  and  circumstances  within  his  knowledge 
in  regard  to  the  late  evacuation  of  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  by  the  troops  of 
the  United  States,  I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  state  that,  conceiv- 
ing it  to  be  the  province  of  the  President  to  direct  this  Department 
what  facts  in  relation  to  military  operations  shall  be  communicated, 
he  instructs  me  to  say  that  Jacksonville  was  evacuated  by  the  orders  of 
the  commanding  general  of  that  department  for  reasons  which  it  is 
not  deemed  compatible  with  the  public  interest  at  present  to  disclose. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  ITur. 

Hon.  Galusha  A.  Grow, 

Spealcer  of  the  Rouse  of  Representatives, 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col,  W,  S,  Dilworth,  commanding  District  of  Middle  and  Hast 

Florida, 

Hdqrs.  District  of  East  and  Middle  Florida, 

Tallahdssee,  Fla,,  April  15,  18G2. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  the  commanding  general  the 
evacuation  of  Jacksonville  by  the  enemy,  which  was  done  on  the  9th 
instant.  • 

When  the  enemy  first  occupied  Jacksonville,  and  while  all  the  Flor- 
ida troops  were  retreating  in  confusion  and  disorder,  I,  as  colonel  of 
the  Third  Eegiment  Florida  Volunteers,  ordered  a part  of  my  regiment 
to  advance  in  the  direction  of  Jacksonville,  and  took  a position  within 
10  miles  of  the  city,  with  only  250  effective  men.  Soon  I had  eight 
companies  of  my  regiment  with  me.  After  making  a thorough  recon- 
naissance of  the  city,  I became  convinced  that  I could  not  attack  the 
city  without  heavy  loss  and  could  be  driven  out  by  the  enemy^s  gun- 
boats. I then  determined  to  commence  a system  of  annoyances,  by 
attacking  their  pickets,  foraging  parties,  &c.  I made  a successful  attack 
on  the  picket  near  the  city  of  Jacksonville,  killing  4 and  taking  3 pris- 
oners, when  I was  ordered  to  take  command  of  the  district.  Colonel 
Davis  was  then  ordered  to  the  command  of  the  forces  near  Jacksonville, 
and  has  most  successfully  carried  on  the  system  which  I commenced, 
and  which  has  resulted  in  their  evacuation  of  the  place.  Colonel  Davis 
I regard  as  an  efficient  officer,  and  commend  him  to  your  favorable  con- 
sideration. 

I have  further  to  report  that  after  the  evacuation  the  enemy  returned, 
under  a flag  of  truce,  and  were  permitted  to  land  52  negroes,  which  were 
taken  in  charge  by  the  commander  of  the  post. 

I inclose  a list  of  prisoners  taken  near  Jacksonville,  and  ask  instruc- 
tions as  to  what  disposition  will  be  made  of  them. 


132  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

I also  ask  permission  to  exchange  three  of  them  for  three  of  ours 
which  were  taken  at  Santa  Eosa,  near  Pensacola,  and  are  here  on  parole. 
This  exchange  could  be  made  at  Fernandina.  I inclose  reports  of  Colonel 
Davis,  reporting  the  capture  of  these  prisoners.* 

I have  the  honor  to  subscribe  myself,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  DIL WORTH, 
Colonel^  Commanding, 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Pocotaligoj  S.  G. 


APRIL  10,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Fernandina,  Fla. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Lieut.  Col.  H.  Bisbee,  jr.,  Ninth  Maine  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Col.  W.  G.  M.  Davis,  First  Florida  Cavalry. 

Ko.  1. 


Report  of  Lieut,  Col,  S,  Bishee,  jr..  Ninth  Maine  Infantry. 

Headquarters, 
Fernandina^  Fla.,  April  27,  1862. 

Report  in  case  of  a party  of  men  belonging  to  Company  I,  Ninth 
Maine  Regiment,  captured  by  the  enemy  on  the  10th  of  April,  1862. — 
Names  of  the  party:  Orderly  Sergt.  Richard  Webster,  Corp.  James 
W.  Bowman,  Privates  Isaac  Whitney,  John  E.  Kent,  Alonzo  B.  Mer- 
rill, 0.  Wesley  Adams,  taken  prisoners ; Private  Ansel  Chase,  killed. 

At  the  time  the  above  party  were  captured  and  killed  Company  I was 
doing  iiicket  duty  at  the  railroad  bridge  which  spans  the  creek  separat- 
ing Amelia  Island  from  the  main-lfnd.  They  were  captured  at  what 
is  known  in  this  vicinity  as  the  Judge  O’Neal  place,  which  is  about  two 
miles  and  a half  from  the  railroad  bridge.  The  captain  of  the  company 
(S.  D.  Baker)  allowed  this  party  of  men  on  the  7th  of  Ai^ril  to  remain 
at  said  Judge  O’Neal  place  to  protect  the  wife  of  one  Mr.  Heath, 
whom  I held  in  arrest  at  the  time,  and  who  was  living  at  O’Neal’s  house. 
Captain  Baker  left  the  party  at  said  place  without  reporting  it  to  his 
commanding  officer,  doing  it  as  an  act  of  kindness  and  sympathy  for 
Mrs.  Heath,  and,  as  his  men  daily  frequented  the  vicinity  with  impunity, 
did  not  think  that  he  was  doing  a wrong  act  or  exposing  his  men.  On 
the  same  day  (7th  of  April)  Private  William  W.  Lunt,  of  Company  I, 
Ninth  Maine  Regiment,  deserted,  went  to  the  enemy’s  lines,  and,  it  is 
supposed,  reported  to  the  enemy  that  this  party  of  men  was  stationed 
at  Judge  O’Neal’s. 

On  Thursday,  10th  of  April,  Captain  Baker  sent  2 men  to  order  the 
party  in,  who  found  the  dead  body  of  1 man,  that  from  appearances 
had  lieen  shot  that  day,  and  the  remainder  of  the  party  taken  prisoners. 
Very  respectfully, 

H.  BISBEE,  Jr., 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Ninth  Maine  Regiment. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham, 

Commanding  First  Division,  Southern  Department. 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XV.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


133 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  G.  M.  Davis^  First  Florida  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Provisional  Forces  East  Florida, 

Camp  Langford j Fla.,  April  12,  18G2. 

Captain  : I liave  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  tlie  col- 
onel commanding  the  department,  that  Capt.  William  M.  Footman,  of 
Company  F,  First  Florida  Cavalry,  in  charge  of  a detachment  of  40  men 
(same  corps),  sent  by  me  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy  near 
Fernandina  and  to  repel  any  effort  made  to  leave  the  island  of  Amelia 
for  the  main  land  in  such  small  parties  as  he  might  be  able  to  cope  with, 
in  the  execution  of  such  orders  encountered  two  men  on  the  railroad, 
who  had  landed  from  a hand  car,  and  made  them  prisoners  without 
resistance. 

In  a short  time  afterwards  he  found  a party  of  5 men  at  the  house  of 
Judge  O’Neal.  One  of  the  party,  offering  resistance,  was  killed,  and  the 
rest  then  made  prisoners.  The  whole  of  the  prisoners  were  sent  here 
by  Captain  Footman,  and  I have  sent  them  by  the  train  to-day,  under  a 
guard  of  5 men,  to  be  delivered  to  you  at  Tallahassee. 

I desire  x)articularly  to  commend  the  conduct  of  Captain  Footman, 
who  has  on  this  occasion,  as  he  has  at  all  times,  proved  himself  a zeal- 
ous, intelligent,  and  efficient  officer. 

I am  about  to  increase  Captain  Footman’s  force  to  100  men.  He  will 
be  assisted  by  parties  of  citizens  should  he  at  any  time  need  them,  and 
1 look  for  good  news  from  him  before  long.  He  will  alarm  the  enemy 
and  keep  them  confined  to  the  island. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  G.  M.  DAVIS, 
Colonel,  Commanding  Regiment. 

Capt.  I.  S.  Cross, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt,  Gen.,  Dept.  Middle  and  East  Florida. 


APRIL  10-11,  1862. — Bombardment  and  capture  of  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Beuliara,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  P.  H.  O’Eorke,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  of  condition  of  the  works  of 
investment  on  February  28,  1862. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army,  of  operations  against  Fort  Pulaski, 
January  28- April  11,  1862. 

No.  6. — Snrg.  George  E.  Cooper,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  7. — Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  8. — Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  E.  Lawton,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  IT.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Fort  Fulaslci,  Coclcspur  Island,  Ga.,  April  13,  1862. 
Sir  : The  flag  of  our  country  waves  over  Fort  Pulaski.  I summoned 
the  garrison  to  surrender  at  sunrise  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant. 


134  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  IChap.  XV. 

Immediately  on  receiving  their  refusal,  at  8 a.  m.,  we  opened  fire,  the 
bombardment  continuing  without  intermission  for  thirty  hours.  At  the 
end  of  eighteen  hours’  firing  the  fort  was  breached  in  the  southeast 
angle,  and  at  the  moment  of  surrender,  2 i).  m.  on  the  11th  instant,  we 
•had  commenced  preparations  for  storming. 

The  whole  armament  of  the  fort — 47  guns,  a great  supply  of  fixed 
ammunition,  40,000  pounds  of  powder,  and  large  quantities  of  commis- 
sary stores,  have  fallen  into  our  hands ; also  360  prisoners,  of  whom 
the  officers  will  be  sent  North  by  the  first  opportunity  that  offers. 

The  result  of  this  bombardment  must  cause,  I am  convinced,  a change 
in  the  construction  of  fortifications  as  radical  as  that  forshadowed  in 
naval  architecture  by  the  conflict  between  the  Monitor  and  Merrimac. 
No  works  of  stone  or  brick  can  resist  the  impact  of  rifled  artillery  of 
heavy  caliber. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  given  Capt.  Q.  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Engi- 
neers (acting  brigadier-general),  the  officer  immediately  in  charge  of  our 
works  on  Tybee  Island,  for  his  industry,  skill,  and  patriotic  zeal.  Great 
credit  is  also  due  to  his  assistants,  Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  U.  S.  Topo- 
graphical Engineers,  and  Lieut.  Horace  Porter,  of  the  Ordnance  Depart- 
ment. I have  also  to  gratefully  acknowledge  the  services  of  Capt.  0.  E. 
P.  Eodgers,  IJ.  S.  Navy,  who,  with  100  of  his  men  from  the  Wabash, 
under  command  of  Lieutenant  Irwin,  did  nobly  at  the  guns. 

^ Our  gallant  volunteers,  under  the  scientific  direction  of  Captain  Gill- 
more,  displayed  admirable  energy  and  perseverance  in  the  construction 
of  the  earthworks  on  Tybee  Island,  and  nothing  could  be  finer  or  more 
impressive  than  the  steadiness,  activity,  skill,  and  courage  with  which 
they  worked  their  guns  in  battery.  When  I receive  the  reports  of  the 
officers  now  immediately  in  command — Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham  and 
Acting  Brigadier-General  Gillmore — a statement  more  in  detail  will  be 
immediately  forwarded  ; but  I cannot  close  without  expressing  my 
thanks  to  both  these  officers,  and  the  hope  that  Acting  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Gillmore  may  be  confirmed  in  the  position  of  brigadier-general,  to 
which  in  this  bombardment  he  has  established  such  deserving  claims. 

I am  happy  to  state  that  our  loss  was  but  one  man  killed,  the  earth- 
works of  our  batteries  affording  secure  protection  against  the  heaviest 
fire  of  the  enemy.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  has  been  stated  as  three 
severely  wounded. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  very  obedient 
servant, 

DAVID  HUNTER, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  TFur,  Washington^  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Tybee  Island^  Ga.y  April  10,  1862. 
To  the  Commanding  Officer,  Fort  PulasJci: 

Sir  : I hereby  demand  of  you  the  immediate  surrender  and  restoration 
of  Port  Pulaski  to  the  authority  and  possession  of  the  United  States. 
This  demand  is  made  with  a view  to  avoiding,  if  possible,  the  effusion 
of  blood  which  must  result  from  the  bombardment  and  attack  now  in 
readiness  to  be  opened. 

The  number,  caliber,  and  completeness  of  the  batteries  surrounding 


Chap.  XV,] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


135 


you  leave  no  doubt  as  to  what  must  result  in  case  of  your  refusal ; and 
as  the  defense,  however  obstinate,  must  eventually  succumb  to  the 
assailing  force  at  my  disposal,  it  is  hoped  you  may  see  tit  to  avert  the 
useless  waste  of  life. 

This  communication  will  be  carried  to  you  under  a flag  of  truce  by 
Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  U.  8.  Army,  who  is  authorized  to  wait  any  i^eriod 
not  exceeding  thirty  minutes  from  delivery  for  your  answer. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

DAVID  HUOTEPt, 

Majo  r-  Genera  I,  Com  ma  ndi  ng. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig,  Gen,  Henry  W.  Benham^  U.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  First  Div.,  North’n  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 
Fort  PulasMj  Goclcspiir  Island^  Ga.^  April  12,  1802. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  conclusion  of  the  operations  of 
the  siege  of  Fort  Pulaski,  in  Savannah  Eiver,  Georgia,  which  have 
resulted  in  the  capture  of  that  fort  and  its  armament  and  the  uncon- 
ditional surrender  of  the  eflective  force  of  the  garrison,  amounting  to 
361,  of  whom  24  were  officers,  besides  about  18  who  were  sick  and 
wounded.  This  siege  is,  as  I would  remark,  the  first  trial,  at  least  on 
our  side  of  the  Atlantic,  of  the  modern  heavy  and  rifled  projectiles 
against  forts  erected  and  supposed  to  be  sufficiently  strong  prior  to 
these  inventions,  almost  equaling,  as  it  would  appear,  the  revolution 
accomplished  in  naval  warfare  by  the  iron-clad  vessels  recently  con- 
structed. These  operations,  with  the  cordial  assistance  and  co-operation 
of  the  naval  forces  under  Flag  Officer  S.  F.  DuPont,  have  been  accom- 
plished by  a portion  of  the  troops  of  my  division,  for  the  most  part 
under  the  immediate  direction  of  Capt.  Q.  A.  Gillmore,  Corps  of  Engi- 
neers, acting  brigadier- general  and  chief  engineer  of  the  siege,  to  whose 
report  (copy  of  which  respectfally  forwarded  herewith)  I have  the  honor 
to  refer  for  the  details  of  the  operations. 

Immediately  after  our  arrival  in  this  department,  as  you  are  aware, 
I visited  Tybee  Island  on  the  31st  ultimo,  and  carefully  inspected  the 
works  being  erected  there  for  the  direct  attack  upon  this  fort,  which 
had  been  well  advanced  by  General  Gillmore,  under  the  directions  of 
that  faithful  and  judicious  officer  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman,  my  prede- 
cessor in  this  district.  These  works  consisted  of  eleven  batteries,  pre- 
pared for  thirty-five  to  thirty-seven  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance,  extend- 
ing along  an  oblique  line  of  about  one  and  a half  miles  in  length,  opposite 
the  southeast  face  of  the  fort,  the  extremities  of  this  line  being  at  dis- 
tances, respectively,  of  about  1 and  2 miles  from  the  fort.  They  were 
placed  with  great  skill  and  judgment,  and  constructed  properij^,  and 
with  as  much  strength  and  regularity  as  the  circumstances  of  tlie  case 
would  permit,  and  the  care  and  forethought  of  the  engineer  in  provid- 
ing for  the  proper  supply  of  ordnance  and  other  stores  that  might  be 
needed  is  worthy  of  especial  mention,  the  whole  arrangement  at  Tybee 
Island  meeting  my  entire  approval. 

Desiring,  however,  to  obtain,  if  possible,  a concentric  fire  upon  th^ 
work,  I endeavored  to  arrange  with  General  Yiele,  commanding  at  Dau- 


136  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

faskie  Island,  to  accomplish  this  object,  directing  him  upon  the  Gth 
instant  to  place  a battery  on  Long  Island,  to  attack  the  gorge  of  the 
fort  on  the  west,  and  after  a second  visit  to  him,  on  the  9tb,  to  con- 
struct another,  if  practicable  and  the  distance  were  not  too  great,  upon 
Turtle  Island  on  the  north,  the  object  being  mainly  the  moral  effect  of 
an  encircling  fire  rather  than  the  expectation  of  any  serious  effect 
upon  the  walls  at  that  distance.  From  some  cause,  however,  the  heavy 
ordiumce  for  these  batteries  did  not  arrive  in  time,  and  the  lighter 
pieces  most  available  and  placed  in  position  on  Long  Island  served 
rather  as  a diversion  than  for  any  serious  demonstration  upon  the 
work. 

The  main  attack  upon  the  work,  as  you  are  aware,  commenced  upon 
the  morning  of  the  10th  instant,  at  about  7.30  o’clock,  and  immediately 
after  the  refusal  of  its  commander  to  surrender  according  to  your  sum- 
mons previously  sent.  Being  present  yourself  at  or  between  our  bat- 
teries for  the  greater  portion  of  the  (lay  during  the  contest  between 
these  batteries  and  the  fort,  you  are,  of  course,  personally  aware  of  the 
great  etficiency  with  which  these  batteries  were  served,  and  of  the 
successful  commencement  of  the  breach  at  the  southeast  angle  of  the 
fort  on  that  day.  You  are  also  aware  of  the  efficient  and  accurate  firing 
of  the  guns  from  the  fort,  directed  as  they  were  with  great  precision,  not 
only  at  our  batteries,  but  even  at  the  individual  persons  passing  between 
them  or  otherwise  exposed.  The  fire  on  our  part,  though  delayed  at 
first  by  the  necessity  for  obtaining  the  proper  ranges,  was  kei)t  up 
with  such  vigor  that  over  3,000  projectiles,  varying  in  size  from  the 
13-inch  mortar  shell  to  the  30  pounder  Parrott  shot,  were  thrown  at  the 
fort  during  the  first  day. 

At  evening,  as  it  was  necessary  to  guard  against  the  possibility  of 
attack  from  the  Wilmington  marshes,  a force  of  some  two  regiments 
v/as  stationed  upon  the  ridges  of  land  adjacent — one  immediately  in 
rear  of  the  upper  batteries  and  one  on  a ridge  running  towards  Tybee 
Eiver ; and  to  give  General  Gillmore  an  opportunity  for  the  rest  which 
he  required,  I arranged  with  him  to  remain  myself  at  the  batteries  in 
general  charge  of  the  forces  during  the  first  half  of  the  night,  directing 
at  the  same  time  that  the  shells  should  be  thrown  at  the  fort  every  ten 
or  fifteen  minutes  during  the  night,  for  the  purpose  of  fatiguing  the 
garrison.  This  shell  practice,  especially  during  the  early  part  of  the 
night,  while  the  moon  was  u]),  was  reported  to  be  most  successful,  or 
fully  as  accurate  as  by  daylight. 

As  a principal  battery  of  one  James  and  five  Parrott  guns  near  the 
fort  appeared  not  to  have  been  so  successfully  served  as  was  possible 
during  the  day,  and  as  a detachment  of  100  seamen  from  the  Navy, 
under  Lieutenant  Irwin,  had  been  kindly  furnished  to  us  by  Flag- 
Officer  DuPont,  at  the  suggestion  of  Capt.  0.  E.  P.  Eodgers,  which  had 
unfortunately  reached  us  too  late  for  the  first  assignment  to  the  bat- 
teries, I directed  that  a portion  of  this  battery  should  be  placed  in  the 
hands  of  this  command,  and  the  remainder,  with  suitable  men,  to  be 
under  Captain  Turner,  assistant  commissary  of  subsistence,  late  of  the 
First  Artillery,  U.  S.  Army,  and  now  chief  commissary  of  your  staff', 
and  the  James  and  three  of  the  Parrott  guns  were  assigned  to  the 
naval  detacffiment  accordingly. 

At  about  7 on  the  morning  of  the  11th  the  fire  opened  on  both  sides 
with  great  vigor  and  accmracy,  the  certainty  as  to  direction  and  distance 
being  greatly  beyond  that  of  the  previous  day,  especially  on  the  part 
of  the  enemy,  there  being  scarcely  anj^  exposure  of  our  force  that  did 
not  draw  a close  shot,  while  the  embrasures  and  parapets  of  our  bat- 


Chap.  XY.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


137 


teries  were  most  accurately  reached.  At  about  10  to  11  a.  m.  I visited 
all  the  batteries,  findiog:  each  of  them  most  elliciently  served,  especially 
the  small  mortar  batteries  nearest  the  fort,  the  batteries  just  referred 
to  ill  charge  of  the  JS^avy  and  Captain  Turner,  and  the  columbiad  bat- 
teries under  Captain  Pelouze.  I found  that  an  embrasure  at  the  breached 
point,  which  was  much  enlarged  on  the  previous  day,  was  now  opened 
to  fully  the  size  of  the  recess  iirch,  or  some  8 or  10  feet  square,  and  the 
adjacent  embrasures  were  rapidly  being  brought  to  a similar  condition. 
At  about  noon  the  whole  mask  and  parapet  wall  of  the  casemate  first 
injured  fell  into  the  ditch,  raising  a ramp  quite  visible  to  us,  and  soon 
after  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  adjacent  casemate  began  to  fall, 
the  Parrott  and  James  shot  passing  entiiely  throiiuh  (as  we  could  see) 
the  heavy  timber  blindage  in  rear  of  the  casemates  to  the  rear  of  the 
magazine  on  the  opposite  (northwest)  angle  of  the  fort. 

In  this  state  of  things  I fidt  sure  that  we  would  soon  be  able  to  jieel 
off  the  whole  scarp  wall  from  the  front  of  the  casemates  of  the  south- 
east front,  making  a breach  greatly  larger  than  the  small  garrison  could 
defeud,  with  probably  another  smaller  breach  upon  the  opposite  side, 
and  I at  once  determined  that  if  the  resistance  was  continued  it  would 
be  best  and  entirely  practicable  to  storm  the  fort  successfully  within 
thirty  to  forty  hours,  and  I had  given  directions  to  General  Gillmore  to 
have  suitable  scaling-ladders  prepared  for  the  purpose,  and  was  arrang- 
ing for  the  proper  forces,  boats,  &c.,  when,  at  about  2 p.  m.,  we  discov- 
ered a white  flag  thrown  up,  and  the  rebel  flag,  after  filling  out  to  the 
wind  for  a few  minutes  at  half-mast,  came  slowly  to  the  ground.  I then 
directed  my  assistant  adjutant-general,  Oapt.  A.  B.  Ely,  to  leave  for  the 
fort,  but  finding  soon  after  your  own  adjutant-general.  Major  Halpine, 
at  the  batteries,  I commissioned  him,  accompanied  by  Cai)tain  Eiy,  to 
proceed  there  with  the  terms  I proposed — simply  those  of  your  first 
note — demanding  the  surrender  of  the  garrison  and  all  the  armament 
and  weapons;  no  other  modification  to  be  allowed  than  that  they  should 
have  as  favorable  terms  as  are  given  by  our  Government  in  this  war. 
General  Gillmore  reaching  the  upper  batteries  soon  after,  and  appear- 
ing to  desire  it,  and  as  his  services  most  eminently  merited  that  his 
wishes  should  be  gratified,  I authorized  him  also  to  pass  over  to  accept 
the  surrender  of  the  fort,  and  the  terms  assented  to  by  him  are  essentially 
those  dictated  by  me,  excepting,  i)erha])s,  those  relating  to  the  disabled 
men,  who  would  otherwise  have  been  a burden  to  us,  and  by  the  return 
of  these  I have  endeavored  to  provide  by  a letter  from  Colonel  Olmstead, 
the  rebel  commander,  for  the  receiving  of  a like  number  of  men  of  the 
Forty-sixth  New  York  Eegiment,  cax)tured  from  Tybee  about  two  weeks 
since. 

1 have  now  in  closing  but  the  pleasing  duty  of  reporting  upon  the 
instances  of  individual  merit  that  have  come  under  my  observation  dur- 
ing this  siege,  which  reports  must  necessarily  be  brief  where  so  many 
have  done  so  well. 

To  the  kind  and  cordial  co-operation  of  the  naval  forces,  under  Flag- 
Officer  DuPont,  I feel  that  our  highest  thanks  are  due,  for  it  was  only 
by  their  assistance  that  we  have  been  enabled  to  completely  isolate  the 
fort  from  the  hope  of  succor  and  relief,  while  the  ready  supply  of  ord- 
nance stores  and  other  material  most  needed  by  us  at  the  last  moment 
has  been  of  great  value,  and  the  battery  manned  by  their  detachment, 
under  Lieutenant  Irwin,  I have  the  pleasure  of  stating,  was  one  of  the 
most  efficiently  served  against  the  fort  during  the  action,  a supervision 
being  kept  over  it  constantly  by  Gai)t.  G.  E.  P.  Eodgers  in  person,  an 


138  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

ofiScer  who,  an  acquaintance  of  more  than  twenty  years  assures  me,  is 
without  a superior  either  in  our  own  or  any  other  service. 

To  Acting  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore,  captain  of  engineers,  the  high- 
est praise  is  due  for  the  exercise  of  his  great  professional  skill  and  judg- 
ment and  his  laborious  industry  in  arranging  and  personally  superin- 
tending all  the  general  preparations  and  all  the  details  of  the  actual 
siege,  which  have  resulted  so  successfully,  showing  how  eminently  worthy 
of  the  position  and  rank  in  which  his  previous  commander.  General 
Sherman,  had  placed  him,  as  far  as  was  in  his  power,  and  which  rank 
1 would  respectfully  ask  your  interest  for  the  confirmation  of  by  the 
President.  Captain  Pelouze,  acting  inspector-general  of  the  depart- 
ment 5 Captain  Turner,  chief  commissary  of  the  department ; Lieutenant 
Porter,  of  the  U.  S.  Ordnance  Department,  and  Lieutenant  Wilson, 
Topographical  Engineers,  all  in  charge  of  batteries,  rendered  most 
zealous  and  efficient  service,  which  their  previous  military  education 
has  so  well  fitted  them  for.  Lieut.  P.  H.  O’Eorke,  of  the  U.  S.  Eugineers, 
acting  as  assistant  engineer  to  General  Gillmore,  was  also  most  energetic 
and  useful. 

Of  your  own  department  staff  I had  the  pleasure  of  noticing  repeatedly 
under  fire  most  actively  engaged  Major  Halpine,  assistant  adjutant-gen- 
eral ; Lieutenant  Smith,  acting  assistant  adjutant- general ; Major  Hough, 
most  especially  zealous j Major  Wright;  Captains  Thompson  and  Dole; 
and  Lieutenants  Stockton,  Hay,  and  Kinzie,  your  aides,  not  only  coin- 
ifiying  with  your  own  directions,  but  ready  to  aid  me  at  all  times  when 
needed. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Hall,  of  the  Volunteer  Engineer  Eegiment,  deserves 
most  special  commendation  for  his  activity,  zeal,  and  general  usefulness 
at  all  times,  by  night  and  by  day,  by  which  he  constantly  rendered  most 
valuable  services,  as  did  the  battalion  of  his  fine  regiment  during  the 
siege  and  previously;  and  Captain  McArthur,  of  the  Eighth  Maine 
Eegiment,  being  highly  praised  by  different  officers,  who  witnessed  his 
successful  management  of  his  men  at  the  batteries,  deserves  my  com- 
mendation. 

The  companies  of  the  Third  Ehode  Island  Artillery,  under  Captain 
Tourtellott,  served  their  guns  most  efficiently;  and  the  Seventh  Connec- 
ticut Eegiment,  under  Colonel  Terry,  very  ably  manned  the  batteries 
which  they  had  most  laboriously  constructed,  so  that  I designated  them 
(as  I was  pleased  to  find  had  been,  unknown  to  me,  the  itrevious  selec- 
tion of  General  Gillmore)  for  the  honor  of  being  the  first  to  garrison  the 
surrendered  fort. 

Of  my  personal  staff,  my  senior  aide,  Lieut.  A.  B.  Ely,  acting  assist- 
ant adjutant  general,  was  constantly  with  me  when  not  occupied  other- 
wise by  my  direction,  still  showing  most  eminentl3"  every  qualitication, 
as  he  had  done  previously  , for  the  responsible  position  for  which  I had 
selected  him,  and  Lieut.  S.  N.  Beuham,my  junior  aide,  and  H.  F.  Hawkes, 
acting  aide,  were  read.y  and  prompt  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties. 
Colonel  Serrell,  of  the  Volunteer  Engineer  Eegiment,  acting  temporarily 
on  my  staff,  showed  great  zeal  and  activity  throughout  the  action. 

I would  respectfully  recommend,  in  relation  to  the  commander  of  the 
garrison  of  tlie  fort.  Col.  Charles  H.  Olmstead,  whose  gallant  conduct  as 
an  enemy  and  whose  courtesy  as  a gentleman  are  entitled  to  all  consid- 
eration, that,  should  you  deem  it  proper,  the  courtesy^  of  the  return  of 
his  own  sword  should  be  extended  to  him.  His  defense,  I would  remark, 
was  continued  until  almost  the  latest  limit  possible,  for  a few  hours  more 
of  our  fire  would,  to  all  appearance,  have  sufficed  for  tbe  destruction  of 
the  magazine  and  a larger  portion  of  the  fort,  while  another  day  would, 


Chap.  XV.]  FORT  PULASKI.  139 

in  any  event,  have  unavoidably  placed  the  garrison  at  the  mercy  of  a 
storming  column  from  our  command. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 

Brigadier-General^  Comdg.  N.  Dist^  Dept,  of  the  South, 
Maj.  Charles  G.  H alpine. 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Department  of  the  South. 


Hdqrs.  North.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Tyhee  River ^ Georgia,  April  11,  18G2. 

Sir  : I have  the  satisfaction  of  inclosing  to  you  herewith  the  terms  of 
surrender  of  Fort  Pulaski,  as  arranged  this  day  by  Acting  Brig.  Gen. 
Q.  A.  Gillmore,  whom  I dispatched  to  the  tort  for  that  purpose  immedi- 
ately after  the  appearance  of  the  white  flag  from  that  fort  at  about  2 i). 
m.  this  day,  the  anniversary  of  the  opening  of  the  fire  upon  Port  Sumter 
by  the  rebels  last  year.  The  terms  agreed  to  by  Col.  C.  H.  Olmstead, 
the  rebel  commander  of  the  fort,  are  essentially  those  dictated  by  my- 
self, and  such  as  I trust  will  meet  your  apiiroval,  from  my  previous  com- 
munication with  you  on  this  subject. 

With  much  congratulation  to  you  on  this  first  success  in  your  present 
department,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

. H.  W.  BENHAM, 

Brig.  Gen.  Comdg.  N.  Dist,  First  Div.,  Dept,  af  the  South. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South. 

[Inclosuro.] 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  April  11,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  the  terms  of  capitulation 
for  the  surrender  to  the  United  States  of  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  signed  by 
me  this  11th  day  of  April,  1862.  I trust  these  terms  will  meet  your 
approval,  they  being  substantially  those  authorized  by  you  as  com- 
mander of  the  district. 

The  fort  hoisted  the  white  flag  at  a quarter  before  2 o’clock  this  after- 
noon, after  a resistance  since  8 o’clock  yesterday  morning  to  the  contin- 
uous fire  of  our  batteries.  A practicable  breach  in  the  walls  was  made 
in  eighteen  and  a half  hours’  firing  by  daylight. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  y our  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLAIORE, 

Brig.  Gen.  Vols.,  Comdg.  U.  S.  Forces  at  Tyhee  Island,  Ga. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham, 

Comdg.  N.  Dist.  Dept,  of  the  South,  Tyhee  Island,  Ga. 

Terms  of  capitulation  agreed  upon  for  the  surrender  to  the  forces  of  the 
United  States  of  Fort  Fulashi,  Cochspur  Island,  Ga. 

Article  1.  The  fort,  armament,  and  garrison  to  be  surrendered  at 
once  to  the  forces  of  the  United  States. 

Art.  2.  The  officers  and  men  of  the  garrison  to  be  allowed  to  take 
with  them  all  their  private  efiects,  such  as  clothing,  bedding,  books,  &c.  j 
this  not  to  include  private  weapons. 


140  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


Art.  3.  The  sick  and  wounded,  under  charge  of  the  hospital  stew- 
ard of  the  garrison,  to  be  sent  up  under  a flag  of  truce  to  the  Confed- 
erate lines,  and  at  the  same  time  the  men  to  be  allowed  to  send  up  any 
letters  they  may  desire,  subject  to  the  inspection  of  a Federal  officer. 

Signed  this  the  11th  day  of  April,  1862,  at  Fort  Pulaski,  Cockspur 
Island,  Ga. 

CHAS.  H.  OLMSTEAD, 

Colonel  First  Vol.  Regt.  of  Georgia.,  Comdq.  Fort  Fulaslci. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brig.  Gen.  Vols.,  Comdg.  U.  S.  Forces.,  Tybee  Island,  Ga. 

[Tuclorscment.] 


I authorized  these  terms,  subject  to  your  approval. 

H.  VV.  BENHAM, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Major-General  Hunter. 


Hdqrs.  North’n  Hist.  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  €.,  April  16,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a copy  of  the  report 
of  General  Yiele,  giving  an  account  of  the  operations  of  the  troops  under 
his  command  at  and  near  Daufuskie  Island,  as  connected  with  the 
environment  and  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski. 

The  principal  labors  of -this  command,  as  connected  with  the  bom- 
bardment itself,  have  been  already  referred  to  in  my  report  upon  that 
subject,  of  the  12th  instant,  as  would  have  been  the  other  matter  re- 
ferred to  in  General  Viele’s  paper,  had  it  been  received  before  my  report 
was  comjfleted. 

Although  the  investment  was  made  more  complete  and  perfect,  as  I 
therein  stated,  by  the  assistance  of  the  naval  forces — by  whom,  as  I 
learn,  the  telegraphic  communication  to  Fort  Pulaski  was  destroyed — 
yet  it  is  undoubted  that  the  formidable  operations  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  this  object  on  the  main  line  of  communication  by  the  two 
channels  of  the  Savannah  River  were  accomplished  by  the  incessant 
watchfulness  and  arduous  labors  of  General  Viele’s  command  j and  for 
this  purpose  there  were  prepared  upon  each  of  two  marsh  islands — fre- 
quently overflowed  at  the  high  spring  tides — a strong  battery  of  eight 
or  nine  guns,  or  seventeen  in  all,  with  the  suitable  magazines  and  splinter- 
proofs  to  protect  the  material  and  men,  and  in  one  case,  for  the  proper 
security  of  the  works,  a causeway  road  was  required  of  over  one-half 
mile  in  length,  for  the  passage  of  the  ordnance  and  material,  which  of 
itself — with  the  construction  of  the  parapets,  &c.,  of  the  batteries — was 
a work  of  extraordinary  labor  and  exposure,  and  meriting  the  highest 
commendation  to  all  the  officers  and  men  engaged. 

For  all  the  other  details  of  the  duties  performed  by  this  command, 
which  were  of  great  utility  in  the  prosecution  of  this  investment  and 
siege,  I respectfully  refer  to  the  rei)ort  of  General  Viele  himself. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halptne, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  South. 


Chap.  XV.  1 


FORT  PULASKI. 


141 


ITo.  3. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 
Savannah  River^  April  11,  18G2. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  tlie  o[)erations 
of  the  troops  under  my  command  in  connection  with  the  investment 
and  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski. 

The  plan  of  operations  assigned  to  me  comprised  the  erection  of  bat- 
teries on  the  Savannah  Eiver,  to  cut  off  communication  between  the 
fort  and  the  city  of  Savannah,  from  which  supplies  of  ammunition  and 
men  were  drawn,  and  to  establish  batteries  on  the  islands  adjacent  to 
the  fort,  against  the  gorge  and  left  flank,  with  which,  in  conjunction 
with  the  batteries  on  Tybee  Island,  the  fort  could  be  reduced.  The 
expedition  for  these  purposes  was  fitted  out  at  Port  Eoyal,  and  consisted 
of  a detachment  of  the  Third  Ehode  Island  Artillery,  a detachment  of 
Volunteer  Engineers,  a battalion  of  the  Eighth  Maine  Eegiment  Volun- 
teers, and  the  Sixth  Eegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  the  Fcrty-eighth 
New  York  Volunteers,  and  a full  supply  of  heavy  ordnance  and  intrench- 
ing tools. 

A full  reconnaissance  and  report  had  previously  been  made  by  Lieut. 
J.  H.  Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers,  of  the  water  communications 
with  the  Savannah  Eiver,  by  which  it  was  developed  that  the  rebels  had 
sunk  the  hulk  of  a brig,  securely  fixed  in  its  position  by  means  of  heavy 
])iles  in  what  is  known  as  Walks  Out,  an  artificial  channel  connecting 
Wright  Eiver  (one  of  the  outlets  of  the  Savannah)  with  Bull  Eiver,  which 
last,  by  its  connection,  forms  a direct  communication  with  the  harbor  of 
Port  Eoyal,  thus  serving  as  a thoroughfare  between  that  harbor  and 
Savannah. 

The  removal  of  the  hulk  was  the  first  thing  to  be  accomplished,  and  was 
intrusted  to  Maj.  O.  T.  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers,  who, 
with  the  aid  of  a company  of  the  Volunteer  Engineers,  and  by  means  of 
mechanical  appliances,  suggested  by  his  own  ingenuity,  succeeded  after 
three  weeks  of  unremitting  night  labor,  and  in  close  proximity  to  the 
rebel  forces,  in  removing  the  piles  and  hulk  from  the  channel,  so  as  to 
admit  of  the  passage  of  gunboats  and  light-draught  steamers.  This 
being  accomplished,  the  expedition  proceeded  to  the  north  end  of  Hau- 
tuskie  Island,  at  which  point  a camp  and  depot  were  established  for 
operations  in  the  Savannah. 

Eeconnaissances  for  suitable  locations  for  the  batteries  were  then  made 
under  the  superintendence  of  Captain  and  Acting  Brigadier-Gieneral 
Gillmore,  during  which  the  telegraphic  communication  between  Fort 
Pulaski  and  Savannah  was  cut,  and  the  wires,  both  land  and  submarine, 
removed  for  about  the  distance  of  1 mile.  Venus  Point,  on  Jones  Island, 
on  the  north  side  of  the  Savannah,  and  the  upper  end  of  Long  Island, 
in  the  Savannah  Eiver,  were  recommended  as  the  most  feasible  positions 
to  be  occupied.  These  islands,  as  well  as  all  others  in  the  river,  are 
merely  deposits  of  soft  mud  on  sand  shoals,  always  covered  at  high  tide 
and  overgrown  with  rank  grasses. 

The  o(5Cupation  of  points  so  unfavorable  for  the  erection  of  batteries 
was  rendered  still  more  difficult  by  the  presence  in  the  Savannah  of  a 
fleet  of  rebel  gunboats,  constantly  passing  and  always  on  the  alert.  To 
have  floated  the  ordnance  in  the  flat-boats  in  which  it  had  been  placed 
into  the  Savannah  River  would  have  exposed  it  to  capture  by  the  gun- 
boats. To  move  it  over  the  swamps  seemed  almost  impossible,  while 


142  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA,  [Chap.  XV. 

at  the  same  time  it  would  be  constantly  exposed  to  view  from  the  river. 
The  alternative  was  adopted  of  moving  the  armament  of  one  battery  by 
hand  at  night  on  shifting  tram-ways  across  Jones  Island,  and  it  was 
accomplished  on  the  night  of  the  11th  of  February.  A drenching  storm 
added  to  the  difficulties,  the  men  often  sinking  to  their  waists  in  the 
marsh,  and  the  guns  sometimes  slipping  from  the  tram-ways.  By  morn- 
ing the  guns  were  in  position  on  the  river,  and  the  next  day  resisted, 
with  unfinished  platforms  and  without  cover,  an  attack  from  the  rebel 
gunboats,  disabling  them  and  driving  them  off. 

Three  days  alter  another  battery  was  erected  on  Bird  Island,  in  the 
Savannah,  under  cover  of  the  battery  on  Jones  Island.  Bird  Island 
was  selected  in  preference  to  the  upper  end  of  Long  Island,  as  affording 
a more  uninterrupted  command  of  the  south  channel  of  the  river.  Since 
the  erection  of  the  batteries  the  works  have  been  completed  on  both  isl- 
ands, the  one  on  Jones  Island  being  called  Fort  Vulcan,  and  that  on 
Bird  Island  Battery  Hamilton,  and  although  the  material  of  which  they 
are  composed  (mud  highly  saturated  with  water)  is  of  the  most  unfa- 
vorable description,  they  are  both  most  creditable  specimens  of  field 
works,  and  evidence  of  the  great  labor  and  perseverance  of  the  troops 
under  most  trying  circumstances,  the  fatigue  parties  always  standing  in 
water  twenty-four  hours. 

The  positions  selected  for  batteries  to  aid  in  the  reduction  of  the  fort 
were  the  lower  end  of  Long  Island  and  the  south  side  of  Turtle  Island. 
As  these  two  points  were  directly  under  the  fire  of  the  fort  it  was  deemed 
advisable  to  ^delay  the  erection  of  4he  batteries  until  those  on  Tybee 
Island  were  ready  to  open.  Hence  it  was  not  until  the  night  before  the 
bombardment  commenced  that  they  were  thrown  up.  The  intrenchments 
were  completed,  but  before  the  guns  were  all  in  position  the  fort  sur- 
rendered unconditionally.  The  mortar  battery  on  the  lower  end  of  Long 
Island  did  good  execution.  It  was  gallantly  served  during  the  entire 
bombardment  by  a detachment  of  the  Third  Ehode  Island  Artillery, 
under  Lieutenants  Turner  and  Tisdale,  receiving  the  most  constant  and 
heaviest  fire  from  the  fort  of  all  the  batteries  erected,  without  in  the 
slightest  degree  diminishing  its  activity. 

In  reporting  the  results  accomplished  I have  to  refer  to  the  services 
rendered  by  the  staff  of  General  Sherman,  without  whom  the  work  could 
not  have  been  performed.  These  officers  were,  Captain  and  Acting 
Brigadier  General  Gillmore,  chief  engineer  j Capt.  John  Hamilton,  chief 
of  artillery;  Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers;  Lieutenant 
Porter,  Ordnance  Corps,  and  Lieuteuant  O’Eorke,  Engineer  Corps. 
Hesitating  at  no  amount  of  exposure  or  fatigue,  they  succeeded  by  their 
individual  examples  in  inspiring  the  men  with  that  energy  and  zeal  which 
could  alone  have  led  them  to  accomplish  the  arduous  labor  required.  I 
am  also  greatly  indebted  to  the  services  of  Captain  Sears,  of  the  Volun- 
teer Engineers,  and  to  Capt.  J.  H.  Liebenau,  assistant  adjutant-general. 
The  accompanying  sketch  exhibits  the  positions  of  the  batteries. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EGBEET  L.  VIELE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Daufuskie  Island,  April  14,  1802. 
General  : The  accompanying  report  was  prepared  for  you  on  the 
11th,  and  was  yesterday  sent  to  Tybee,  or  rather  Pulaski,  hoping  to  find 


Chap.  XV.] 


FORT'  PULASKI. 


143 


you  there.  I did  not  receive  your  note  of  the  11th  until  yesterday  (13th) 
afternoon.  I think  the  report*  covers  all  the  ground,  and  will  send  it  as 
I had  written  it. 

With  regard  to  the  sortie,  a couple  of  men  prowling  around  from  the 
fort  the  day  before  we  opened  saw  the  mortar,  which  had  not  been  quite 
placed  in  position  before  the  party  was  overtaken  by  daylight,  they  (the 
party)  having  withdrawn  to  escape  observation,  concealing  a few  car- 
tridges which  they  had  brought  down  with  the  mortar.  These  were  found 
and  carried  off  by  the  two  men,  who  must  have  been  in  a great  hurry,  as 
they  did  no  damage  otherwise.  The  position  of  the  Long  Island  battery 
seemed  almost  under  the  walls  of  the  fort,  and  the  men  were  very  much 
exposed.  Nevertbeless,  although  over  50  shots  were  fired  at  them,  some 
striking  the  parapet  and  some  bursting  over  their  heads,  no  one  was 
injured.  The  marks  of  the  shell  from  this  mortar  I saw  on  the  gorge 
yesterday,  and  if  I had  had  time  to  get  heavy  guns  in  position  I should 
have  had  a fine  opportunity  to  do  a great  deal  of  execution. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EGBEET  L.  YIELE, 

General  Benham,  Brigadier-  General, 

Commanding^  &c. 


IS'o.  4. 

Be^jort  of  Lieut.  P.  H.  O^RorJce,  U.  Corps  of  Engineers^  of  condition  of 
the  works  of  investment  on  February  28,  1862. 

Daufuskie  Island,  S.  C.,  February  28,  1862. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  directions,  I have  the  honor  to  submit 
the  following  report,  showing  the  amount  of  work  accomplished  and 
the  present  condition  of  the  batteries  on  Jones  and  Bird  Islands : 

About  the  7th  of  this  month  it  was  determined  by  you  to  wait  no 
longer  the  long  delayed  entrance  of  the  naval  force  into  the  Savannah 
Eiver.  It  was  at  the  same  time  directed  that  a battery  should  be 
planted,  under  cover  of  the  night,  at  Yenus  Point,  on  Jones  Island,  at 
the  earliest  practicable  moment.  The  next  day  the  proposed  battery 
was  staked*  out,  and  on  the  same  evening  an  attempt  was  made  to 
transport  the  guns  and  material  to  the  landing  on  Mud  Eiver.  This 
movement,  after  the  greatest  exertions  to  carry  it  into  execution,  had 
to  be  abandoned  lor  that  night,  in  consequence  of  the  severe  storm  which 
came  up  and  the  extreme  darkness  of  the  night.  The  attempt  w^as 
made  again  on  the  ensuing  night,  and  was  most  successful.  Five  Par- 
rott guns  and  an  8 inch  siege  howitzer  were  landed  on  Jones  Island, 
and  two  of  the  guns  were  moved  about  200  yards  towards  their  intended 
positions.  Four  platforms  were  laid  the  same  night,  two  others  com- 
menced, and  a magazine  built.  As  it  was  not  deemed  expedient  to  show 
ourselves  in  the  daytime,  the  work  was  suspended  until  the  next  night. 
The  following  morning  saw  our  guns  in  position  and  ready  for  action. 

Fatigue  parties  were  now  set  at  work  to  throw  up  a parapet  as  rapidly 
as  possible,  and  by  night  a parapet  8 feet  wide  and  about  3 feet  high 
was  thrown  up  in  front  of  the  guns.  At  the  same  time  a thin  covering 
of  earth  was  thrown  around  the  magazine,  in  addition  to  the  sand  bags 
which  had  been  placed  around  it  at  first.  In  consequence  of  the  soft- 
ness of  the  mud  of  which  the  island  is  made,  it  was  found  impossible 
to  make  the  parapet  sufficiently  high  at  once  or  to  give  it  a regular 
shape.  The  first  occasion  tor  using  the  guns  showed  that  the  platforms 


144  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

furnished  by  the  Ordnance  Department  were  too  narrow  to  allow  them 
to  be  traversed  sufficiently.  Immediate  steps  were  taken  to  provide  the 
lumber  necessary  to  enlarge  the  platforms.  A grillage  was  formed  of 
logs,  and  upon  these  planks  were  laid,  increasing  the  width  to  20  feet. 
Some  of  the  lumber  used  had  to  be  transported  from  the  Winfield  Scott, 
and  other  pieces  obtained  by  pulling  down  houses  on  Daufuskie  Island. 

The  subsequent  engagement  with  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy  showed 
that  our  platforms  were  now  sufficiently  wide  and  firm.  The  spring 
tides  now  coming  on,  the  whole  island  was  covered  with  water,  and  our 
efforts  were  immediately^  directed  to  the  completion  of  a level  around 
the  work.  After  having  the  battery  twice  flooded  this  was  accomplished. 
The  work  for  some  day^  could  now  be  prosecuted  only  at  low  water,  and 
then  with  great  difficulty,  in  consequence  of  the  softening  of  the  surface. 
Since  then  the  work  has  been  progressing  constantly,  though  slowly. 

There  is  now  a parapet  around  the  work  over  1,000  feet  in  length,  from 
6 to  10  feet  thick,  differing  on  different  faces,  and  from  3 to  4 feet  high. 
The  magazine  is  covered  on  top  by  5 feet  of  earth  and  sand  bags,  and 
on  the  sides  by  about  10  feet  in  thickness  of  the  same  material.  It  is 
not  entirely  completed.  A board  walk  has  been  built  about  6 feet  in 
rear  of  the  platforms,  to  extend  the  whole  length  of  the  work,  with 
other  walks  leading  from  this  to  the  platforms.  A good  wheelbarrow 
road  has  been  made  across  the  island  by  laying  poles  about  2 feet  apart 
and  placing  boards  upon  them.  Some  of  the  lumber  last  brought  from 
Hilton  Head  has  been  applied  towards  making  the  garrison  as  comfort- 
able as  possible.  * 

About  the  19th  of  this  month  it  was  decided  by  you  that  a battery 
should  be  placed  on  the  north 'end  of  Bird  Island.  It  was  staked  out 
the  next  day,  and  the  same  night  the  guns  and  material  were  taken 
from  Daufuskie  Island  to  that  point  and  landed.  On  the  following  day 
the  platforms  were  laid  and  the  guns  put  in  position.  Since  then  the 
levee  has  been  built  around  the  work,  and  in  addition  to  this  another 
has  been  built  for  the  protection  of  the  camp  of  the  infantry  supports 
against  high  tides.  A magazine  has  also  been  built  here,  and  secured 
as  far  as  practicable.  A strong  wind  prevented  our  flats  from  being 
towed  backward  and  forward  for  two  or  three  days,  and  consequently 
has  prevented  us  from  supplying  the  battery  with  sufficient  lumber  uj) 
to  this  time.  Some  of  the  platforms  have  begun  to  sink,  and  will  have 
to  be  relaid.  Profiles  have  been  put  up  on  this  battery,  and  it  is  steadily 
progressing.  Timbers  for  the  foundation  of  the  platform  tor  thecolum- 
biad  have  been  got  out  of  the  houses  pulled  down  on  this  island,  and 
are  ready  as  soon  as  transportation  can  be  had  for  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant. 

P.  H.  O’EOEKE, 

Lieutenant  of  Engineers^  U.  tS.  Army. 
Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Yiele, 

Commanding  TJ.  S.  Forces  on  Savannah  River. 


No.  5. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army.,  of  operations 
against  Fort  PulasTci^  January  2S- April  II,  1802. 

Headquarters,  Fort  Pulaslcf  Oa.,  April  12,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  several  batteries  established 
on  Tybee  Island,  to  operate  against  Fort  Pulaski,  opened  fire  on  the 


CHAr.  XV. J 


FORT  PULASKI. 


145 


iiiorning  of  the  10th  iiistant,  at  8.15  o’clock,  coinmeiiciiig  with  the  13- 
iiich  mortaris.  When  the  range  of  these  pieces  had  been  ai)proxiitiately 
obtained  by  the  use  of  signals,  the  other  batteries  oi)ened  in  the  order 
lirevionsly  prescribed  in  General  Orders,  No.  17,  from  these  lieadqnar- 
ters,  Iierennto  api)ended  as  part  of  this  report,*  so  that  by  0.30  o’clock 
all  onr  batteries,  eleven  in  number,  had  commenced  their  work.  The 
breaching  batteries  opened  at  9.30.  With  the  exception  of  four  10-inch 
colnmbiads,  dismounted  at  the  outset  by  their  own  recoil  in  conse(pience 
of  their  having  been  supplied  with  unsuitable  pintles,  and  from  very 
serious  defects  in  the  wrought-iron  chassis,  which  will  be  noticed  more 
fully  in  jny  detailed  report,  all  the  pieces  were  served  through  the  day. 

With  few  exceptions,  strict  regard  was  paid  to  the  instructions  laid 
down  in  orders  for  regulating  the  rapidity  and  direction  of  the  lir(‘.  At 
dark  all  the  pieces  ceased  tiring  except  two  13-inch  mortars,  one  -10-inch 
mortar,  and  one  30-pounder  Parrott,  which  were  served  through  the 
night  at  intervals  of  twenty  minutes  for  each  piece.  The  only  plainly 
l)erceptible  result  of  this  cannonade  of  ten  and  a half  hours’  duration 
(the  breaching  batteries  having  been  served  but  nine  and  a half  hours) 
was  the  commencement  of  a breach  in  the  easterly  half  of  the  pan-coupe 
connecting  the  south  and  southeast  faces,  and  in  that  portion  of  the 
southeast  face  spanned  by  the  two  casemates  adjacent  to  tXia  pan-coupe. 
The  breach  had  l)een  ordered  in  this  portion  of  the  scarp  so  as  to  take 
in  reverse  through  the  opening  the  magazine  located  in  the  angle  formed 
by  the  gorge  and  north  face.  Two  of  the  barbette  guns  of  the  fort  had 
been  disabled  and  three  casemate  guns  silenced.  The  enemy  served 
both  tiers  of  guns  briskly  throughout  the  day,  but  without  injury  to 
the  materiel  or  personnel  of  our  batteries.  The  result  from  the  mortar 
batteries  was  not  at  all  satisfactory,  notwithstanding  the  care  and  skill 
with  whicli  the  pieces  were  served. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th  our  batteries  again  oi)ened  a little  after 
sunrise  with  decided  effect,  the  fort  returning  a heavy  and  well-directed 
fire  from  its  barbette  and  casemate  guns.  The  breach  was  rapidly  en- 
larged. At  the  exiiiration  of  three  hours  the  entire  casemate  next  the  pan- 
coupe had  been  opened,  and  by  11  o’clock  the  one  adjacent  to  it  was  in  a 
similar  condition.  Directions  were  then  given  to  train  the  guns  upon  the 
third  embrasure,  upon  which  the  breaching  batteries  were  operatiug  with 
effect,  when  the  fort  hoisted  the  white  flag.  This  occurred  at  2 o’clock. 
The  formalities  of  visiting  the  fort,  receiving  its  surrender,  and  occupying 
it  with  our  troops  consumed  the  balance  of  the  afternoon  and  evening. 

I cannot  indu'ge  in  details,  however  interesting  and  instructive,  in 
this  hasty  and  preliminary  report,  but  the  pleasing  duty  of  acknowledg- 
ing the  valuable  services  of  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command 
during  the  laborious  and  fatiguing  preliminaries  for  opening  fire,  as  well 
as  during  the  action,  I do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  defer. 

The  labor  of  landing  the  heaviest  ordnance,  with  large  supplies  of 
ordnance  stores,  without  a wharf,  upon  an  open  and  exposed  beach 
remarkable  for  its  heavy  surf,  taking  advantage  of  the  tide  night  and 
day ; the  transportation  of  those  articles  to  the  advance  batteries  under 
cover  of  night ; the  erection  of  seven  of  the  eleven  batteries  in  plain  view 
of  Fort  Pulaski  and  under  its  fire;  the  construction  over  marshy  ground 
in  the  night-time  exclusively  of  nearly  1 mile  of  causeway  resting  on 
fascines  and  brush-wood ; the  difficult  task  ofhauliug  the  guns,  carriages, 
and  chassis  to  their  positions  in  the  dark  over  a narrow  road  bordered 
by  marsh  by  the  labor  of  the  men  alone  (the  advance  batteries  being 

* Embodied  in  report  following. 

10  R R VOL  VI 


3 46  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

miles  from  tlie  landing) ; the  indomitable  j^erseverance  and  cheerful 
deportment  of  the  officers  and  men  under  the  frequent  and  discouraging 
incidents  of  breaking  down,  miring  in  the  swamp,  &c.,  are  services  to 
the  cause  and  country  which  I do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  leave  unrecorded. 
An  idea  of  the  immense  labor  expended  in  transporting  the  ordnance 
can  be  gained  from  the  fact  that  250  men  could  hardly  move  a 13-inch 
mortar  loaded  on  a sling-cart. 

Another  circumstance  deserving  especial  mention  is  that  twenty- two 
of  the  thirty-six  pieces  comprised  in  the  batteries  were  served  during  the 
action  by  the  troo])s  who  had  performed  the  fatiguing  labors  to  which  I 
ha^^e  relerred  above.  They  received  all  their  instruction  in  gunnery  at 
such  odd  times  as  they  could  be  spared  from  other  duty  during  the  week 
preceding  the  action.  The  troops  who  participated  in  all  the  heavy  labor 
were  the  Forty-sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  Col.  Eudolph  Rosa;  the 
Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Col.  Alfred  H.  Terry  ; two  companies 
of  the  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers  (Captain  Graef  and  Lieutenant 
Brooks),  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Hall;  two  companies 
of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Captains  Mason  and  Rogers,  and 
a small  detachment  from  Company  A,  Corps  of  Engineers,  under  Sergt. 
James  E.  Wilson.  Colonel  Terry  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hall  entered 
most  zealously  upon  the  discharge  of  their  varied  duties. 

A detachment  from  Colonel  Rosa’s  regiment,  under  Captain  Hinckel, 
have  occupied  since  the  22d  of  February  an  advanced  and  very  exposed 
])osition  on  Lazaretto  Creek,  by  which  boat  communication  between  Fort 
Pulaski  and  the  interior  was  cut  off.  Several  interesting  reconnaissances 
of  Wilmington  Island  were  made  by  Cai)taiu  Hinckel,  one  of  which,  com- 
nianded  by  Coloiud  Rosa,  developed  some  useful  information.  Lieut. 
Horace  Porter,  of  the  Ordnance  Department,  has  rendered  signal,  impor- 
tant, and  indispensable  services.  Besides  discharging  most  faithfully 
the  specaal  duties  of  ordnance  officer,  he  directed  in  person  the  trans- 
])ortation  of  the  heaviest  ordnance,  and  drilled  and  instructed  the  men 
in  their  use,  laboring  indefatigably  night  and  day.  He  was  actively 
engaged  among  the  batteries  during  the  action.  Lieut.  James  H.  Wil- 
son, Corps  of  Topographical  Engineers,  joined  my  command  eleven  days 
before  the  action,  and  did  good  service  in  instructing  the  artillerists. 
He  rendered  efficient  service  with  the  breaching  batteries  on  the  10th 
and  11th.  Caj)t.  L.  H.  Pelouze,  Fifteenth  Infantry,  U.  S.  Army,  and 
Capt.  J.  W.  Turner,  of  the  Commissary  Department,  IT.  S.  Army,  mem- 
bers of  General  Hunter’s  staff,  volunteered  for  the  action,  and  did  good 
service  in  the  batteries. 

I am  under  obligations  to  Commander  C.  R.  P.  Rodgers,  U.  S.  Navy, 
and  a detachment  of  sailors  under  Lieut.  John  Irwin,  U.  S.  Navy,  for 
skillfully  serving  four  seige  guns  in  Battery  Sigel  on  the  11th. 

Lieut.  P.  H.  O’Rorke,  Corps  of  Engineers,  and  Adam  Badeau,  esq., 
volunteered,  and  served  on  my  staff  as  aides  during  the  10th  and  11th. 
Sergt.  J.  E.  Wilson,  of  Company  A,  Corps  of  Engineers,  Regular  Army, 
did  excellent  service  in  mounting  the  heavy  guns  and  getting  them 
ready  for  action.  He  commanded  Battery  Burnside  during  the  action. 
No  mortar  battery  was  served  more  skillfully  than  his. 

I will  close  this  preliminary  report  with  some  general  deductions  from 
absolute  results,  without  going  into  details  or  reasons. 

1.  Mortars  (even  the  13-inch  sea-coast)  are  unreliable  for  the  reduction 
of  works  of  small  area,  like  Fort  Pulaski.  They  cannot  be  fired  with 
sufficient  accuracy  to  crush  the  casemate  arches.  They  might  after  a 
long  time  tire  out  any  ordinary  garrison. 

2.  Good  rifled  guns,  properly  served,  can  breach  rapidly  at  1,650  yards’ 


Chap.  XV.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


147 


distance.  A few  heavy  round  shot,  to  bring  down  the  masses  loosened 
by  the  rifled  projectiles,  are  of  good  service.  1 would  not  hesitate  to 
attempt  a practicable  breach  in  a brick  scarp  at  2,000  yards’  distance 
with  ten  guns  of  my  own  selection. 

3.  No  better  piece  for  breaching  can  be  desired  than  the  42-pounder 
James.  The  grooves,  however,  must  be  kept  clean.  Parrott  gnus 
throw  ing  as  much  metal  as  the  James  w^onld  be  equally  good,  supposing 
them  to  lire  as  accurately  as  the  30-pounder  Parrott. 

I append  to  this  report  a map,*  giving  the  positions  of  our  several  bat- 
teries and  the  orders  issued,  assigning  the  detachments  to  the  batteries, 
and  regulating  the  direction  and  ra])idity  of  the  firing. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMOEE, 

Comdg.  U.  8.  Forces^  Tybee  and  Coclcspur  Islands^  Ga. 

Lieut.  A.  B.  Ely, 

A.  A,  A.  (t.,  a.  i>..  Dept,  of  the  South,  Hilton  Head,  8.  C. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Tybee  and  CocJcspur  Islands,  April  23,  1862. 

General  : You  showed  me  General  Viele’s  report  of  the  operations 
of  his  command  on  the  Savannah  Eiver.  As  I was  present  with  his 
forces  as  General  Sherman’s  chief  engineer  uutil  after  the  Venus  Point 
battery  was  established,  I have,  in  compliance  with  General  Totten’s 
request  and  with  General  Sherman’s  knowledge,  furnished  a report  of 
those  operations,  and  shall  accompany  my  report  of  the  siege  of  Pulaski 
with  an  accurate  map  of  the  Savannah  Eiver.*  I am  very  desirous  that 
there  shall  be  no  conflict  or  discrepancy  in  the  records.  This  is  my 
excuse  for  calling  your  attention  to  some  portions  of  General  Viele’s 
report,  which  must  have  left  his  hands  without  having  been  closely 
inspected  by  him.  The  points  to  which  I refer  are — 

■1st.  One  impression  conveyed  in  the  report  is  that  the  obstructions  in 
Wall’s  Cut  were  removed  by  General  Viele’s  command,  when  in  fact 
Major  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  York,  then  the  provost-marshal  at  Hil- 
ton Head,  was  secretly  sent  out  by  General  Sherman  to  do  this  work, 
with  a company  of  engineers,  more  than  three  weeks  before  the  invest- 
ing force  left  Port  Eoyal  or  General  Viele  was  assigned  to  their  com- 
mand. The  obstructions  were  removed  on  January  13,  two  weeks  before 
General  Viele’s  troops  left  Port  Eoyal. 

2d.  The  length  of  the  road  across  Jones  Island,  over  which  the  Venus 
Point  guns  were  carried,  is  represented  on  the  general’s  map  as  consid- 
erably longer  than  the  distance  from  Fort  Pulaski  to  the  10-inch  mortar 
on  Long  Island,  which  opened  on  the  fort  the  last  day  of  the  siege, 
while  in  fact  it  is  not  much  over  one-half  as  long.  In  other  words,  the 
Jones  Island  causeway  is  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  long,  while  the 
distance  from  Fort  Pulaski  to  the  mortar  referred  to  is  over  one  mile 
and  a quarter,  according  to  Coast  Survey  charts.  The  mortar  was  not 
at  the  extreme  lower  end  of  the  island.  The  effect  is  to  unduly  exag- 
gerate the  labor  of  building  the  road  and  the  danger  of  serving  the 
mortar.  According  to  statements  of  Colonel  Olmstead  and  his  officers 
after  the  surrender  not  a single  shell  from  Long  Island  reached  the  fort; 
a circumstance  which  might  have  been  foreseen  by  a reference  to  the 
table  of  range  for  10-inch  siege  mortars. 


To  appear  in  Atlas. 


148  ^ COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA  , AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

3d.  The  map  represents  a battery  on  Turtle  Island,  while  in  fact  none 
was  placed  there. 

A desire  to  secure  historical  accuracy  in  the  records  of  this  siege 
alone  induces  me  to  make  these  statements,  which  you  are  at  liberty  to 
make  such  use  of  as  you  think  proper. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

General  H.  W.  Benham, 

Comdg.  Norton  Bist.^  Dept,  of  the  South^  Hilton  Head,  S.  G. 


Headquarters  Department  of  South  Carolina, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  October  20,  1865. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report,  compiled  from 
my  original  report  to  the  Chief  Engineer,  of  operations  against  Fort 
Pulaski,  Ga.,  resulting  in  its  caxutulation  to  the  United  States  forces 
under  my  immediate  command  on  the  11  th  day  of  April,  1862 : 

The  two  accompanying  maps*  are  deemed  necessary  to  a full  under- 
standing of  the  report.  . 

This  success  so  fully  demonstrated  the  power  and  effectiveness  of 
rifled  cannon  for  breaching  at  long  distances — at  distances,  indeed, 
hitherto  untried  and  considered  altogether  impracticable,  thus  opening 
a new  era  in  the  use  of  this  most  valuable  and  comparatively  unknown 
arm  of  service — was  obtained  with  such  singularly  strict  adherence  to 
the  details  of  the  project  as  originally  submitted  by  me  in  the  previous 
December,  and  has  withal  in  its  developed  results  such  an  important 
bearing  upon  the  character  of  our  harbor  and  frontier  defenses,  that  I 
feel  called  upon  to  enter  into  some  details. 

The  transfer  to  another  field  of  labor  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman, 
lately  in  command  of  the  forces  on  this  coast,  under  whose  auspices  the 
pi'oject  for  the  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski  was  pushed  forward  to  within 
a few  days  of  its  final  accomplishment,  renders  it  proper  that  this  report 
should  refer  to  the  preliminary  operations  directly  connected  with  the 
siege. 

In  the  capacity  of  chief  engineer  on  General  Sherman’s  staff  I was 
l)resent  with  the  investing  forces  under  General  Viele  when  the  Savan- 
nah River  was  closed  above  the  fort  by  the  establishment  of  the  battery 
on  Venus  Point,  Jones  Island,  on  the  night  of  the  11th  of  February 
last.  I took  no  part  in  the  erection  of  the  Bird  Island  battery,  oppo- 
site Venus  Point.  These  two  batteries  effectually  closed  the  Savannah 
River. 

In  the  double  capacity  of  engineer  and  commander  of  the  forces  I 
was  charged  with  the  offensive  operations  on  Tybee  Island,  where  the 
batteries  for  the  reduction  of  the  work  were  to  be  established,  and  also 
with  the  completion  of  the  investment  by  the  blockade  of  the  Wilming- 
ton Narrows  and  Lazaretto  Creek  passage. 

The  data  ior  this  report  will  therefore  be  taken  in  a measure  from  my 
private  journal  and  from  official  correspondence  and  orders. 

Fort  Pulaski. — Fort  Pulaski  is  situated  on  Cockspur  Island,  Georgia, 
latitude  32°  2'  north  and  longitude  3^  51'  west  from  W ashington,  at  the 
head  of  Tybee  Roads,  commanding  both  channels  of  the  Savannah 
River.  The  position  is  a very  strong  one.  Cockspur  Island  is  wholly 
a marsh,  and  is  about  one  mile  long  and  half  a mile  wide. 


To  appear  in  Atlas. 


Chap.  XV.J 


FORT  PULASKI. 


149 


Fort  Pulaski  is  a brick  work  of  five  sides  or  faces,  including  the 
gorge,  caseiiiated  on  all  sides,  walls  feet  thick,  and  25  feet  high  above 
high  water,  inoniiting  one  tier  of  guns  in  embrasures  and  one  en  bar- 
bette. The  gorge  is  covered  by  an  earthen  outwork  (demi-lune)  of  bold 
relief. 

The  main  work  and  demi  lune  are  both  surrounded  and  separated  by  a 
wet  ditch.  Around  the  main  work  the  ditch  is  48  feet  wide  ; around  the 
demi-lune,  32  feet. 

The  communication  with  the  exterior  is  through  the  gorge  into  the 
demi-lune  over  a draw-bridge,  and  then  through  one  face  of  the  demi- 
lune over  the  demi  lune  ditch  by  another  draw-bridge.  The  scarp  of  the 
demi-lune  and  the  entire  counterscarp  of  main  work  and  demi-lune  are 
revetted  with  good  brick  masonry. 

At  the  time  of  the  siege  it  contained  48  guns,  of  which  20  bore  upon 
the  batteries  on  Tybee,  viz,  five  10-inch  columbiads,  live  8 inch  colum- 
biads,  four  32-pounders,  one  24-pounder  Blakely  rille,  two  12-inch  and 
three  10-inch  sea  coast  mortars.  A full  armament  for  the  work  would 
be  140  guns. 

On  the  29th  of  November  I was  directed  by  General  Sherman  to  make 
an  examination  of  Tybee  Island  and  Fort  Pulaski,  and  to  report  upon 
the  propriety  of  occupying  and  holding  that  island  and  upon  the  prac- 
ticability (and,  if  deemed  practicable,  the  best  method)  of  reducing  Fort 
Pulaski.  I reported  as  follows : 


Headquarters  Chief  Engineer’s  Office, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  December  1,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  S,  C. : 

Sir  : Agreeably  to  your  orders,  I proceeded  in  the  steamer  Ben  DeFord,  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  29th  ultimo,  to  Tybee  Island,  to  make  a military  reconnaissance  of  that 
locality.  The  enemy  had  a battery  on  Warsaw  Sound,  whose  exact  position  was  un- 
known. The  exact  position  of  the  battery  controlling  Warsaw  Inlet  has  no  bearing  on 
the  prominent  points  to  which  my  attention  was  directed,  namely,  the  propriety  of 
occupying  and  holding  the  first  Tybee  Island  and  the  practicability  (and,,  if  deemed 
practicable,  the  best  method)  of  reducing  Fort  Pulaski.  I deemed  the  reduction  of 
that  work  practicable  by  batteries  of  mortars  and  rifled  guns  established  on  Tybee 
Island.  I think  it  probable  that  a nearer  position,  on  firm  ground  (although  very 
shallow,  and  therefore  ill-adapted  to  mortars  and  sunken  batteries),  can  be  found  on 
the  island  west  of  Tybee.  I would  establish  these  batteries  from  20  to  25  yards  apart, 
one  gnu  or  one  mortar  in  each,  behind  the  ridge  of  sand  on  the  shore  westward  from 
the  light-house.  I would  sink  the  mortar  batteries  as  low  as  the  water  would  permit, 
and  the  guns  sufficiently  low  to  leave  a high  parapet  in  front.  On  the  sides  and  rear 
of  each  I would  have  a high  mound  of  earth,  and  I would  cover  each  with  a horizontal 
bomb-proof  shelter  of  logs  covered  with  earth  and  supported  by  logs  planted  vertically 
in  the  ground.  The  embrasures  for  the  guns  should  be  deep,  narrow,  and  of  very  little 
splay.  I estimate  that,  after  once  obtaining  the  range,  five-eighths  of  the  shells  from 
the  mortars  can  be  lodged  inside  the  fort.  I would  have  enough  mortars  to  throw  one 
shell  a minute  into  the  fort,  and  as  many  guns  as  mortars.  For  landing  the  ordnance 
required  I would  have  built  two  or  three  large  flat-bottomed  bateaux  or  scows,  sucli 
as  are  commonly  used  on  rope  ferries.  I think  these  could  be  built  here. 

There  are  now  probably  at  Fort  Pulaski  700  good  troops.  About  200  landed  yester- 
day, and  the  Navy  officers  informed  me  that  at  least  500  have  entered  the  fort  within, 
the  last  three  days,  while  some  (probably  raw  recruits  or  portions  of  the  Home  Guards) 
have  gone  away.  It  may  be  their  design  to  land  on  Tybee  and  hold  the  west  end  of 
it,  to  prevent  the  erection  of  batteries  against  the  fort.  I therefore  recommend  the 
immediate  occupation  of  Tybee  Island  b.y  one  good  regiment  until  the  question  of 
attempting  the  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski  be  determined. 

I learned  while  at  Tybee  that  offers  have  been  made  by  negroes  to  burn  two  of  the 
principal  bridges  on  the  railroad  between  Charleston  and  Savannah.  One  of  these 
bridges  is  said  to  be  nearly  2 miles  long.  In  a military  point  of  view  its  destruction 
would  be  of  great  value  to  us,  and  l recommend  the  subject  to  your  attention. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Captain,  and  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps. 


150  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


The  armament  proposed  for  the  several  batteries  is  given  in  the  fol- 
lowing communication  : 


Office  of  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  December  5,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. : 

Sir  : Should  it  he  determined  to  attempt  the  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski  from  Tyhee 
Island,  I recommend  the  following  armament  for  the  batteries,  inclusive  of  pieces  held 
in  reserve  to  replace  those  dismounted  or  otherwise  rendered  unserviceable: 

Ten  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars  ; ten  13-inch  sea-coast  mortars ; eight  heavy  rifled 
guns  of  the  best  kind,  to  be  used  some  against  the  barbette  guns  of  the  fort  and  some 
against  the  walls;  eight  columbiads  for  tiring  solid  shot  principally,  some  of  them  to 
tire  shells,  in  case  it  be  found  practicable  to  drop  them  in  or  explode  them  over  the 
fort.  The  mortars  should  each  have  900  rounds  of  shell,  the  guns  and  columbiads  the 
same  number  of  rounds  of  solid  shot,  and  the  columbiads  300  rounds  of  shell  besides. 
It  would  be  well  to  have  a 15-inch  columbiad,  if  one  can  be  obtained. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Captain,  and  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps. 


The  project  set  forth  in  the  foregoing  communications  received  Gen- 
eral Sherman’s  sanction  at  once,  with  some  slight  modifications  as  to  the 
number  and  caliber  of  the  mortars  to  be  used,  and  was  forwarded  to 
Washington  and  approved  there.  Information  was  in  due  time  received 
that  orders  to  prepare  and  forward  the  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores 
had  been  issued.  For  months,  therefore,  preceding  the  fall  of  Pulaski, 
its  reduction  from  Big  Tybee,  favored  by  a thorough  investment,  formed 
one  of  General  Sherman’s  approved  plans,  awaiting  only  the  action  of 
others  in  sending  the  necessary  supplies  for  its  completion.  The  Forty- 
sixth  Eegiment  New  York  Yolunters,  Ool.  E.  Eosa,  was  sent  to -occupy 
Big  Tybee  Island  early  in  December. 

Operations  for  investing  the  place  by  the  erection  of  batteries  on  the 
Savannah  Eiver  above  the  work  were  set  on  foot  about  the  middle  of 
January,  1862.  It  was  known  to  General  Sherman  before  that  time 
that  gunboats  of  medium  draught  could  enter  the  river  above  Fort 
Pulaski  without  encountering  any  batteries  on  the  south  side  through 
Warsaw  Sound,  Wilmington  Narrows  (or  Freeborn’s  Out),  and  Saint 
Augustine  Creek,  and  on  the  north  side  through  New  Eiver,  Wall’s 
Cut,  and  either  Wright  or  Mud  Eivers. 

Wall’s  Cut  is  an  artificial  channel,  narrow  but  deep,  connecting  New 
and  Wright  Eivers,  and  has  for  years  been  used  in  making  the  inland 
water  passage  between  Charleston  and  Savannah.  This  cut  the  enemy 
had  obstructed  by  an  old  hulk  and  numerous  heavy  piles,  as  ascertained 
about  the  1st  of  January  by  Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  of  the  Topographical 
Engineers.  These  obstructions  had  all  been  removed  by  a detachment 
of  our  engineer  troops,  under  Major  Beard,  Forty  eighth  Eegiment  New 
York  Volunteers,  secretly  sent  from  Hilton  Head  by  General  Sherman 
for  that  purpose.  The  piles  were  sawed  off  on  a level  with  the  bottom 
of  the  stream,  and  the  hulk  was  swung  around  against  the  side  of  the 
cut,  leaving  ample  room  for  the  jiassage  of  transports  and  gunboats. 
The  opening  of  Wall’s  Cut,  which  required  four  days  and  four  nights  to 
effect,  was  reported  to  the  Navy  on  the  14th  January,  in  order  that 
the  gunboats  might  enter  the  Savannah  Eiver  and  cover  us  in  the  erec- 
tion of  our  investing  batteries.  At  this  time  the  enemy’s  gunboats  were 
daily  passing  uj)  and  down  the  river. 

Mud  Eiver  is  navigable  at  high  spring  tide  for  vessels  of  to  9 feet 
draught,  Wright  Eiver  Bar  has  about  11^  feet  of  water  at  ordinary 
high  tide.  The  Wright  Eiver  jiassage  rendered  it  necessary  to  approach 
to  within  about  2 miles  of  Fort  Pulaski. 


Chap.  XV.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


151 


After  the  removal  of  the  Wall’s  Cut  obstructions  a joint  exi)e(lition  of 
land  and  naval  forces  for  the  investment  was  organized  by  General 
Sherman  and  Commodore  DuPont.  This  expedition  consisted  of  one 
regiment  of  infantry  (the  rorty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers),  two  com- 
panies of  the  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  and  two  companies  of  the 
Third  Khode  Island  Volunteer  Heavy  Artillery,  with  20  guns  of  all 
caliber,  viz,  two  8-inch  siege  howitzers,  four  30-pounder  Parrotts,  three 
20-pounder  Parrotts,  three  12-pounder  James  rifles,  and  eight  24-pounder 
field  howitzers,  and  was  accompanied  by  three  gunboats.  The  troops 
were  to  rendezvous  at  Daufuskie  Island,  where  we  already  had  tliree 
companies  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  under  Major  Gardi- 
ner, guarding  Wall’s  Cut.  They  had  been  posted  there  on  January 
13.  The  laud  force  was  in  readiness  at  Hilton  Head  soon  after  the  mid- 
dle of  January.  Various  causes  delayed  the  expected  naval  co-opera- 
tion, so  that  110  gunboats  i^assed  Wall’s  Cut  until  the  28th  of  January. 
The  naval  forces  were  commanded  by  Commander  John  Kodgers,  U.  S. 
N.j  the  land  forces  by  Brigadier-General  Viele.  Another  mixed  force, 
approaching  by  way  of  Warsaw  Sound,  presented  itself  on  the  south  of 
the  Savannah  liiver,  in  Wilmington  Narrows  (or  Freeborn’s  Cut),  at  the 
same  time,  the  land  force  being  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  H.  G..  Wright 
and  the  gunboats  by  Fleet  Captain  Davis. 

On  the  afternoon  of  January  28  a reconnaissance  was  made  by  me  of 
Mud  liiver  and  the  Savannah  Fiver  shore  of  Jones  Island.  Venus 
Point,  on  the  margin  of  the  Savannah,  was  selected  as  the  x^osition  for 
one  of  the  investing  batteries.  The  line  for  a road  or  causeway  over 
the  marsh  between  Venus  Point  and  Mud  Eiver  was  also  located.  Its 
length  was  nearly  1,300  yards.  This  causeway  or  corduroy  was  never 
completed. 

Jones  Island  is  nothing  but  a mud  marsh,  covered  with  reeds  and  tall 
grass.  The  general  surface  is  about  on  the  level  of  ordinary  high  tide. 
There  are  a few  spots  of  limited  area,  Venus  Point  being  one  of  them, 
that  are  submerged  only  by  spring  tides  or  by  ordinary  high  tides 
favored  by  the  wind,  but  the  character  of  the  soil  is  the  same  over  the 
whole  island.  It  is  a soft  unctuous  mud,  free  of  grit  or  sand,  and  is  in- 
cax)able  of  sui^porting  a heavy  weight.  Even  in  the  most  elevated 
places  the  partially  dry  crust  is  but  3 or  4 inches  in  depth,  the  sub- 
stratum being  a semi-fluid  mud,  which  is  agitated  like  jelly  b3^  the  fall- 
ing of  even  small  bodies  upon  it,  like  the  juminng  of  men  or  ramming 
of  earth.  A pole  or  an  oar  can  be  forced  into  it  with  ease  to  the  depth 
of  12  or  15  feet.  In  most  x^laces  the  resistance  diminishes  with  increase 
of.  penetration.  Men  walking  over  it  are  partially  sustained  by  the  roots 
of  reeds  and  grass,  and  sink  in  only  5 or  6 inches.  When  this  top  sup- 
port gives  way  they  go  down  from  2 to  2J  feet,  and  in  some  places  much 
farther.  A road  or  causeway  of  some  kind  across  Jones  Island  from 
Mud  Kiver  to  Venus  Point  was  deemed  necessary  and  determined  ui^on 
at  the  outset,  even  if  the  guns  should  not  have  to  be  carried  over  it,  as 
the  means  of  getting  speedy  succor  to  the  Venus  Point  battery  in  case 
of  attack;  Daufuskie  Island,  4 miles  distant,  being  the  nearest  point 
where  troops  could  be  kept  for  that  ijurpose. 

On  the  29th  of  January  Lieutenant  O’Eorke,  of  the  Engineers,  was 
dispatched  by  me  in  a small  boat  to  examine  Long  and  Elba  Islands,  in 
the  Savannah  Hiver.  Major  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  Y^oik  Volunteers, 
accompanied  him.  They  entered  the  Savannah  Eiver  via  Cunningham 
Point  at  the  lower  end  of  Jones  Island,  xmlled  up  the  Savannah,  stojo- 
l)ing  several  times  on  Long  and  liflba  Islands,  and  went  around  the  west 
end  of  the  latter  to  within  about  2 miles  of  Fort  Jackson.  Lieutenant 


152  COASTS  OP"  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLP".  AND  P^AST  FLA.  IChap.  XV. 

O’liorke  reported  the  upper  end  of  Long  Island  favorable  for  batteries, 
the  snrfaee  being  fully  as  high  as  that  at  Venus  Point. 

The  following  extracts  from  my  journal  furnish  a portion  of  the  history 
of  the  operations  on  Jones  Island  and  the  Savannah  Eiver  for  the  in- 
vestment of  Fort  Pulaski,  and  may  be  properly  introduced  into  this 
report : 

Extracts  from  journal  of  Brigadier- General  Gillmore,  chief  engineer  Expcditionarg  Corps. 

February  1,  2,  3,  and  4. — The  two  engineer  companies  on  Danfiiskie  Island,  com- 
manded by  Captain  Sears,  were  employed  in  cutting  poles  for  a causeway  on  Jones 
Island  from  Mud  River  to  Venus  Point,  and  for  the  engineer  wharf  on  Daufuskie 
Island,  New  River. 

On  the  4th,  the  wharf,  with  8 feet  of  water  at  low  tide,  was  completed.  Ten  thou- 
sand poles,  5 to  6 inches  in  diameter  and  9 feet  long,  had  been  cut  on  Daufuskie  Island, 
and  1,900  of  them  deposited  at  the  wharf.  The  men  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York  and 
Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers  transported  the  poles  on  their  shoulders,  the  average 
distance  carried  being  1 mile.  At  the  suggestion  of  Captain  Sears  I had  a swath  cut 
and  cleared  of  reeds  and  grass  across  the  upper  end  of  Jones  Island,  to  prevent  the 
enemy  burning  the  island  over. 

Navy  officers  were  engaged  in  sounding  Mud  and  Wright  Rivers.  No  certainty  as 
yet  that  the  gunboats  will  enter  the  Savannah  River.  Mud  River  has  about  one  "and 
one-half  feet  of  water  in  it  at  the  extreme  low  tide,  with  a very  soft  (almost  semi-fluid) 
bottom.  Soundings  in  Wright  River  are  not  completed  yet. 

February  5 and  6. — Nothing  specially  new.  Engineer  force  engaged  in  cutting  poles, 
filling  sand  bags  on  Daufuskie  Island,  building  a temporary  wharf  of  poles  and  sand 
bags  on  Mud  River,  and  constructing  a wheelbarrow  track  of  planks  laid  end  to  end 
from  Venus  Point  to  Mud  River  Wharf.  The  Forty-eighth  New  York,  Seventh  Con- 
necticut Volunteers,  and  a portion  of  the  engineer  forces  engaged  in  transporting 
poles  and  planks  and  carrying  tilled  sand  bags  from  Daufuskie  Island  to  Jones  Island 
(a  distance  of  about  4 miles)  in  row-boats. 

February  1 and  8. — Finished  temporary  wharf  on  Mud  River.  Carried  several  hun- 
dred tilled  sand  bags  across  to  Venus  Point ; also  a quantity  of  planks  and  other  bat- 
tery materials.  Had  the  balance  of  the  engineer  materials  required  for  the  Venus 
Point  battery  put  into  lighters,  so  as  to  be  ready  whenever  the  gunboats  should  move. 
There  appears  to  be  no  immediate  prospect  of  their  moving. 

February  9. — I visited  Commander  Rotlgers  to  consult  in  regard  to  his  moving  into 
the  Savannah.  He  said  he  intended  to  attempt  the  Mud  River  passage  that  night  on 
the  high  tide.  The  signal  for  his  starting  would  be  one  note  from  his  steam-whistle. 
Returned  to  Daufuskie  and  consulted  with  General  Viele  and  Captain  Hamilton,  the 
chief  of  artillery.  It  was  arranged  that  the  flats,  with  the  guns  and  ammunition  on 
them,  should  be  towed  by  the  steamer  Mayflower  through  Wall’s  Cut  and  up  Mud 
River  into  the  Savannah,  just  behind  the  gunboats.  They  were  accordingly  taken 
in  tow  in  the  evening  after  dark  from  the  engineer  wharf.  The  night  was  windy, 
rainy,  and  very  dark.  The  Mayflower,  after  several  attempts,  failed  to  reach  Wall’s 
Cut,  and  cast  anchor  near  the  spot  she  started  from.  The  gunboats  did  not  move 
on  account  of  the  weather. 

February  10. — The  gunboats  Pembina  and  Unadilla  are  at  anchor  in  Wright  River, 
near  W all’s  Cut.  The  gunboat  Hale  has  taken  up  position  in  Mud  River  about  200  yards 
to  the  eastward  of  the  temporary  wharf,  in  order  to  protect  the  landing  and  cover  us  if 
driven  back.  Captain  Hamilton  quite  ill  from  last  night’s  exposure  in  the  Mayflower. 
I consulted  with  General  Viele  in  the  afternoon,  and  it  was  determined  to  establish  the 
Venus  Point  battery  at  once,  and  wait  no  longer  for  the  gunboats  to  go  ahead  of  us. 
Orders  from  General  Sherman  to  that  eflect  were  subsequently  received  that  same 
evening,  also  to  effect  this  by  landing  the  guns  on  Jones  Island  from  Mud  River  and 
hauling  them  over  the  marsh  instead  of  towing  them  into  the  Savannah  in  flats,  as 
first  coufemplated.  Major  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  Lieut.  J.  H. 
Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers,  volunteered  to  assist  Lieut.  Horace  Porter,  the  ord- 
nance officer,  in  getting  the  flats  into  Mud  River  and  the  guns  on  shore  and  into  posi- 
tion. Accordingly  the  flats  with  the  guns  were  towed  by  our  row-boats  up  the  river 
against  the  tide  and  landed  without  accident.  Two  of  them  were  taken  about  300 
yards  into  the  marsh  by  Lieutenant  Wilson.  The  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers 
furnished  the  fatigue  parties,  which  had  already  been  twenty-four  hours  at  work  on 
Jones  Island  and  were  very  much  exhausted.  Deeming  it  impossible  to  get  the  guns 
over  that  night,  I directed  them  to  be  covered  with  reeds  and  grass,  to  prevent  their 
<liscovery  by  the  enemy,  and  left  there  until  the  following  night. 

During  the  night  of  tlu)  lOtli,  Lieutenant  O’Rorke,  of  the  Engineers,  with  a party  of 
volunteer  engineers,  commenced  the  magazine  and  gnn  platforms  at  Venus  Point. 


Chap.  XV.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


153 


The  party  concealed  their  work  at  daybreak  (11th)  and  withdrew.  The  platforms 
were  made  by  raising  the  surface  5 or  6 inches  with  sand,  carried  over  in  bags.  On 
this  sand  foundation  thick^planks  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  the  battery  were  laid, 
nearly,  but  not  quite,  in  contact  with  each  other.  At  right  angles  to  these,  deck- 
planks  were  laid,  giving  a platform  9 by  17  feet.  The  floor  of  the  magazine  was  20 
iuciies  above  the  natural  surface,  and  rested  on  sand  bags. 

February  11. — Continued  getting  battery  and  road  materials  to  Jones  Island  during 
the  day.  Early  in  the  evening  I went  to  Jones  Island  with  fresh  men,  to  finish  the  labor 
of  getting  the  guns  over.  Lieutenants  Wilson  and  Porter  and  Major  Beard  took 
charge  of  the  fatigue  parties  as  before.  The  work  was  done  in  the  following  manner: 
The  pieces,  mounted  on  their  carriages  and  limbered  up,  were  moved  forward  on  shift- 
ing runways  of  planks  about  15  feet  long,  1 foot  wide,  and  J inches  thick,  laid  end  to 
end.  Lieutenant  Wilson,  with  a party  of  35  men,  took  charge  of  the  two  pieces  in  ad- 
vance, one  8-incli  siege  howitzer  and  a 30-pounder  Parrott,  and  Major  Beard  and  Lieu- 
tenant Porter,  with  a somewhat  larger  force,  of  the  four  pieces  in  ithe  rear,  two  20  and 
two  30  pounder  Parrotts.  Each  party  had  one  pair  of  planks  in  excess  of  the  number 
required  for  the  guns  and  limbers  to  rest  upon  when  closed  together.  This  extra  pair  of 
planks  being  placed  in  front,  in  prolongation  of  those  already  under  the  carriages,  the 
pieces  were  then  drawn  forward  with  drag-ropes  one  afterthe  other  thelength  of  aplank, 
thus  freeing  the  two  planks  in  the  rear,  which  in  their  turn  were  carried  to  the  front. 
This  labor  is  of  the  most  fatiguing  kind.  In  most  places  the  men  sank  to  their  knees 
in  the  mud,  in  some  places  much  deeper.  This  mudbeing  of  the  most  slippery  and  slimy 
kind  and  perfectly  free  from  grit  and  sand,  the  planks  soon  became  entirely  smeared 
over  with  ih  Many  delays  and  much  exhausting  labor  were  occasioned  by  the  gun- 
carriages  slipping  off  the  planks.  When  this  occurred  the  wheels  would  suddenly  sink 
to  the  hubs,  and  powerful  levers  had  to  be  devised  to  raise  them  up  again.  I author- 
ized the  men  to  encase  their  feet  in  sand  bags  to  keep  the  mud  out  of  their  shoes. 
Many  did  this,  tying  the  strings  just  below  the  knees.  The  magazines  and  platforms 
were  ready  for  service  at  daybreak.  Lieutenant  Wilson  got  his  two  pieces  into  posi- 
tion at  2.30  a.  m.  and  Major  Beard  and  Lieutenant  Porter  their  four  pieces  at  8.30  a. 
m.  on  the  12th.  At  3 a.  m.  Lieutenant  Wilson  started  back  to  General  Viele,  on  Dau- 
fuskie,  to  report  the  success. 

February  12. — After  giving  directions  for  the  fresh  relief  to  be  put  to  work  in  throw- 
ing up  a dike  around  the  battery  to  keep  out  the  spring  tides,  which  were  beginning 
to  flow,  I returned  to  Daufuskie  Island.  The  high  tide  to-day  came  within  8 inches 
of  the  surface  at  Venus  Point. 

February  13,  14,  15. — Various  causes,  particularly  the  weather,  delayed  the  establish- 
ment of  the  battery  on  Long  Island.  On  the  morning  of  the  13th  the  rebel  steamer 
Ida  passed  down  by  Venus  Point  under  full  steam.  Nine  shots  were  fired  at  her, 
striking  her  astern,  all  but  one.  Elevation  good,  but  not  enough  allowance  made  for 
speed  of  vessel.  I was  not  in  the  battery  at  the  time.  All  the  pieces,  except  one  30- 
pounder,  recoiled  off  the  platforms.  These  were  at  once  enlarged  to  18  by  17^  feet.  On 
the  afternoon  of  the  14th  three  rebel  gunboats  came  down  the  river  and  o^iened  fire  on 
the  battery,  taking  a position  about  1 mile  distant.  Battery  fired  about  30  shots. 
One  of  the  vessels  was  struck.  The  boats  then  withdrew. 

February  10. — The  steamer  Ida,  which  ran  the  battery  on  the  13th,  left  Fort  Pulaski 
and  returned  to  Savannah,  via  Lazaretto  Creek,  Wilmington  Narrows,  Turner’s  Creek, 
and  Saint  Augustine  Creek. 

February  17. — I returneddo  Hilton  Head,  by  General  Sherman’s  order,  leaving  Lieu- 
tenant O’Rorke  Avith  General  Viele,  with  written  instructions  concerning  the  engineer- 
ing operations  to  be  carried  on. 

The  foregoing  extracts  from  my  journal  are  all  that  bear  directly  upon 
the  operations  on  the  Savannah  above  Fort  Pulaski.  I did  not  return 
there  on  duty.  I soon  received  official  information,  however,  that  a second 
battery,  consisting  of  one  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  one  30-pouuder  Parrott, 
one  20-pounder  Parrott,  and  three  12-pounder  James  rides,  was  estab- 
lished on  Bird  Island,  just  above  Long  Island.  This  was  done  on  the 
night  of  February  20,  the  flats,  with  the  guns,  ammunition,  &c.,  on  them, 
being  towed  up  Mud  Eiver  and  across  the  Savannah  by  row-boats. 
Lieutenant  O’Rorke,  of  the  Engineers,  was  present  as  engineer  officer, 
and  Lieutenant  Porter  as  ordnance  officer.  Oapt.  John  Hamilton,  Gen- 
eral Sherman’s  chief  of  artillery,  was  also  present. 

On  the  19th  of  February  I Avas  ordered  by  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman 
to  Big  Tybee  Island,  to  place  it  in  a thorough  state  of  defense  against 
approach  from  Wilmington  N^arrows  and  Lazaretto  Creek,  to  prevent  all 


154  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

approach  by  water,  and  blockade  the  channel,’^  thereby  completing  the 
investment,  and  also  to  ‘^commence  operations  for  the  bombardment  of 
Fort  Pulaski.” 

The  absolute  blockade  of  Pulaski  dates  from  the  22d  of  February, 
at  which  time  I stationed  two  companies  of  the  Forty-sixth  New  York 
Volunteers,  with  a battery  of  two  held  xheces,  on  Decent  Island,  Laza- 
retto Creek.  This  force  was  subsequently  placed  on  board  an  old  hulk, 
anchored  in  Lazaretto  Creek,  about  2^  miles  from  Fort  Pulaski.  One 
30-pounder  Parrott  was  then  added  to  the  battery.  A small  guard  boat, 
mounting  a Navy  6 pounder,  was  posted  considerably  in  advance  of  the 
hulk,  to  intercept  messengers  attempting  to  reach  Fort  Pulaski  by  way 
of  McQueen’s  Island  Marsh.  On  the  31st  of  March  the  guard  boat  and 
18  men  were  captured  by  a large  scouting  party  of  the  enemy,  who 
suddenly  api)eared  on  Wilmington  Island.  After  this  the  services  of 
the  gunboat  Norwich,  Captaiu  Duncan,  were  secured  in  Wilmington 
Narrows,  to  assist  the  blockade. 

It  was  found  impossilde  to  perfectly  isolate  the  work.  In  order  to 
appreciate  the  difficulty  and  even  impracticability  of  securing,  with  ordi- 
nary means,  the  complete  blockade  of  a place  like  Fort  Pulaski,  it  is 
necessary  to  understand  something  of  the  topography  of  the  position. 

The  Savannah  River,  from  its  mouth  on  Tybee  Roads  to  its  confluence 
with  Saint  Augustine  Creek,  8 miles  above,  is  skirted  on  both  sides  by 
low  marsh  islands,  submerged  by  spring  tides,  covered  with  a thick 
growth  of  reeds  and  tall  grass,  and  cut  up  by  numerous  small,  tortu- 
ous creeks  and  bayous.  With  light  boats  that  can  be  hauled  over  the 
marsh  by  hand  from  creek  to  creek  small  parties  familiar  with  the  local- 
ity can  with  comparative  security  find  their  way  over  these  marshes  in 
the  night,  and  avoid  guards  and  pickets.  It  was  known  that  messen- 
gers passed  to  and  from  the  fort  in  this  way  quite  frequently.  Several 
of  these  were  caught.  One  of  them  started  from  the  fort  and  made  his 
escape  to  Savannah,  just  after  the  white  flag  was  raised,  on  the  day  of 
the  surrender. 

On  the  21st  of  February  the  first  vessel  with  ordnance  and  ordnance 
Stores  for  the  siege  arrived  in  Tybee  Roads.  From  that  time  until  the 
hth  of  April  all  the  troops  on  Tybee  Island,  consisting  of  the  Seventh 
Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  the  Forty-sixth  Regiment  New  York 
Volunteers,  two  companies  of  the  Volunteer  Engineers,  and,  for  the 
most  of  the  time,  two  companies  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Volunteer 
Artillery,  were  constantly  engaged  in  landing  and  transporting  ord- 
nance, ordnance  stores,  and  battery  materials,  making  fascines  and  roads, 
constructing  gun  and  mortar  batteries,  service  and  depot  magazines, 
splinter  and  bomb  proof  shelters  for  the  relief  of  cannoneers  off*  duty, 
and  drilling  at  the  several  jiieces. 

The  armament  comprised  30  pieces,  distributed  in  eleven  batterie's,  at 
various  distances  from  the  fort,  as  shown  in  the  following  table: 

1.  Battery  Stanton,  three  heavy  l3-in(‘h  mortars,  at  3,400  yards. 

2.  Battery  Grant,  three  heavy  i3-inch  mortars,  at  3,200  yards. 

3.  Battery  Lyon,  three  heavy  10-inch  colnmbiads,  at  3,100  yards. 

4.  Battery  Lincoln,  three  heavy  S-inch  columhiads,  at  3,045  yards. 

5.  Battery  Burnside,  one  heavy  13-inch  mortar,  at  2,750  yards. 

6.  Battery  Sherman,  three  heavy  13-inch  mortars,  at  2,650  yards. 

7.  Battery  Halleck,  two  heavy  13-inch  mortars,  at  2,400  yards. 

8.  Battery  Scott,  three  10-inch  and  one  8-inch  columbiad,  at  1,740  yards. 

9.  Battery  Sigel,  live  30-i)ounder  Parrotts  and  one  4 8-x)0 under  James  (old  24-pouuder), 
at  1,670  yards. 

10.  Battery  McClellan,  two  84-pounder  James  (old  42-pounder)  and  two  64-pounder 
James  (old  32-ponnder),  at  1,650  yards. 

11.  Battery  Totten,  four  10-inch  siege  mortars,  at  1,650  yards. 


Chap.  XV.l 


FORT  PULASKI. 


155 


Each  battery  had  a service  magazine  capable  of  containing  a supply 
of  powder  for  about  two  days^  firing.  A depot  powder  magazine  of 
3,600  barrels’  capacity  was  constructed  near  the  Martello  Tower,  which 
was  the  landing  place  for  all  the  supplies.  Serious  difficulties  were 
encountered  in  making  a road  sufficiently  firm  to  serve  for  this  heavy 
transportation. 

Tybee  Island  is  mostly  a mud  marsh,  like  other  marsh  islands  on  this 
coast.  Several  ridges  and  hummocks  of  firm  ground,  however,  exist 
upon  it,  and  the  shore  of  Tybee  Eoads,  where  the  batteries  were  located, 
is  partially  skirted  by  low  sand  banks,  formed  by  the  gradual  and  pro- 
tracted action  of  the  wind  and  tides.  The  distance  along  this  shore 
from  the  landing  place  to  the  advanced  batteries  is  about  miles. 
The  last  mile  of  this  route,  on  which  the  seven  most  advanced  batteries 
were  placed,  is  low  and  marshy,  lies  in  full  view  of  Fort  Pulaski,  and  is 
within  effective  range  of  its  guns.  The  construction  of  a causeway 
resting  on  fascines  and  brush-wood  over  this  swampy  portion  of  the 
line;  the  erection  of  the  several  batteries,  with  the  magazines,  gun  plat- 
forms, and  splinter-proof  shelters ; the  transportation  of  the  heaviest 
ordnance  in  our  service  by  the  labor  of  men  alone;  the  hauling  of 
ordnance  stores  and  engineer  supplies,  and  the  mounting  of  the  guns^ 
and  mortars  on  their  carriages  and  beds  had  to  be  done  almost  exclu- 
sive y at  night,  alike  regardless  of  the  inclemenc}-  of  the  weather  and 
of  the  miasma  from  the  swamps. 

No  one  except  an  eye-witness  can  form  any  but  a faint  conception  of 
the  herculean  labor  by  which  mortars  of  tons’  weight  and  columbiads^ 
but  a trifle  lighter  were  moved  in  the  dead  of  night  over  a narrow  cause- 
way, bordered  bj"  swamps  on  either  side,  and  liable  at  any  moment  to 
be  overturned  and  buried  in  the  mud  beyond  reach.  The  stratum  of 
mud  is  about  12  feet  deep,  and  on  several  occasions  the  heaviest  pieces, 
particularly  the  mortars,  became  detached  from  the  sling-carts,  and 
were  with  great  difficulty,  by  the  use  of  planks  and  skids,  kept  from 
sinking  to  the  bottom.  Two  hundred  and  fifty  men  Avere  barely  suffi- 
cient to  move  a single  piece  on  sling  carts.  The  men  were  not  allowed 
to  speak  above  a whisper,  and  were  guided  by  the  notes  of  a whistle. 

The  positions  selected  for  the  five  most  advanced  batteries  were 
artificially  screened  from  view  from  the  fort  by  a gradual  and  almost 
inperceptible  change,  made  little  by  little  every  night,  in  the  condition 
and  appearance  of  the  brush- wood  and  bushes  in  front  of  them.  Ne 
sudden  alteration  of  the  outline  of  the  landscape  was  permitted.  After 
the  concealment  was  once  perfected  to  such  a degree  as  to  afford  a good 
and  safe  parapet  behind  it  less  care  was  taken,  and  some  of  the  work  in 
the  batteries  requiring  mechanical  skill  was  done  in  the  daytime,  the 
fatigue  parties  going  f^o  their  labor  before  break  of  day  and  returning 
in  the  evening  after  dark.  In  all  the  batteries  traverses  were  placed 
between  the  pieces.  With  two  exceptions  (Batteries  Lincoln  and  Tot- 
ten) the  magazines  were  placed  in  or  near  the  center  of  the  battery, 
against  the  epaulement,  with  the  opening  to  the  rear.  An  ante-room 
for  filling  cartridge  bags  was  attached  to  each.  The  magazines  for  the 
Batteries  Lincoln  and  Totten  weie  located  in  the  rear  of  the  platforms. 

For  revetting  the  sides  of  the  traverses  and  epaulements  fascines, 
hurdles,  brush,  and  marsh  sods  were  used.  Marsh  sods  form  the  best 
revetment  for  sandy  soil.  All  the  others  allow  the  sand  to  sift  through 
them  to  such  an  extent  as  to  become  a serious  annoyance  to  the  men 
Serving  the  pieces. 

In  order  to  diminish  as  much  as  possible  the  labor  of  forming  the 
parapets  in  front  of  the  pieces  the  foundation  timbers  of  all  the  gun 


156  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

aD(l  mortar  i)latforms  were  sunk  to  liigh-water  mark.  This  brought 
them  in  many  cases  to  within  6 or  8 inches  of  the  substratum  of  soft 
<‘lay.  To  secure  them  against  settlement  the  lateral  as  well  as  vertical 
<limensions  usually  adopted  for  platforms  were  considerably  enlarged. 

On  the  31st  day  of  March  Maior-General  Hunter  assumed  command 
of  the  Department  of  the  South,  and  Brigadier  General  Benham,  of 
the  Northern  District  thereof,  comprising  the  States  of  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  a part  of  Florida.  During  the  week  which  followed  these 
generals  visited  Tybee  Island  at  separate  times,  and  inspected  the  siege 
works  and  batteries  there  established.  No  change  or  modification  of 
any  of  the  works  was  suggested  by  either. 

On  the  afternoon  of  April  9 everything  was  in  readiness  to  open 
fire.  Generals  Hunter  and  Benham  had  arrived  the  evening  before 
with  their  respective  staffs. 

The  following  general  orders,  regulating  the  rapidity  and  direction  of 
the  firing  and  the  charges  and  elevation  of  the  pieces  of  each  battery, 
were  issued.  As  the  instructions  then  given  were,  with  one  or  two 
trifling  excei)tions,  adhered  to  with  remarkable  fidelity  throughout  the 
action,  they  are  inserted  here  in  full,  to  save  the  necessity  of  further 
reference  to  them : 

General  Orders,  > Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

No.  17.  5 Tyhee  Inland,  Ga.,  April  9,  1862. 

The  batteries  established  against  Fort  Pulaski  will  be  manned  and  ready  for  service 
at  break  of  day  to-morrow.  The  signal  to  begin  the  action  will  be  one  gun  from  the 
right  mortar  of  Battery  Halleck  (2,400  yards  from  the  work),  fired  under  the  direction 
of  Lieut.  Horace  Porter,  chief  of  ordnance.  Charge  of  mortar,  11  pounds  ; charge  of 
shell,  11  pounds;  elevation,  55  degrees;  length  of  fuse,  24  seconds.  This  battery  (two 
13-inch  mortars)  will  continue  firing  at  the  rate  of  fifteen  minutes  to  each  mortar 
alternately,  varying  the  charge  of  mortars  and  the  length  of  fuse  so  that  the  shells  will 
drop  over  the  arches  of  the  north  and  northeast  faces  of  the  work  and  explode  immedi- 
ately after  striking,  and  not  before. 

The  other  batteries  will  open  as  follows,  viz,  Battery  Stanton  Hhree  13-inch  mortars, 
3,400  yards  distant)  immediately  after  the  signal,  at  the  rate  of  fifteen  minutes  for 
«ach  piece,  alternating  from  the  right.  Charge  of  mortars,  14  pounds ; charge  of  shell, 
7 pounds;  elevation,  45  degrees;  length  of  fuse,  23  seconds;  varying  the  charge  of 
mortar  and  length  of  fuse  as  may  be  required.  The  shells  should  drop  over  the  arches 
of  the  south  face  of  the  work  and  explode  immediately  after  striking,  but  not  before. 

Battery  Grant  (three  13-inch  mortars,  3,200  yards  distant)  immediately  after  the 
ranges  of  Battery  Stanton  have  been  determined,  at  the  rate  of  fifteen  minutes  for 
each  piece,  alternating  from  the  right.  Charge  of  shells,  7 pounds;  elevation,  45 
degrees ; charges  of  mortars  and  length  of  fuse  to  be  varied  to  suit  the  range,  as  deter- 
mined from  Battery  Stanton.  The  shells  should  drop  over  the  south  face  of  the  work 
and  explode  immediately  after  striking,  but  not  before. 

Battery  Lyon  (three  10-inch  columbiads,  3,100  yards  distant),  with  a curved  fire, 
immediately  after  the  signal,  allowing  ten  minutes  between  the  discharges  for  each 
piece,  alternating  from  the  right.  Charge  of  gun,  17  pounds ; charge  of  shell,  3 pounds ; 
elevation,  20  degrees,  and  length  of  fuse,  20  seconds ; charge  and  length  of  fuse  to 
vary  as  required.  The  shells  should  pass  over  the  parapet  into  the  work,  taking  the 
gorge  and  north  face  in  reverse,  and  exploding  at  the  moment  of  striking  or  immedi- 
ately after. 

Battery  Lincoln  (three  8-inch  columbiads,  3,045  yards  distant),  with  a curved  fire, 
immediately  after  the  signal,  allowing  six  minutes  between  discharges  for  each  piece, 
alternating  from  the  right.  Charge  of  gun,  10  pounds ; charge  of  shell,  1^  pounds ; 
elevation,  20  degrees,  and  length  of  fuse,  20  seconds.  Directed  the  same  as  Battery 
Lyon,  upon  the  gorge  and  north  face  in  reverse,  varying  the  charge  and  length  of  fuse 
accordingly. 

Battery  Burnside  (one  13-inch  mortar,  2,750  yards  distant)  firing  every  ten  minutes 
from  the  time  the  range  is  obtained  for  Battery  Sherman.  Charge  of  shell,  7 pounds; 
elevation,  45  degrees  ; charge  of  mortar  and  length  of  fuse  varying  as  required  from 
those  obtained  for  Battery  Sherman.  The  shells  should  drop  on  the  arches  of  the  north 
and  northeast  faces,  and  explode  immediately  after  striking,  but  not  before. 

Battery  Sherman  (three  13-inch  mortars,  2,650  yards  distant)  commencing  immedi- 
ately after  the  ranges  for  Battery  Grant  have  been  determined,  and  firing  at  the  rate 
•of  lifteen  minutes  for  each  piece,  alternating  from  the  right.  Charge  of  shell,  7 pounds 


Chap.  XV.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


157 


elevation,  45  dej^rees  ; charge  of  mortar  and  length  of  fuse  to  be  fixed  to  suit  the  range, 
as  determined  from  Battery  Grant.  The  sliells  should  drop  over  the  arches  of  the 
north  and  northeast  faces. 

Battery  Scott  (three  10-inch  and  one  8-inch  colnmhiads,  1,740  yards  distant)  firing 
solid  shot,  and  commencing  immediately  after  the  barbette  tire  of  the  work  has  ceased. 
Charge  of  10-inch  colnmbiads,  20  pounds;  elevation,  4i  degrees.  Charge  of  8-inch 
colnmbiad,  10  pounds ; elevation,  5 degrees.  This  battery  should  breach  tlie  pa7i- 
coupe  between  the  south  and  southeast  faces,  and  the  embrasure  next  to  it,  in  the 
southeast  face,  the  elevation  to  be  varied  accordingly ; the  charge  to  riimain  the  same. 
Until  the  elevation  is  accurately  determined  each  gun  should  fire  once  in  ten  minutes; 
after  that  every  six  or  eight  minutes. 

Battery  Sigel  (live  30-pounder  Parrotts  and  one  48-ponrider  James,  old  24-pounder 
rifled,  1,(570  yards  distant)  to  open  with  4f-seconds  fuses  on  the  barbette  guns  of  the 
fort  at  the  second  discharge  fro  in  Battery  8herman.  Charge  for  30-pounder,  3^  pounds ; 
charge  for  45-pounder,  5 pounds ; elevation,  4 degrees  for  both  calibers.  As  soon  as 
the  barbette  fire  of  the  work  has  been  silenced  this  battery  will  be  directed  with  per- 
cussion shells  upon  the  walls,  to  breach  the  paw-,  between  the  south  and  southeast 

faces,  the  elevation  to  be  varied  accordingly,  the  charge  to  remain  the  same.  Until 
the  elevation  is  accurately  determined  each  gun  should  fire  once  in  six  or  eight  min- 
utes ; after  that  every  four  or  five  minutes.  • 

Battery  McClellan  (two  84  and  two  64-pounders  James,  old  42  and  32  pounders  rifled, 
1,650  yards  distant)  opensfire  immediately  after  Battery  Scott.  Charge  for  84-pounder, 
8 pounds  ; charge  for  64-pounder,  6 pounds ; elevation  for  84-pounder,  4^  degrees,  and 
for  the  64-pounder,  4 degrees.  Each  piece  should  fire  once  every  five  or  six  minutes 
after  the  elevation  has  been  established.  Charge  to  remain  the  same.  This  battery 
should  breach  the  work  in  the  pan-coup^  between  the  south  and  southeast  faces  and 
the  embrasure  next  to  it  in  the  southeast  face.  The  steel  scraper  for  the  grooves 
should  be  used  after  every  fifth  or  sixth  discharge. 

Battery  Totten  (four  10-inch  siege  mortars,  1,650  yards  distant)  opens  fire  immedi- 
ately after  Battery  Sigel,  firing  each  piece  about  once  in  five  minutes.  Charge  of 
mortar,  3^  pounds;  charge  of  shell,  3 pounds;  elevation,  45  degrees,  and  length  of 
fuse,  1^  seconds.  The  charge  of  mortar  and  length  of  fuse  to  vary  so  as  to  explode 
the  shells  over  the  northeast  and  southeast  faces  of  the  work.  If  any  battery  should 
be  unmasked  outside  the  work.  Battery  Totten  will  direct  its  fire  upon  it,  varying  the 
charge  and  length  of  fuse  accordingly.  The  fire  from  each  battery  will  cease  at  dark, 
except  especial  directions  be  given  to  the  contrary.  A signal  officer  at  Battery  Scott, 
to  observe  the  effect  of  the  13-inch  shells,  will  be  in  communication  with  other  signal 
officers  stationed  near  Batteries  Stanton,  Grant,  and  Sherman,  in  order  to  determine 
the  rauge  for  these  batteries  in  succession. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore : 

W.  L.  M.  BURGER, 

First  Lieutenant,  Volunteer  Engineers,  and  Aetg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen. 

Just  after  sunrise,  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hun- 
ter, commanding  the  department,  dispatched  Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  of  the 
Topographical  Engineers,  to  Fort  Pulaski,  bearing  a flag  of  truce  and 
a summons  to  surrender.  To  this  demand  a negative  answer  was  re- 
turned. 

The  order  was  given  to  open  fire,  commencing  with  the  mortar  bat- 
teries, agreeably  to  the  foregoing  instructions. 

The  fiist  shell  was  fired  at  a quarter  past  8 o’clock  a.  m.  from  Battery 
Halleck.  The  other  mortar  batteries  opened  one  after  the  other,  as 
rapidly  in  succession  as  it  was  found  practicable  to  determine  the  ap- 
proximate ranges  by  the  use  of  signals.  The  guns  and  columbiads  soon 
followed,  so  that  before  half  past  9 a.  m.  all  the  batteries  were  in  opera- 
tion, it  having  been  deemed  expedient  not  to  wait  for  the  barbette  fire 
of  the  work  to  be  silenced  before  opening  with  Breaching  Batteries 
Scott  and  McClellan. 

The  three  10-inch  columbiads  in  Battery  Scott  were  dismounted  by 
their  own  recoil  at  the  first  discharge,  and  one  of  those  in  Battery  Lyon, 
from  the  same  cause,  at  the  third  discharge.  The  gun-carriages  were 
the  new  iron  pattern,  while  the  pintles  and  pintle-crosses  belonged  to 
, the  old  wooden  carriages,  and  were  unsuitable.  They  were  all,  except 
one  in  Battery  Scott,  subsequently  remounted  and  serv^ed. 

As  the  several  batteries  along  our  line,  which  was  2,550  yards  in 


158  COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


length,  opened  fire  one  after  another,  the  enemy  followed  them  up  suc- 
cessively with  a vigorous  though  not  at  first  very  accurate  fire  from  his 
barbette  and  casemate  guns.  Subsequent  inquiry  showed  that  he  knew 
the  exact  position  of  only  two  of  our  batteries — Sherman  and  Burnside. 
These  were  established  just  above  high-water  mark,  on  low  ground,  void 
of  bushes  or  undergrowth  of  any  kind.  During  their  construction  no 
special  attempt  at  concealment  had  been  made  after  once  securing  good 
parapet  cover  by  night  work. 

Great  surprise  and  disappointment  were  expressed  by  all  experienced 
officers  present  at  the  unsatisfactory  results  obtained  with  the  13-inch 
mortars.  Although  the  platforms  were  excellent  and  remained  for  all 
useful  purposes  intact,  and  although  the  pieces  were  served  with  a fair 
degree  of  care  and  skill,  not  one-tenth  of  the  shells  thrown  appeared  to 
fall  within  the  work — an  estimate  that  was  afterwards  found  to  be  rather 
over  than  under  the  correct  proportion.  Whether  this  inaccuracy  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  no  cartridge-bags  were  furnished  for  the  mortars,  to 
inequalities  in  the  strength  of  the  powder,  to  defects  inherent  in  the 
piece  itself,  or  to  these  several  causes  combined,  remains  yet  to  be  ascer- 
tained. It  is  suggested  that  the  earnest  attention  of  the  proper  depart- 
ment be  directed  to  this  subject. 

By  1 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  (April  10)  it  became  evident  that  the 
work  would  be  breached,  provided  our  breaching  batteries  did  not  be- 
come seriously  disabled  by  the  enemy’s  fire.  By  the  aid  of  a powerful 
telescope  it  could  be  observed  that  the  rifled  projectiles  were  doing  excel- 
lent service,  that  their  penetration  was  deep  and  effective,  and  that  the 
portion  of  the  wall  where  the  breach  had  been  ordered  was  becoming 
rapidly  honey-combed. 

It  also  became  evident  before  night,  on  account  of  the  inefficiency  of 
the  mortar  firing,  that  upon  breaching  alone  ending  perhaps  in  an 
assault,  we  must  depend  for  the  reduction  of  the  work. 

In  order  to  increase  the  security  of  our  advanced  batteries  a tolerably 
brisk  fire  against  the  barbette  guns  of  the  fort  was  kept  up  throughout 
the  day.  Probably  from  15  to  20  per  cent,  of  the  metal  thrown  from  the 
breaching  batteries  on  the  10th  was  expended  in  this  way. 

As  evening  closed  in,  rendering  objects  indistinct,  all  the  pieces  ceased 
firing,  with  the  exception  of  two  13-inch  mortars,  one  10-inch  mortar, 
and  one  30-pounder  Parrott,  which  were  served  throughout  the  night  at 
intervals  of  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  for  each  piece.  The  object  of  this 
was  to  prevent  repairs  of  the  breach  or  the  filling  of  the  casemates  in 
rear  of  it  with  sand  bags  or  other  material. 

I extract  as  follows  from  my  preliminary  report  to  Brigadier- General 
Benham,  dated  April  12,  1862  : 

The  only  plainly  perceptible  result  of  this  cannonade  of  ten  and  a half  hours’  dura- 
tion (on  tiie  10th),  the  breaching  batteries  having  been  served  but  nine  and  a halt 
hours,  was  the  commencement  of  a breach  in  the  easterly  half  of  the  pan-coiip^  con- 
necting the  south  and  southeast  faces,  and  in  that  portion  of  the  southeast  face  spanned 
by  the  two  casemates  adjacent  to  the  pan-coupe. 

The  breach  had  been  ordered  in  this  portion  of  the  scarp  so  as  to  take  in  reverse, 
through  the  opening  formed,  the  powder  magazine,  located  in  the  angle  formed  by  the 
gorge  and  the  north  fade. 

Two  of  the  barbette  guns  of  the  fort  had  been  disabled  and  three  casemate  guns 
silenced. 

The  enemy  served  both  tiers  of  guns  briskly  throughout  the  day,  but  without  injury 

to  the  materiel  or  personnel  of  our  batteries. 

*#*##*# 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  a little  after  sunrise,  our  batteries  again 
opened  fire  with  decided  effect,  the  fort  returning  a heavy  and  well- 
directed  fire  from  its  casemates  and  barbette  guns.  The  breach  was 


Chap.  XY.J 


FORT  PULASKI. 


159 


rapidly  enlarged.  After  the  expiration  of  three  hours  the  entire  case- 
mate next  the  pan-coupS  had  been  opened,  and  by  12  o’clock  the  one 
adjacent  to  it  was  in  a similar  condition. 

Directions  were  then  given  to  train  the  guns  upon  the  third  embra- 
sure, upon  which  the  breaching  batteries  were  operating  with  effect, 
when  the  fort  hoisted  the  white  flag.  This  occurred  at  2 o’clock. 

The  formalities  of  visiting  the  fort,  receiving  its  surrender,  and  occu- 
pying it  with  our  troops,  consumed  the  balance  of  the  afternoon  and 
evening. 

During  the  11th  about  one-tenth  of  the  projectiles  from  the  three 
breaching  batteries  were  directed  against  the  barbette  guns  of  the  tort. 
Eleven  of  its  guns  were  dismounted,  or  otherwise  rendered  temporarily 
unserviceable. 

The  garrison  of  the  fort  was  found  to  consist  of  385  men,  including  a 
full  complement  of  officers.  Several  of  them  were  severely,  and  one 
fatally,  wounded. 

Our  total  loss  was  1 man  killed.  None  of  our  ineces  were  struck. 

I take  pleasure  in  recording  my  acknowledgment  of  the  hearty,  zeal- 
ous, and  persevering  co-operation  afforded  me  by  the  officers  and  men 
under  my  command,  not  only  during  the  10th  and  11th,  when  all  more 
or  less  forgot  their  fatigue  in  the  excitement  and  danger  of  the  engage- 
ment, but  throughout  the  exhausting  and  unwholesome  labors  of  prep- 
aration, occupying  day  and  night  a period  of  nearly  eight  weeks. 

The  entire  available  strength  of  the  command  was  on  guard  or  fatigue 
duty  every  twenty -four  hours. 

The  details  for  night  work  were  always  paraded  immediately  after 
sunset,  and  were  usually  dismissed  from  labor  between  1 and  2 o’clock 
in  the  morning,  although  circumstances  frequently  required  parties  to 
remain  out  all  night. 

In  unloading  the  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  advantage  was  always 
taken  of  favorable  tide  and  weather  day  and  night. 

There  is  one  circumstance  connected  with  this  siege  which  appears  to 
deserve  special  mention,  and  that  is,  that  with  the  exception  of  a detach- 
ment of  sailors  from  the  frigate  Wabash,  who  served  four  of  the  light 
siege  pieces  in  Battery  Sigel  on  the  11th,  we  had  no  artillerists  of  any 
experience  whatever.  Four  of  the  batteries  were  manned  by  the  Third 
Ehode  Island  Volunteer  Artillery,  who  were  conversant  with  the  manual 
of  the  pieces,  but  had  never  been  practiced  at  firing.  All  the  other 
pieces  were  served  by  infantry  troops,  who  had  been  on  constant  fatigue 
duty,  and  who  received  all  their  instructions  in  gunnery  at  such  odd 
times  as  they  could  be  spared  from  other  duties  during  the  week  or  ten 
days  preceding  the  action. 

Instructions  had  been  given  by  General  Benham  to  place  a mortar 
battery  on  the  lower  end  of  Long  Island  and  two  10-inch  columbiads  on 
Turtle  Island,  in  order  to  obtain  a reverse  fire  on  the  work.  These  bat- 
teries were  to  have  been  erected  and  manned  by  detachments  from 
General  Viele’s  command.  One  10-inch  siege  mortar  was  therefore 
placed  on  Long  Island,  and  was  served  on  the  11th  April  by  a detach- 
ment commanded  by  Major  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers. 
It  was  entirely  ineffective  on  account  of  the  distance — nearly  1,900 
yards.  The  idea  of  Turtle  Island  battery  was  not  carried  into  effect, 
and  no  pieces  were  landed  there. 

Throughout  the  siege  Col.  Alfred  H.  Terry,  Seventh  Eegiment  Con- 
necticut Volunteers,  and  Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Hall,  commanding  battal- 
ion of  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  were  conspicuous  for  the  zeal 


160  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

and  perseverance  with  wliicli  they  discharged  the  varied  duties  to  which 
they  were  assigned. 

Captain  Ilinckel,  with  one  company  of  the  Forty-sixth  EegimentKew 
York  Volunteers  and  a small  battery,  occupied  for  eight  weeks,  with 
credit  to  himself  and  command,  an  advanced  and  exposed  position  on  a 
hulk  in  Lazaretto  Creek,  cutting  off  boat  communication  in  that  direc- 
tion between  Fort  Pulaski  and  the  interior. 

Lieut.  Horace  Porter,  of  the  Ordnance  Department,  rendered  impor- 
tant and  valuable  service.  Besides  discharging  most  efficiently  the 
special  duties  of  chief  of  ordnance  and  artillery,  he  directed  in  person 
the  transportation  of  nearl}"  all  the  heavy  ordnance  and  instructed  the 
men  in  its  use.  He  was  actively  engaged  among  the  batteries  during 
the  action. 

Capt.  Charles  E.  Fuller,  assistant  quartermaster,  served  with  me  four 
weeks,  assuming'  during  that  time  the  entire  charge  of  unloading  the 
ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  from  the  vessels;  a duty  which  he  dis- 
charged with  a success  worthy  of  special  notice. 

Lieut.  James  H.  Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers,  joined  my  com- 
mand eleven  days  before  the  action,  and  was  assigned  to  duty  as  in- 
structor of  artillery.  He  rendered  valuable  service  in  that  capacity, 
and  also  at  the  breaching  batteries  on  the  10th  and  11th. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze,  Fifteenth  IJ.  S.  Infantry,  and  Capt.  J.  W. 
Turner,  commissary  of  subsistence,  U.  S.  Army,  members  of  Major-Gen- 
eral Hunter’s  staff,  volunteered  for  the  engagement,  and  were  assigned 
to  the  command  of  batteries,  where  their  knowledge  and  experience  as 
artillerists  proved  of  great  value. 

On  the  11th  two  pieces  of  Battery  Sigel  were  served  by  a detachment 
from  the  Eighth  Kegiment  Maine  Volunteers,  under  Captain  McArthur, 
of  that  regiment.  The  men  had  all  served  exclusively  as  infantry,  and 
received  their  first  artillery  drill  from  Captain  Turner  and  Lieutenant 
Wilson  under  a severe  fire.  They  readily  adapted  themselves  to  their 
new  duties,  and  served  their  guns  creditably. 

Capt.  F.  E.  Graef  and  Lieut.  T.  B.  Brooks,  commanding  respectively 
the  two  companies  (D  and  A)  of  Volunteer  Engineers,  were  indefatigable 
in  the  discharge  of  their  duties  as  engineer  officers,  which  required  them 
to  be  out  with  the  working  parties  every  night. 

I nm  under  obligations  to  Commander  C.  E.  P.  Eodgers  and  Lieut. 
John  Irwin,  U.  S.  Navy,  for  skillfully  serving  with  a detachment  of 
sailors  four  siege  guns  in  Battery  Sigel  on  the  11th. 

Lieut.  W.  L.  M.  Burger,  of  the  regiment  of  New  York  Volunteer  En- 
gineers, served  with  zeal  and  efficiency  as  my  adjutant-general  during 
the  operations  on  Tybee  Island. 

Lieut.  P.  H.  O’Eorke,  of  the  Corps  of  Engineers,  and  Adam  Badeau, 
esq.,  volunteered  to  serve  as  my  aides  on  the  10th  and  11th,  and  ren- 
dered valuable  assistance. 

The  services  of  Sergt.  James  E.  Wilson,  of  Company  A,  Corps  of 
Engineers,  deserve  special  mention,  and  largely  contributed  towards 
getting  the  breaching  batteries  ready  for  service.  Sergeant  Wilson 
commanded  Battery  Burnside  during  the  action. 

To  Major-General  Hunter  and  Brigadier-General  Benham,  command- 
ing respectively  this  department  and  district,  I am  under  obligations 
for  the  official  courtesy  with  which  they  allowed  the  project  for  reducing 
the  fort,  which  was  planned  and  all  but  executed  before  they  assumed 
their  commands,  to  be  carried  out  in  all  its  details  without  change  or 
modification. 


<3hap.  XV.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


161 


OENERAL  OBSERVATIONS. 

The  three  breaching  batteries — Sigel,  Scott,  and  McClellan — were 
established  at  a mean  distance  of  1,700  yards  from  the  scarp  walls  of 
Fort  Pulaski. 

The  circumstance,  altogether  new  in  the  annals  of  sieges,  that  a prae- 
ticable  breach,  which  compelled  the  surrender  of  the  work,  was  made  at 
that  distance  in  a wall  feet  thick,  standing  obliquely  to  the  line  of 
fire  and  backed  by  heavy  casemate  piers  and  arches,  cannot  bo  ignored 
by  a simple  reference  to  the  time-honored  military  maxims  that  “ Forts 
cannot  sustain  a vigorous  land  attack,”  and  that  ‘‘All  masonry  should 
be  covered  from  land  batteries.” 

A comparative  glance  at  the  status  of  military  science  as  regards 
breaching  prior  to  the  invention  of  rifled  cannon  will  enable  us  to  form 
a tolerably  correct  estimate  of  the  importance  to  be  attached  to  the 
results  developed  by  this  improved  arm  of  the  service.  A standard 
military  work  furnishes  the  following  extract : 

An  exposed  wall  may  be  breached  with  certainty  at  distances  from  500  to  700  yards, 
even  when  elevated  100  feet  above  the  breaching  battery ; and  it  is  believed  that  in 
case  of  extreme  necessity  it  would  be  justifiable  to  attempt  to  batter  down  an  exposed 
wall  from  any  distance  not  exceeding  1,000  yards;  but  then  the  quantity  of  artillery 
must  be  considerable,  and  it  will  require  from  four  to  seven  days’  firing,  according  to  the 
number  of  guns  in  battery  and  the  period  of  daylight,  to  render  a breach  practicable. 

During  the  Peninsular  war  breaching  at  500  to  700  yards  was  of  fre- 
quent occurrence,  and  at  the  second  siege  of  Badajos  fourteen  brass  24- 
pounders  breached  an  exposed  castle  wall  backed  by  earth  alone,  and 
consequently  much  weaker  than  a scarp  sustained  in  the  rear  by  heavy 
piers  and  arches,  in  eight  hours,  at  a distance  of  800  yards. 

Experiments  of  breaching  with  rifled  guns  have  recently  been  made. 
I shall  notice  two  cases  : 

In  August,  1860,  experiments  with  Armstrong's  rifled  guns  were  made 
against  a condemned  marteUo  tower  at  Eastbourne,  on  the  coast  of  Sus- 
sex, England.  The  tower  was  of  brick,  fif  ty-six  years  old,  and  designed 
for  one  gun,  the  wall  being  7J  feet  thick  at  the  level  of  the  ground  and  5j^ 
thick  at  the  spring  of  the  vault,  which  was  19  feet  above  the  ground. 
It  was  31^  feet  high,  46  feet  exterior  diameter  at  the  bottom,  and  40  feet 
at  the  top.  The  pieces  used  against  it  were : one  40-pounder  of  4f-inch 
caliber,  one  82  pounder  of  6-inch  caliber,  and  one  7-inch  howitzer,  throw- 
ing 100-pound  shells.  A practicable  breach,  24  feet  wide,  including  most 
of  the  arch,  was  made  with  an  expenditure  of  10,850  pounds  of  metal,  at 
a distance  of  1,032  yards.  The  projectiles  expended  were:  40-pounder 
gun,  20  solid  shot,  1 plugged  shell,  43  live  shells;  82-pounder  gun,  19* 
solid  shot,  8 plugged  shells,  36  live  shells ; 7-inch  howitzer,  2 plugged 
shells,  29  live  shells. 

Projectiles  that  failed  to  hit  the  wall  are  excluded  from  the  above 
table.* 

General  Sir  John  Burgoyne,  in  his  report  upon  these  experiments, 
says : 

Trials  were  subsequently  made  to  breach  a similar  tower  from  smooth-bored  68  and 
32  pounders  at  the  same  range  of  1,030  yards,  and  the  result  may  be  deemed  altogether 
a failure,  both  accuracy  of  fire  and  velocity  of  missiles  being  quite  deficient  for  such  a 
range.  At  500,  or  perhaps  COO,  yards  the  superiority  of  the  rifled  ordnance  would 
probably  have  been  very  little,  if  any. 

Experimental  siege  operations  for  the  instruction  of  the  Prussian  army, 
comprising  the  demolition  of  the  defective  and  obsolete  fortifications  at 

* Reference  is  to  table  on  tbe  map  showing  position  of  the  batteries;  &c.,  to  appear 
in  Atlas.  The  table  shows  that  4,079  shell  and  914  shot  were  fired. 

11  B B VOL  VI 


162 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


Juliers,  were  carried  on  in  the  month  of  September,  1860,  especially  with 
reference  to  the  effect  of  rifled  breech -loading  guns. 

The  following  brief  summary  of  the  breaching  experiments  is  taken 
from  the  report  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  Eoss,  Eoyal  Engineers : 

Four  12-pounder  iron  guns  and  two  12-pounder  brass  guns,  weighing,  respectively, 
2,700  pounds  and  1,300  pounds,  throwing  a conical  ball  weighing  27  pounds,  and  fired 
with  a charge  of  2.1  pounds,  at  800  Prussian  paces  (640  yards),  made  a practicable 
breach  32  feet  wide  in  a brick  wall  3 feet  thick,  with  counter-forts  4 feet  thick,  4 feet 
wide,  and  16  feet  from  center  to  center,  the  wall  being  16  feet  high,  and  built  en  d^chargej 
after  firing  126  rounds.  The  first  six  rounds  are  omitted  from  this  calculation,  as  they 
did  not  strike  the  wall,  the  wall  being  entirely  covered  from  the  guns.  No  difference 
was  observed  between  the  effects  of  the  brass  and  the  iron  guns.  The  bursting  charge 
of  the  shells  was  fourteen-fifteenths  of  a pound.  The  penetration  was  15  inches. 

Six  6-pounder  guns,  four  of  iron  and  two  of  cast  steel,  weighing,  respectively,  1,300 
.and  800  pounds,  throwing  a conical  shell  weighing  13  pounds,  and  firing  with  a charge 
of  1.1  pounds,  at  50  paces,  made  a practicable  breach  70  feet  wide,  in  precisely  the 
same  description  of  wall  as  that  above  described,  after  firing  276  rounds,  thebattery  being 
situated  on  the  counterscarp  opposite  the  wall.  No  difference  was  observed  between  the 
effects  of  the  cast  steel  and  iron  guns.  The  bursting  charge  of  a shell  was  half  a pound. 
The  penetration  of  the  first  single  shot  averaged  18  inches. 

Four  24-pounder  iron  guns,  weighing  between  53  and  54  hundredweight,  throwing 
a shell  weighing  57  pounds  and  firing  with  a charge  of  4 pounds,  at  a distance  of  60 
yards  made  a practicable  breach  62  feet  wide  in  a loop-holed  brick  wall  24  feet  high 
and  6^  thick  after  firing  117  rounds,  the  wall  being  seen  from  the  battery.  The  burst- 
ing charge  of  the  shell  was  2 pounds.  The  penetration  of  the  two  first  single  shots 
was  2^  and  3 feet. 

The  same  guns,  after  firing  294  rounds  with  the  same  charges  and  at  a distance  of 
96  yards,  made  a breach  46  feet  wide  in  a brick  wall  40  feet  high  and  12  feet  thick  at 
the  foot,  with  a batter  of  about  4 feet.  The  wall  was  12  feet  thick,  and  built  en 
d^charge,  with  counter-forts  6 feet  wide  and  16  feet  from  center  to  center,  and  connected 
by  two  rows  of  arches,  one  above  the  other.  The  penetration  of  the  first  single  shot 
was  3 feet  and  3^  feet.  All  the  above-mentioned  guns  were  rifled  breach-loaders. 

It  is  impossible  to  institute  a very  close  comparison  of  the  relative 
value  of  rifled  and  smooth-bore  guns  for  breaching  purposes  from  any 
data  which  experience  has  thus  far  developed. 

The  experiments  at  Eastbourne,  hereinbefore  mentioned,  are  the  only 
ones  on  record  where  they  have  been  tried  side  by  side  to  the  extent  of 
actual  breaching  against  the  same  kind  of  masonry  and  at  the  same  dis- 
tance. We  have  seen  how  on  that  occasion  the  rifles  were  a complete 
success,  while  the  smooth-bores  were  an  utter  failure. 

At  Fort  Pulaski  an  excellent  opportunity  was  afforded  on  the  scarp 
wall  near  the  breach  for  obtaining  the  actual  penetration  of  the  several 
kinds  of  projectiles.  An  average  of  three  or  more  shots  for  each  caliber 
was  taken,  giving  the  following  results,  which  may  be  relied  upon  as 
correct : 


Table  of  penetrations,  in  a brick  wall,  as  determined  at  the  siege  of  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  April, 

1862. 


Kind  of  gun. 

Distance  from 
wall. 

Kind  and  weight  of  projectiles. 

Elevation. 

4 

.d 

O 

Penetration. 

Olrl  4.^?-ponTn1fir  riflftil  

Yards. 
1,  650 

1,  650 

James  84  lbs.,  solid 

o 

4i 

4 

Lbs. 

8 

Ins. 

26 

Old  32-pounder,  rifled  

James,  64  lbs.,  solid 

6 

20 

Olrl  /’4-pfmrid«r  riflod 

1,670 

James,  48  lbs.,  solid 

4^ 

4i 

5 

19 

T’nrrnt'if,  riflfifl  gim  

1,670 

1,  740 

PaiTott,  30  lbs.,  solid 

20 

18 

Columbiad  (10-inch),  smoothbore 

Parrott,  128  lbs.,  solid  round 

13 

Columbiad  (8-inch),  smooth  bore 

1,740 

Parrott,  68  lbs.,  solid  round 

5 

10 

1 

11 

The  above  table  indicates  very  prominently,  although  it  affords  no 
exact  means  of  measuring,  the  great  superiority  of  rifle  over  smooth- 
bore guns  for  purposes  requiring  great  penetrating  power. 


Chap.  XV.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


163 


Against  brick  walls  the  breaching  effect  of  percussion  shell  is  certainly 
as  great  as  that  of  solid  shot  of  the  same  caliber.  They  do  not  penetrate 
as  far  by  20  to  25  per  cent.,  but  by  bursting  they  make  a much  broader 
crater.  Such  shell  would  doubtless  break  against  granite  walls  without 
inflicting  much  injury. 

Sir  W.  Dennison,  from  a comparison  of  the  several  sieges  in  Spain 
during  the  Peninsular  war,  estimated  that  a practicable  breach  at  500 
yards  could  be  made  in  a rubble  wall  backed  by  earth  by  an  average 
expenditure  of  254,400  pounds  of  metal  fired  from  smooth-bore  24-pound- 
ers for  every  100  feet  in  width  of  breach — equal  to  2,544  pounds  of  metal 
for  ever  linear  foot  in  width  of  breach. 

Before  we  can  draw  any  comparison,  however  imperfect,  between  this 
estimate  and  the  results  obtained  at  Fort  Pulaski,  it  is  necessary  to  make 
certain  deductions  from  the  amount  of  metal  thrown  from  the  breaching 
batteries  used  against  that  work,  as  follows : 

First.  For  the  shots  expended  upon  the  barbette  guns  of  the  fort  in 
silencing  their  fire. 

Second.  For  10  per  cent,  of  Parrott  projectiles,  which  upset  from  some 
defect  which  I know  from  personal  observation  has  been  entirely  removed 
by  the  recent  improvements  of  the  manufacturer. 

Third.  For  nearly  50  per  cent,  of  the  64  pound  James  shot,  due  to  the 
fact  that  one  of  the  two  pieces  from  which  they  were  thrown  had  by 
some  unaccountable  oversight  been  bored  nearly  one-fourth  of  an  inch 
too  large  in  diameter,  and  gave  no  good  firing  whatever.  Making  these 
deductions,  it  results  that  110,643  pounds  of  metal  were  fired  at  the 
breach. 

The  really  practicable  portion  of  the  breach  was  of  course  only  the 
two  casemates  that  were  fully  opened,  say  30  feet  in  aggregate  width ; 
but  the  scarp  wall  was  battered  down  in  front  of  three  casemate  piers 
besides,  and  had  these  piers  not  been  there,  or  had  the  scarp  been  backed 
by  earth  alone,  as  was  generally  the  case  in  Spain,  the  practicable 
portion  of  the  opening  would  have  been  from  45  to  50  feet  wide.  Call- 
ing it  45  feet,  the  weight  of  metal  thrown  per  linear  foot  of  breach  was 
2,458  pounds,  against  2,544  per  linear  foot  in  the  Peninsular  sieges.  Dad 
the  fort  held  out  a few  hours  longer  this  difference  would  have  been  much 
greater,  for  the  wall  was  so  badly  shattered  to  the  distance  of  25  or  30 
feet  each  side  of  the  breach  that  the  opening  could  have  been  extended 
either  way  with  a comparatively  trifling  expenditure  of  metal.  On  re- 
pairing the  work  100  linear  feet  of  the  scarp  wall  had  to  be  rebuilt. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  at  Fort  Pulaski  only  58  per  cent,  of  the 
bleaching  metal  was  fired  from  rifled  guns,  the  balance  being  from 
smooth-bored  8-inch  and  10-inch  columbiads  (68  and  128  pounders)  of 
Battery  Scott. 

It  may  therefore  be  briefly  and  safely  announced  that  the  breaching 
of  Fort  Pulaski  at  1,700  yards  did  not  require  as  great  an  expenditure 
of  metal,  although  but  58  per  cent,  of  it  was  thrown  from  rifled  guns, 
as  the  breaches  made  in  Spain  with  smooth-bores  exclusively  at  500 
yards.  In  the  former  case  the  wall  was  good  brick  masonry,  laid  in  lime 
mortar,  and  backed  by  heavy  piers  and  arches ; in  the  latter,  rubble 
masonry,  backed  by  earth. 

A knowledge  of  the  relative  value  of  heavy  round  shot,  10-inch  for 
example,  and  elongated  percussion  shells  from  lighter  guns,  say  James 
64-pouu(lers  (old  32-pounders),  in  bringing  down  the  masses  of  brick 
masonry  cracked  and  loosened  by  the  elongated  solid  shot,  is  a matter 
of  some  importance,  considering  the  vast  difference  in  the  amount  of 
labor  required  to  transport  and  handle  the  two  kinds  of  ordnance.  The 


164  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

penetration  of  the  percussion  shell  would  exceed,  and  its  local  effect 
would  at  least  equal,  that  of  the  solid  round  shot.  The  general  effect 
of  the  latter,  within  certain  ranges,  is  a matter  for  consideration. 

My  own  opinion,  based  principally  upon  personal  observation,  corrob- 
orated by  the  reports  of  experiments  made  in  Europe,  may  be  stated  in 
the  following  terms : 

First.  Within  700  yards  heavy  smooth  bores  may  be  advantageously 
used  for  breaching,  either  alone  or  in  combination  with  rifles. 

Second.  Within  the  same  distance  light  smooth  bores  will  breach  with 
certainty,  but  rifles  of  the  same  weight  are  much  better. 

Third.  Beyond  700  yards  rifled  guns  exclusively  are  much  superior 
for  breaching  i)urposes  to  any  combination  of  rifles  and  heavy  or  light 
smooth  bores. 

Fourth.  Beyond  1,000  yards  a due  regard  to  economy  in  the  expend- 
iture of  manual  labor  and  ammunition  requires  that  smooth  bores,  no 
matter  how  heavy  they  may  be,  should  be  scrupulously  excluded  from 
breaching  batteries. 

Fifth,  In  all  cases  when  rifled  guns  are  used  exclusively  against'  brick 
walls  at  least  one-half  of  them  should  fire  percussion  shells.  Against 
stone  walls  shell  would  be  ineffective. 

For  breaching  at  long  distances  the  James  and  Parrott  projectiles  seem 
to  be  all  that  can  be  desired.  The  grooves  of  the  J ames  gun  must  be 
kept  clean  at  the  seat  of  the  shot.  This  is  not  on^y  indispensably  nec- 
essary, but  of  easy  and  ready  attainment,  by  using  the  very  simple  and 
effective  scraper  devised  on  the  principle  of  the  searcher  for  the  pieces 
we  employed  against  Pulaski.  This  scraper  consists  of  a number  of 
steel  springs  or  prongs,  one  for  each  groove,  firmly  attached  by  screws 
to  the  cylindrical  part  of  a rammer-head,  and  flaring  like  a broom,  so  as 
to  fit  closely  into  the  grooves.  About  half  an  inch  of  the  lower  end  of 
each  prong  is  bent  out  at  right  angles.  The  prongs  being  compressed 
by  a ring,  to  which  a lanyard  is  attached,  when  entering  the  bore  spring 
out  firmly  into  the  grooves  when  the  ring  is  removed,  and  clean  them 
thoroughly  as  the  scraper  is  drawn  out. 

The  failure  of  the  James  shot,  as  reported  on  two  or  three  occasions 
by  apparently  good  authority,  is  probably  due  to  neglect  in  this  partic- 
ular. There  were  no  failures  in  our  firing,  except  as  before  mentioned, 
with  the  32-pounders  (carrying  a G4-pound  shot),  that  had  been  bored 
too  large. 

Although  the  James  projectiles  are  surrounded  when  first  made  by 
greased  canvas,  there  is  believed  to  be  an  advantage  in  greasing  them 
Hgain  at  the  moment  of  loading.  This  was  done  in  our  batteries  against 
Fort  Pulaski.  As  the  Parrott  projectiles  receive  their  rotary  motion 
from  a ring  of  wrought-iron  or  brass  which  surrounds  the  lower  portion 
of  the  cylinder,  and  which  does  not  foul  the  grooves  while  engaging 
them,  no  special  precaution  to  prevent  fouling  need  be  taken  with  the 
Parrott  guns. 

With  lieavy  James  or  Parrott  guns  the  practicability  of  breaching 
the  best-constructed  brick  scarp  at  2,300  to  2,500  yards  with  satisfactory 
rapidity  admits  of  very  little  doubt.  Had  we  possessed  our  present 
knowledge  of  their  power  previous  to  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Pulaski, 
the  eight  weeks  of  laborious  preparation  for  its  reduction  could  have 
been  curtailed  to  one  week,  as  heavy  mortars  and  columbiads  would 
have  been  omitted  from  the  armament  of  the  batteries  as  unsuitable  for 
breaching  at  long  ranges. 

It  is  also  true  beyond  (luestion  that  the  minimum  distance,  say  from 
900  to  1,000  yards,  at  which  land  batteries  have  heretofore  been  con- 


Chap  XY.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


165 


sidereci  practically  harmless  against  exposed  masonry,  must  be  at  least 
trebled,  now  the  rifled  guns  have  to  be  provided  against. 

The  inaccuracy  of  the  fire  of  the  13-inch  mortars  has  already  been 
adverted  to.  Not  one-tenth  of  the  shells  dropped  inside  of  the  fort.  A 
few  struck  the  terre-plein  over  the  casemate  arches,  but,  so  far  as  could 
be  observed  by  subsequent  inspection  from  below,  without  producing 
any  effect  upon  the  masonry.  Whether  they  penetrated  the  earth  work 
to  the  roofing  of  the  arches  was  not  ascertained. 

Two  or  three  striking  in  rapid  succession  into  the  same  spot  over  an 
arch  might  be  expected  to  injure  it  seriously,  if  not  fatally.  Such  an 
occurrence  would,  however,  be  rare  indeed.  Against  all,  except  very 
extraordinary  casualties,  it  would  be  easy  for  a garrison  to  provide  as 
they  occurred,  by  repairing  with  sand  bags  or  loose  earth  the  holes 
formed  in  the  terre-plein  by  shells. 

We  may  therefore  assume  that  mortars  are  unreliable  for  the  reduc- 
tion of  a good  casemated  work  of  small  area,  bke  most  of  our  sea-coast 
fortifications. 

As  auxiliary  in  silencing  a barbette  fire,  or  in  the  reduction  of  a work 
containing  wooden  buildings  and  other  exposed  combustible  material, 
mortars  may  undoubtedly  be  made  to  play  an  important  part. 

For  the  reduction  of  fortified  towns  or  cities,  or  extensive  fortresses 
containing  large  garrisons,  there  is  perhaps  no  better  arm  than  the 
mortar,  unless  it  be  the  rifled  gun,  firing  at  high  elevations. 

To  the  splinter-proof  shelters  constructed  for  the  seven ' advanced 
batteries  I attribute  our  almost  entire  exemption  from  loss  of  life.  We 
had  1 man  killed  by  a shell  from  one  of  the  mortar  batteries  outside  the 
fort,  which  was  the  only  casualty. 

The  demoralizing  effect  of  constant  and  laborious  fatigue  duty  upon 
the  health  and  discipline  of  troops,  particularly  upon  such  as  are  unused 
to  the  privations  of  war,  like  our  volunteers,  who  can  but  slowly  adapt 
themselves  to  the  stinted  comforts  of  a campaign,  is  a subject  which 
demands  the  earnest  attention  of  commanding  officers  in  the  field. 

Upon  regular  troops,  to  whom  the  drill  in  their  special  arm  has  to  a 
certain  extent  become  a second  nature,  who  are  accustomed  to  the  vicis- 
situdes of  the  field  and  familiar  with  expedients  and  make-shifts  to 
secure  comfort,  the  bad  effects  of  excessive  labor  and  constant  interrup- 
tion of  drill  are  of  course  less  apparent.  ' 

With  the  average  of  our  volunteer  regiments  every  alternate  day 
should  be  devoted  to  drill,  in  order  to  keep  them  up  to  a fair  standard 
of  efficiency. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Major-General  Volunteers. 

To  the  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington^  D.  C. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Surg.  George  E.  Cooper,  U.  S.  Army. 

Medical  Director’s  Office,  Dep’t  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Heady  S.  0.,  April  14,  1862. 
Sir  : Herewith  inclosed  I transmit  the  list  of  casualties  which  oc- 
curred among  the  United  States  forces  during  the  attack  on  Fort 
Pulaski,  Ga. 


166  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Though  the  professional  services  of  the  surgeons  were  fortunately  but 
little  needed,  I cannot  but  state  that  great  credit  is  due  to  Dr.  Francis 
Bacon,  surgeon  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  for  his  volun- 
tary presence  in  the  batteries  nearest  to  the  work  being  assailed  from 
the  opening  of  the  fire  until  the  surrender  of  the  fort,  as  well  as  to  Bri- 
gade Surgeon  Craven  for  the  energy  shown  by  him  in  the  performance 
of  the  duties  belonging  to  his  position  during  the  action. 

Kespectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  E.  COOPEE, 

Surgeon^  TJ.  S.  Army,  Medical  Director  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General,  Department  of  the  South. 

[Inclosure.] 

List  of  casualties  occurring  among  the  United  States  forces  during  the 
siege  of  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  on  April  10  and  11 : [killed]  Thomas  Campbell, 
private.  Company  H,  Third  Ehode  Island  Artillery.  There  were  a few 
slight  injuries  received  by  the  cannoneers  during  the  action,  but  none 
were  reported  as  unfitting  the  men  for  the  performance  of  their  duties. 

GEO.  E.  COOPEE, 

Surgeon,  TJ.  S.  Army,  Medical  Director  Dept,  of  the  South. 


]Sro.  7. 


Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  G.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Dep^t  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  S.  G.,  April  11,  1862 — 11.40  p.  m. 
General  Lee,  Richmond,  Va. : 

I have  just  received  the  following  telegraph  from  General  Lawton : 


General  J.  C.  Pemberton: 

A messenger  from  Pulaski  reports  that  the  fort  surrendered  at  2 o’clock  to-day ; 
seven  breaches  in  the  wall ; all  barbette  guns  dismounted,  and  three  shots  had  entered 
the  magazine. 

I left  Savannah  at  5.30  p.  m.  At  that  time  all  was  believed  to  be 
right.  Four  regiments  have  been  ordered  to  Tennessee.  I should  have 
them  replaced.  Martial  law  should  be  proclaimed  from  Savannah  to 
Augusta,  inclusive. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  R.  Lawton,  G.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Department  [Dist.]  Georgia, 

Savannah,  Ga.,  April  14,  1802. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy  opened  liie  on 
Fort  Pulaski  early  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant,  as  was  evident 
from  the  rapid  and  continuous  firing  and  bursting  of  shells,  which  could 
bo  seen  from  the  city  of  Savannah  and  other  accessible  points  of  obser- 


Chap.  XV.] 


FORT  PULASKI. 


167 


vation.  As  communication  with  the  fort  was  cut  off,  my  knowledge  of 
what  occurred  during  the  first  day^s  bombardment  was  derived  exclu- 
sively from  distant  views  and  the  sound  of  the  guns.  The  firing  con- 
tinued during  the  entire  day  and  at  intervals  during  the  night. 

On  the  night  of  the  10th  1 attempted  to  communicate  with  the  fort 
by  a small  boat,  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  to  it  a man  detailed  on 
signal  service,  who  had  recently  arrived,  under  orders,  from  Kichmond. 
He  was  carried  there  by  Corporal  Law,  of  the  Phoenix  Piflemen,  sta- 
tioned at  Thunderbolt,  who  had  successfully  communicated  with  the 
fort  more  than  once  before  since  the  steamers  had  been  cut  off. 

It  was  observed  that  the  fire  on  both  sides  ceased  about  2 p.  m.  on 
the  11th,  and  these  two  men  returned  to  the  battery  at  Thunderbolt 
about  8 o’clock  that  evening.  The  only  detailed  information  I have  is 
derived  from  the  verbal  statement  of  these  two  men.  They  represent 
that  they  reached  the  fort  about  6 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  11th, 
in  the  midst  of  a heavy  fire  both  from  the  fort  and  the  enemy ; that 
soon  after  their  arrival  a breach  was  made  in  the  wall  at  the  southeast 
angle,  nearest  the  Tybee  Island,  and  that  before  the  fort  surrendered 
this  breach  was  wide  enough  to  drive  a four-horse  team  through ; that 
.the  wall,  which  embraced  seven  casemates  in  succession,  was  nearly  aU 
knocked  down,  and  that  all  the  barbette  guns  which  could  play  on 
their  batteries  at  Tybee  [Island]  had  been  disabled ; that  several  shots 
had  been  fired  into  the  magazine.  They  further  represent  that  4 
men  had  their  arms  or  legs  broken ; none  others  seriously  wounded, 
and  none  dead  at  the  time  they  left.  They  further  state  that  the  ships 
were  not  engaged  at  all,  but  that  all  the  firing  was  from  batteries  on 
Tybee  [Island],  chiefly  from  a battery  of  Parrott  guns  at  King’s  Land- 
ing, the  nearest  point  of  Tybee  [Island]  to  the  fort.  As  these  men 
constituted  no  part  of  the  garrison,  they  were  advised  by  Colonel  Olm- 
stead  to  make  their  escape,  if  possible. 

In  reporting  the  statements  of  these  two  men  I must  express  my 
belief  that  they  gave  an  exaggerated  account  of  the  injury  done  to  the 
fort,  owing,  perhaps,  to  the  very  exciting  circumstances  under  which 
they  must  have  entered  and  left  it.  It  is  truly  painful  to  be  left  with- 
out any  more  definite  or  reliable  details,  but  it  is  quite  certain  that 
Pulaski  has  fallen,  as  the  enemy’s  flag  has  been  distinctly  seen  flying 
above  the  ramparts,  and  I consider  it  my  duty  to  give  you  these  state- 
ments as  they  were  made  to  me.  As  there  have  been  no  returns  received 
from  Fort  Pulaski  for  some  time,  I cannot  give  you  the  precise  strength 
of  the  garrison.  It  consisted,  however,  of  five  companies,  numbering 
a little  over  400  men,  and  commanded  by  Col.  C.  H.  Olmstead.  The 
armament  consisted  of  five  10-inch  columbiads,  nine  8-inch  columbiads, 
three  42-pounders,  three  10-inch  mortars,  one  12-inch  mortar,  one  24- 
pounder  howitzer,  two  12-pounder  howitzers,  twenty  32-pounders,  and 
two  4J-inch  (Blakely)  rifled  guns,  with  130  rounds  of  ammunition  per 
gun. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  LAWTOK, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Capt.  J.  E.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant-Oeneral^  Pocotaligo^  S.  G. 


168  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


COERESPOOT)ENOE,  ORDERS,  AND  RETURNS  RELATING  TO 
OPERATIONS  ON  THE  COASTS  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA, 
GEORGIA,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLORIDA  FROM 
AUGUST  21,  1861,  TO  APRIL  11,  1862. 


CORRESI^OJSrDElNCE:,  ETC. 


Wak  Depaetment,  August  2,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman: 

General  ; You  will  proceed  to  New  York  immediately  and  organize, 
in  connection  with  Captain  DuPont,  of  the  Navy,  an  expedition  of 
12,000  men.  Its  destination  you  and  the  naval  commander  will  deter- 
mine after  you  have  sailed.  You  should  sail  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War, 


Approved : 


August  2,  1861. 
A.  LINCOLN. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  August  11,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman: 

Sir  : You  wiU  proceed  to  the  capitals  of  the  States  of  Connecticut, 
Rhode  Island,  Massachusetts,  New  Hampshire,  and  Maine,  and  confer 
with  the  governors  of  those  States  on  the  subject  which  I have  verbally 
communicated  to  you,  and  which  is  conveyed  to  the  governors  also  in 
the  letters  herewith  placed  in  your  hands,  and  which  you  are  requested 
to  deliver.  You  will  then  proceed  to  New  York  City,  as  heretofore 
instructed. 

Very  respectfully,  THOMAS  A.  SCOT^ 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War, 

{Inclosuro.] 

War  Department, 
Washington,,  August  10,  1861. 

General  T.  W.  Sherman,  having  been  charged  with  the  preparation 
of  an  expedition  to  rendezvous  on  Long  Island  Sound,  will,  on  the  part 
of  this  Department,  consult  with  you  as  to  the  troops  which  can  be 
earliest  made  available  for  this  service. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War, 

Their  excellencies  the  governors  of  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Massa- 
chusetts, Connecticut,  and  Rhode  Island. 


New  York,  August  20,  1861. 

Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

A,  A,  G,,  U,  S,  A.,  Hdgrs.  Army^  Washington,  D,  G,: 

Sir  : In  conformity  to  verbal  instructions  of  the  10th  instant  I have 
delivered  in  person  the  letters  placed  in  my  hands  by  the  honorable 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


169 


Secretary  of  War  to  the  governors  of  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Massa- 
chusetts, Ehode  Island,  and  Connecticut,  and  conferred  with  each  of 
them  on  the  subject  of  my  mission.  Their  excellencies  were  animated 
with  a very  commendable  interest  in  the  success  of  rendezvousing  the 
force  on  Long  Island,  and  feel  a deep  solicitude  that  the  Government 
should  extend  its  efforts  even  in  different  directions  from  those  already 
commenced. 

I have  ascertained  that  the  probable  number  of  men  that  can  be  con- 
centrated on  Long  Island  by  September  5 from  the  above  States,  with  a 
little  increase  of  energy,  is : Maine,  thr^e  regiments ; New  Hampshire, 
two  regiments  j Massachusetts,  five  regiments  5 Ehode  Island,  one,  regi- 
ment ; Connecticut,  two  regiments  5 or  about  13,000  men. 

Some  of  these  regiments  will  contain  men  peculiarly  well  adapted  to 
the  nature  of  the  service  required,  but  unless  some  means  outside  of  the 
camp  on  Long  Island  be  taken  to  make  heavy  artillerists,  this  force  wiE 
be  entirely  deficient  in  that  element,  which  the  nature  of  our  opera- 
tions will  render  of  the  first  importance.  Any  deficiency,  therefore,  of 
regular”  artillerists  should  be  made  up  of  men  from  these  regiments 
sent  to  some  of  our  forts  for  instruction  in  that  particular  arm. 

But,  in  consequence  of  recent  orders  from  the  War  Department  to  the 
governors,  the  force  above,  considered  available  for  the  expedition,  is  to 
be  diverted  to  Washington  City,  and  it  now,  therefore,  remains  for  the 
Department  to  decide  from  whence  and  when  this  expedition  is  to  be 
organized.  The  time  set  by  the  Cabinet  for  the  expedition  to  leave  is 
rapidly  approaching,  and,  even  with  the  greatest  dispatch,  it  will  already 
be  impracticable  to  prepare  it  within  that  time.  The  rumored  threats 
of  the  enemy  on  the  Potomac  but  only  necessitate  the  greater  dispatch 
of  this  expedition. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier- General^  U.  S,  Army, 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington^  J),  C.,  August  27,  1861. 
[General  Thomas  W.  Sherman:] 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  20th  instant  having  been  submitted  to  the 
Secretary  of  War,  I now  inclose  herewith  letters  to  be  delivered  or  for- 
warded by  you  to  the  several  governors  to  whom  they  are  addressed. 
You  will  observe  the  former  quota  from  Massachusetts  is  reduced  from 
five  to  three  regiments,  and  three  regiments  are  now  called  for  from 
New  York,  in  the  hope  of  thus  hastening  the  organization  of  the  force 
to  be  under  your  command. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


[Inolosnres.] 


War  Department, 
Washington^  August  27,  1861. 

Sir  : This  wiU  be  sent  you  by  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  LT.  S. 
A.,  who  has  heretofore  communicated  with  you  on  the  project  of  con- 
centrating in  a camp  of  instruction  a number  of  regiments  of  United 


170  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

States  volunteers.  As  late  emergencies  may  have  somewhat  inter- 
fered with  this  object,  I have  now  to  renew  the  request  that  you  will 

put  regiments,  as  soon  as  they  can  be  prepared  for  service, 

under  the  orders  of  General  Sherman,  who  will  indicate  the  place  of 
rendezvous. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SIMON  OAMEEON, 

Secretary  of  War, 

(Copy  sent  to  the  governor  of  Maine,  three  regiments ; governor  of 
New  Hampshire,  two  regiments;  governor  of  Massachusetts,  three 
regiments ; governor  of  Eliode  Island,  one  regiment ; governor  of  Con- 
necticut, two  regiments ; governor  of  New  York,  three  regiments.) 

War  Department, 
Washington^  August  27,  1861. 

His  Excellency  E.  D.  Morgan, 

Governor  of  New  Yorlc : 

Sir  : This  will  be  handed  you  by  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 
who  will  explain  to  your  excellency  the  purpose  of  the  Department  in 
requesting  that  three  of  the  New  York  regiments  first  prepared  for  serv- 
ice may  be  put  under  the  orders  of  General  Sherman  as  soon  as  they 
can  be  made  ready.  I will  also  request  your  excellency  to  send  the  next 
three  New  York  regiments  which  may  be  ready,  after  those 'above  indi- 
eated,  to  Fort  Monroe,  Old  Point  Comfort,  Ya.,  and  the  Department  will 
take  it  as  a favor  if  you  wiU  inform  it  of  your  action  in  these  matters. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SIMON  CAMEEON, 

Secretary  of  War, 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  IJ.  S.  Forces, 

No.  1.  1 New  YorJc,  September  9,  1861. 

I. ’  The  following-named  officers  are  announced  upon  the  staff  of  the 
commanding  officer : 

Maj.  H.  G.  Wright,  IT.  S.  Engineers,  chief  engineer. 

Capt.  John  McNutt,  IT.  S.  Ordnance,  chief  ordnance  officer. 

Capt.  Eufus  Saxton,  Quartermaster’s  Department,  U.  S.  Army,  chief 
quartermaster. 

Capt.  Michael  E.  Morgan,  Commissary  ol  Subsistence,  IJ.  S.  Army, 
chief  commissary. 

Lieut.  Silas  Crispin,  IT.  S.  Ordnance. 

Assistant  Surgeon  Chas.  A.  McCall,  Medical  Department,  IT.  S.  Army. 

Lieut.  George  Merrill,  volunteer  aide. 

Lieut.  James  Magner,  volunteer  aide. 

II.  The  camp  at  Hempstead  Plains  will  be  designated  and  known  as 
Camp  Winfield  Scott. 

*#*##** 

lY.  Brigadier- General  Yiele,  having  been  assigned  to  duty  with  this 
command,  will  take  post  at  Camp  Winfield  Scott. 

##«###« 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


€hap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


171 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

New  York,  September  13,  1861, 

Capt.  Kurus  Saxton, 

Assistant  Quartermaster,  U.  S.  Army: 

Sir  : You  will  provide  transportation  in  good,  sound,  and  safe  steam- 
ers for  fourteen  regiments  of  infantry  from  this  place  to  localities  not  to 
be  designated  in  the  contract ; said  transportation  to  be  ready  to  leave 
on  the  5th  of  October.  Besides  the  troops  above  mentioned,  but  in  con- 
nection therewith,  are  to  be  transported  some  1,400  tons  of  ordnance 
and  ordnance  stores,  and  the  commissary  and  quartermaster’s  stores, 
horses,  &c.,  that  will  be  hereafter  turned  over  to  you  for  that  purpose. 

SufiScient  water  must  be  provided  for  the  men  and  horses  for  at  least 
fifteen  days,  and  proper  and  ample  arrangements  for  cooking,  &c.,  for  the 
whole  force.  As  it  is  very  uncertain  when  the  steamers  can  be  dis- 
charged, and  as  some  of  them  may  be  required  for  some  time  after  reach- 
ing their  destination,  without  any  facilities  or  means  of  recoaling,  the 
largest  amount  of  coal  must  be  taken,  without  prejudice  to  the  stipulated 
cargo.  No  stipulation,  however,  should  be  made  to  keep  the  transports 
over  fifteen  days,  and  indeed  this  clause  had  better  be  left  out  altogether 
if  practicable.  Should  it  prove  advantageous  to  the  public  interest  to 
have  a couple  of  these  vessels  in  readiness  by  the  1st  of  October,  in  consid- 
eration of  the  immensity  of  your  material  and  the  difficulty  of  depositing 
it,  you  are  authorized  to  do  so,  but  the  public  economy  must  be  consulted 
and  adhered  to  in  every  contract. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington,  September  14,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W,  Sherman,  U.  S.  A., 

New  York  City,  N.  Y.: 

General  Scott  says:  ‘^Come  here  with  aU  your  command  without 
delay,  leaving  the  smallest  guard  necessary  to  protect  your  camp.” 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Executive  Mansion,  September  18,  1861. 
Hon.  Secretary  of  War: 

My  Dear  Sir  : To  guard  against  misunderstanding  I think  fit  to  say 
that  the  joint  expedition  of  the  Army  and  Navy,  agreed  upon  some  time 
since,  and  in  which  General  T.  W.  Sherman  was  and  is  to  bear  a con- 
spicuous part,  is  in  nowise  to  be  abandoned,  but  must  be  ready  to  move 
by  the  1st  of  or  very  early  in  October.  Let  all  preparations  go  forward 
accordingly. 

Yours,  truly,  A.  LINCOLN. 


General  Orders,  1 Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  5.  ( Washington,  B,  C.,  September  19,  1861. 

The  command  will  for  the  present  be  divided  into  three  brigades,  to 
be  composed  and  commanded  as  follows:  ' 

First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  Yiele. — The  Forty-sixth,  Forty-sev- 


172  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

enth,  and  Forty-eighth  Kew  To^?k,  the  Eighth  Maine,  and  the  Third  New 
Hampshire  Regiments. 

Second  Brigade,  Brigadier-General . — The  two  remaining  Maine 

regiments,  the  remaining  New  Hampshire,  and  one  of  the  Massachusetts 
regiments. 

Third  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  Wright. — The  two  Connecticut 
regiments  and  the  first  two  Massachusetts  regiments  that  arrive. 

The  Rhode  Island  regiment  is  reserved  for  special  service  and  will  be 
disposed  of  hereafter. 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Executive  Department, 
Hartford,  Conn.,  September  20,  1861. 

Hon.  Simon  Cameron, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington : t 

Sir:  I telegraphed  you  on  the  17th  and  18th  instant,  and  would  now 
repeat  the  dispatch,  by  saying  that  the  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut 
Volunteers  left  New  Haven  for  Washington  on  the  17th  instant  with 
974  men,  rank  and  file,  and  the  Seventh  Regiment  left  on  the  18th 
instant  with  about  1,000  men.  Under  the  direction  of  General  Sher- 
man I fitted  the  regiments  with  only  five  wagons  and  two  ambulances 
and  a corresponding  number  of  horses  to  each. 

I am,  dear  sir,  yours,  with  high  regard, 

WM.  A.  BUCKINGHAM. 


Executive  Department, 
Albany,  N.  Y.,  September  21,  1861. 

Hon.  Simon  Cameron, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  ; I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that,  in  accordance  with  your 
telegraphic  message  of  the  14th  instant,  received  on  the  evening  of  that 
day,  in  the  words  following — 

War  Department, 
Washington,  Septeniber  14,  1861. 

Governor  Morgan, 

Astor  House: 

Secure  transportation  to-day,  and  forward  immediately  to  Washington  the  three 
regiments  intended  for  Sherman  and  all  others  that  you  can  possibly  send.  Give 
them  arms  and  start  them.  Sherman  has  been  ordered  here  with  all  his  force.  Let 
me  know  immediately  what  you  can  do. 

SIMON  CAMERON, 

Secretary  of  War — 

I have  dispatched  six  infantry  regiments  to  Washington,  commanded 
and  of  the  strength,  respectively,  as  near  as  can  be  ascertained  at  this 
moment : Forty-seventh  New  York,  Colonel  Moore,  662  j Forty-eighth 
New  York,  Colonel  Perry,  950  •,  Forty-sixth  New  York,  Colonel  Rosa, 
675;  Forty-third  New  York,  Colonel  Vinton,  750;  Forty-ninth  New 
York,  Colonel  Bidwell,  800;  Fiftieth  New  York,  Colonel  Stuart,  864. 
The  first  three  were  being  organized  for  Brigadier-General  Sherman, 
to  be  sent  to  his  camp  at  Hempstead.  The  remaining  three  regiments 
would  have  been  sent  to  General  Wool  at  Fortress  Monroe,  agreeably 
to  orders  of  27th  August,  but  for  the  above  dispatch.  I also  forwarded 


€hap.XV.]  correspondence,  ETC. UNION.  173 

on  Sunday  last  ten  rifled  cannon,  with  carriages,  caissons,  harness,  and 
shot,  taking  Major  Uagner’s  receipt  therefor,  to  be  replaced.  I have 
not  yet  heard  of  the  safe  arrival  of  this  battery. 

The  regiments  forwarded  are  not  aU  of  the  requisite  strength,  nor 
was  it  possible  to  send  them  in  proper  condition  and  comply  with  your 
telegraphic  dispatch-  herein  copied.  I propose  to  retain  recruiting  the 
forces  now  in  the  State  until  near  or  quite  full  regimental  organizations 
can  be  made  therefrom  and  proper  equipment  can  be  provided,  as  the 
apprehended  danger  of  an  attack  does  not  now,  I .believe,  exist  at 
Washington.  It  would  be  well  for  the  General  Government  to  direct 
the  several  departments  of  United  States  officers  on  duty  in  this  State 
to  fill  promptly  my  requisitions,  obey  all  orders,  and  to  afford  every 
facility  in  their  power  in  aid  of  my  efforts  in  supplying  the  General 
Government  with  troops ; also  to  give  me  authority  to  continue  the 
raising  of  regiments  or  batteries  without  limit  until  revoked,  or,  if  in 
your  judgment  you  deem  it  necessary  and  proper  to  fix  a limit,  let  it  be 
ifor  twenty  infantry  regiments,  additional  to  those  called  for,  and  the 
proper  proportion  additional  of  artillery  and  cavalry.  I do  not  propose 
that  this  call  should  be  public.  I am  sure  it  should  not  be,  yet  I need 
the  power,  as  all  present  requirements,  judging  from  present  appear- 
ances, are  quite  sure  to  be  filled.  I also  desire  that,  disregarding 
specifications  and  forms,  the  Government  should  send  without  delay  a 
competent  person  to  purchase  horses  in  this  State,  Vermont,  or  else- 
where near  by,  for  all  the  purposes  required,  whether  for  artillery, 
cavalry,  or  ambulance  service.  Horse  equipments,  sabers,  and  bugles 
are  needed  immediately.  The  inspection  of  horses  should  be  here,  and 
the  delivery  of  them  here.  Inspection  at  Washington  will  greatly 
embarrass  matters.  They  will  be  wanted  for  drilling  purposes  sooner 
than  they  can  be  purchased  and  delivered. 

Colonel  Bailey’s  regiment  at  Elmira  will  consist  of  ten  batteries  5 the 
guns,  carriages,  caissons,  shot,  harness,  and  uniforms  for  the  men  will 
be  ready,  and  there  will  be  no  finer  regiment  in  the  service.  He  is 
almost  discouraged,  as  he  does  not  get  detached  from  the  United 
States  service,  and  horses,  horse  equipments,  sabers,  and  bugles  are 
indispensable,  and  no  ability  to  procure  the  former  under  the  restric- 
tions in  the  horse  specifications,  and  the  latter  I have  been  informed 
would  be  provided  by  the  Government.  At  this  moment  there  is  less 
difficulty  in  getting  soldiers  than  arms.  May  I ask  your  immediate 
attention  to  the  several  subjects  to  which  this  communication  relates  ? 

Faithfully  and  truly,  yours, 

E.  H.  MOKGAN. 

[Indorsement.] 

The  within  letter  of  Governor  Morgan  is  referred  to  the  Quarter- 
master-General, with  the  request  that  he  will  reply  to  that  portion 
which  refers  to  purchasing  horses. 

By  order : J.  LESLEY,  Jr. 


Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts,  Exec.  Dept., 

Boston^  Mass.^  September  23,  1861. 
Brigadier-General  Sherman,  U.  S.  A.: 

General  : His  excellency  Governor  Andrew  directs  me  to  write  you 
that  he  expects  you  to  exert  all  the  personal  effort  within  your  power 
to  secure  to  ygur  command  the  contingent  which  you  expect  from  Mas- 
sachusetts, and  prevent  it  from  being  diverted  to  General  Butler  or  any 


174  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

other  officer.  His  excellency  pledged  to  you  his  own  personal  efforts  to 
secure  to  you  the  first  regiments  whose  organization  should  be  com- 
pleted in  the  State  after  the  dispatch  to  Washington  of  the  five  regi- 
ments which  were  forming  when  you  first  visited  Boston.  Those  five 
regiments  are  all  now  in  the  field  in  active  service,  and  the  three  which 
he  conceives  rightfully  to  belong  to  your  command  (being  the  three 
which  will  next  be  completed)  are  General  Wilsoffs  two  regiments,  now 
encamped  at  Springfield,  i.  e.,  the  Twenty-second  and  Twenty- third,  and 
the  Twenty-fifth  Eegiment,  now  encamped  at  Worcester.  Other  regi- 
ments can  be  furnished  General  Butler  in  proper  time,  and  neither  he 
nor  any  other  commander  ought  to  be  allowed  to  divert  from  you  these 
three  regiments,  which  are  yours  almost  by  right.  His  excellency,  so 
far  as  he  can  influence  the  matter,  proposes  to  assign  to  General  Butler 
the  regiment  being  raised  by  Colonel  Jones  (the  Twenty-sixth),  who  is 
a townsman  and  a personal  and  political  friend  of  General  Butler,  and 
also  an  Irish  regiment,  whose  organization  is  in  progress.  There  can  be 
no  just  pretense  on  which  your  claim  to  the  Twenty-second,  Twenty- 
third,  and  Twenty -fifth  can  be  disputed  ; but  as  it  is  probable  that  it 
may,  nevertheless,  be  drawn  into  question,  his  excellency  relies  upon 
you,  for  your  own  sake,  to  assist  him  to  maintain  it.  The  Twenty-second 
is  already  full,  and  it  will  be  ready  to  move  at  the  beginning  of  next 
week — certainly  by  October  1.  The  Twenty -third  and  Twenty-fifth  are 
also  in  an  advanced  state  of  progress. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  G.  BKOWJ^E,  Jr., 
Captain  and  Military  Secretary,  _ 


Executive  Department, 
Boston^  Mass.^  September  23,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman: 

General  : Since  the  accompanying  letter  was  written  his  excellency 
Governor  Andrew  has  received  a telegram  from  the  office  of  the  Secre- 
tary of  War  as  follows: 

Select  tlie  regiments  yourself  for  Sherman,  and  supply  him  first. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War, 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  yours,  very  truly, 

THOS.  DEEW, 
Assistant  Military  Secretary, 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

New  YorJcj  September  27,  1861. 

Capt.  Eupus  Saxton, 

Assistant  Quartermaster : 

Sir  : The  vessels  chartered  to  transport  the  fourteen  regiments  are  to 
form  two  divisions,  to  move  and  act  together  or  separately,  as  the  cir- 
cumstances may  require. 

Division  Ko.  1 is  to  accommodate  8,000  men,  the  ordnance  and  ord- 
nance stores,  provisions,  and  material  for  a certain  locality,  the  amount 
of  which  will  be  furnished  you  by  the  chief  ordnance  officer  and  com- 
missary. 


Chai\  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


175 


Division  No.  2 is  to  accommodate,  say,  5,000  men,  with  the  ordnance 
and  ordnance  stores,  provisions,  and  material  for  another  locality,  the 
amount  of  which  will  also  be  furnished  you  by  the  same  officers. 

The  light  guns  and  their  carriages  complete,  with  their  ammunition, 
are  to  be  so  placed  on  the  transports  that  they  can  be  got  off  at  amoment^s 
notice  for  immediate  action.  The  regimental  commissaries  will  have  suffi- 
cient supplies  furnished  them  for  the  voyage,  so  that  the  bulk  of  the 
supplies  will  remain  intact  during  the  voyage.  The  surf-boats  are  to  be 
so  secured  that  they  can  be  launched  with  safety  at  a moment^s  notice. 

A transport  must  be  fitted  up  mainly  for  the  purpose  of  transporting 
the  horses,  and  the  greatest  security  afforded  them  by  proper  stalls  and 
slings.  A sufficient  quantity  of  disinfectants  must  be  taken  along  to 
insure  health  on  board  each  vessel. 

The  shipping  of  so  large  a quantity  of  supplies  and  the  necessary  dis- 
tribution of  it  among  so  many  vessels  will  demand  a great  deal  of  care 
and  system  to  prevent  misplacement  and  delay  in  getting  at  the  proper 
stores  wanted  at  the  period  of  landing,  as  well  as  to  prevent  losses,  and 
you  are  authorized  to  employ  all  the  assistance  necessary  to  effect  these 
important  ends.  The  most  of  the  staff*  officers  of  the  command  being 
necessarily  employed  with  their  brigades  in  Washington  City,  it  will 
require  the  utmost  exertion  and  management  on  your  part  to  get  this 
expedition  fitted  out  within  the  time  designated,  and  you  are  authorized 
to  call  on  Colonel  Tompkins  for  any  assistance  he  can  render,  and  if  that 
is  insufficient,  to  employ  responsible  agents  to  assist  you  in  the  work. 

Very  respectfully, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier^  General j Commanding^ 


War  Department, 
Washington^  October  5,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool, 

Commanding  Fort  Monroe: 

Please  select  1,000  active  men  from  the  lot  of  fugitive  contrabands 
now  on  hand  at  Fort  Monroe,  and  prepare  them  to  accompany  General 
Sherman’s  expedition  to  the  Southern  coast.  Have  them  ready  to  em- 
bark by  the  15th  of  October.  General  Sherman  will  provide  transporta- 
tion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  truly,  yours, 

• THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Special  Orders,  \ Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  10.  ) Washington^  D.  0.,  October  5,  1861. 

I.  Surg.  George  E,  Cooper,  Medical  Department,  IJ.  S.  Army,  is  hereby 
announced  as  medical  director  to  this  command. 

II.  Brigadier-General  Yiele’s  brigade  will  continue  its  movement  to 
Annapolis,  as  before  directed. 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  H.  G.  Wright  will  move  his  brigade  to  Annapolis  at 
the  earliest  possible  moment.  The  Ninth  Maine  and  the  Fourth  New 
Hampshire  Regiments  are  assigned  to  this  Third  Brigade  and  will 
move  with  it,  taking  the  place  of  the  two  Massachusetts  regiments 
not  arrived. 

General  Wright  will  apply  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Army  of  the 


176  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Potomac  for  the  necessary  transportation  of  baggage,  property,  and 
supplies. 

IV.  The  Second  Brigade  of  this  division  will  be  composed  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts regiment  daily  expected  in  New  York,  the  Eighth  Michigan, 
the  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  and  the  Koundhead  Pennsylvania  Regiments. 
The  Massachusetts  regiment  will  embark  at  New  York,  and  the  three 
remaining  regiments  now  in  Washington  will  march  as  soon  as  practi- 
cable to  Annapolis,  under  their  brigade  commander.  In  the  event  of  no 
brigade  commander  being  assigned  to  this  brigade  before  that  time,  it 
will  march  on  Wednesday  morning,  9th  instant,  under  the  command  of 
its  senior  colonel. 

The  headquarters  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  will  be  apphed  to  for 
transportation  of  baggage,  property,  and  supplies. 

Y.  Ilamilton’s  light  battery  of  artillery  will  march  at  once  to  Annapolis 
and  report  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  expedition. 

VI.  All  the  above-mentioned  troops  will  be  in  position,  with  all  brigade 
and  staff  officers  at  their  posts,  oh  Thursday,  the  10th  instant,  in  readi- 
ness for  embarkation. 

VII.  The  position  at  Annapolis  will  be  taken  up  with  fifteen  days’ 
supply  of  subsistence  and  forage. 

VIII.  The  movements  above  directed  will  be  conducted  by  the  brigade 
commanders,  who  will  arrange  their  own  transportation,  and,  to  avoid 
interference,  Brigadier-Greneral  Wright’s  brigade  will  leave  not  later 
than  Tuesday  morning,  8th  instant,  and  the  Independent  brigade  posi- 
tively on  Wednesday  morning. 

IX.  The  embarkation  will  be  made  in  accordance  with  orders  hereafter 
published. 

X.  Brigade  commanders  will  enforce  a strict  compliance  with  the 
regulation  for  allowance  of  personal  baggage. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman : 

JUSTUS  STEINBERGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


War  Department,  October  14,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  TnoMAs  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expedition  to  the  Southern  Coast: 

Sir  : In  conducting  military  operations  within  States  declared  by  the 
proclamation  of  the  President  to  be  in  a state  of  insurrection  you  will 
govern  yourself,  so  far  as  persons  held  to  service  under  the  laws  of  such 
States  are  concerned,  by  the  principles  of  the  letters  addressed  by  me  to 
Major-General  Butler  on  the  30th  of  May  and  the  8th  of  August,  copies 
of  which  are  herewith  furnished  to  you.*  Special  directions  adapted  to 
special  circumstances  cannot  be  given.  Much  must  be  referred  to  your 
own  discretion  as  commanding  general  of  the  expedition.  You  will, 
however,  in  general  avail  yourself  of  the  services  of  any  persons,  whether 
fugitives  from  labor  or  not,  who  may  offer  them  to  the  National  Govern- 
ment. You  will  emjdoy  such  persons  in  such  services  as  they  may  be 
fitted  for — either  as  ordinary  employes,  or,  if  special  circumstances  seem 
to  require  it,  in  any  other  capacity,  with  such  organization  (in  squads, 
companies,  or  otherwise)  as  you  may  deem  most  beneficial  to  the  service  j 
this,  however,  not  being  a general  arming  of  them  for  military  service. 
You  will  assure  all  loyal  masters  that  Congress  will  provide  just  com- 
pensation to  them  for  the  loss  of  the  services  of  the  persons  so  employed. 

*See  under  these  dates  in  Vol.  I,  Series  III,  pp.  282,402. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


177 


It  is  believed  that  the  course  thus  indicated  will  best  secure  the  sub- 
stantial rights  of  loyal  masters  and  the  proper  benefits  to  the  United 
States  of  the  services  of  all  disposed  to  support  the  Government,  while 
it  will  avoid  all  interference  with  the  social  systems  or  local  institutions 
of  every  State,  beyond  that  which  insurrection  makes  unavoidable  and 
which  a restoration  of  peaceful  relations  to  the  Union  under  the  Consti- 
tution will  immediately  remove. 

Eespectfully,  THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington^  October  14,  18G1.  • 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

U.  S.  Volunteers: 

Sir  : You  have  been  selected  to  command  the  land  portion  of  a joint 
expedition  with  a naval  squadron,  and  selected  on  account  of  its  impor- 
tance. A short  letter  of  general  instructions  you  have  already  received 
from  the  War  Department,  and  are  fully  impressed  with  the  principal 
objects  of  the  expedition.  Wishing  to  leave  you  a wide  margin  of  dis- 
cretion, I have  but  little  to  add,  and  that  little  relates  to  the  principles 
which  govern  co-operation  in  joint  expeditions,  l^o  land  officer  can  be 
subjected  in  strictness  to  the  orders  of  any  sea  officer  until  placed  on 
ship  to  serve  as  a marine,  and  no  sea  officer  under  the  orders  of  a land 
officer  unless  placed  in  some  fortification  to  assist  in  its  defense  or  before 
it  to  assist  in  its  capture.  But  land  troops  embarked  in  vessels  of  war 
for  transportation  merely  will  be  considered,  in  respect  to  naval  com- 
manders, as  passengers,  subject,  of  course,  to  the  internal  regulations  of 
the  vessel. 

Cordiality  and  deference  on  the  part  of  our  land  forces  towards  those 
of  our  Nav3^  in  the  service  in  question  need  scarcely  to  be  urged. 
Hearty  reciprocity  cannot  fail  to  be  the  result.  To  this  end  free  and 
frequent  conferences  between  the  joint  commanders  are  recommended. 
Accordingly  the  President,  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  and  Yavj", 
requires  and  expects  the  most  effective  and  cordial  co-operation  between 
the  commanders  of  the  expedition,  their  officers  and  men,  and  will  hold 
all,  in  proportion  to  rank,  to  a strict  and  severe  responsibility  for  any 
failure  to  preserve  harmony  and  to  secure  all  the  objects  of  the  joint 
expedition. 

You  will  take  care  to  maintain  strict  order  and  discipline  among  your 
troops,  not  to  neglect  opportunities  of  making  the  prescribed  returns 
to  the  Adjutant-General,  and  to  report  to  him  every  incident  of  imxmr- 
tance  that  may  occur  to  your  command. 

I am,  with  great  respect, 

WINFIELD  SCOTT. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  11.  I AnnapoliSj  Mtl.,  October  14,  18G1. 

The  following-named  officers  are  announced  upon  the  staff'  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding : 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze,  Fifteenth  Infantry,  acting  assistant  adjutant- 
general. 

First  Lieut.  George  Merrill,  U.  S.  volunteers,  aide-de-camp. 

Capt.  Eufus  Saxton,  assistant  quartermaster,  U.  S.  Army,  chief  quar- 
termaster. 

12  R R- 


■VOL  VI 


178  COASTS  OP"  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Capt.  Michael  E.  Morgan,  commissary  subsistence,  U.  S.  Army,  chief 
commissary. 

Capt.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Engineers,  chief  engineer. 

Capt.  John  MclS^utt,  Ordnance  De])artment,  chief  of  ordnance. 

Surg.  George  E.  Cooper,  Medical  Department,  U.  S.  Army,  medical 
director. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman : 

L.  n.  PELOUZE, 

Captain^  Fifteenth  Infantry,  Act  Asst  Adjt  Generat 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  13.  ) Annapolis^  Md.,  October  15,  1861. 

The  following  instructions  are  promulgated  for  the  information  and 
guidance  of  the  troops  composing  this  command : 

I.  The  troops  will  embark  on  the  transports,  which  will  be  specially 
assigned  to  brigades  and  regiments.  The  senior  officer  on  board  each 
transport  will  assign  each  company,  when  embarked,  its  position,  and  see 
that  each  man  has  been  assigned  a place  or  bunk,  which  assignment  will 
remain  permanent  while  on  board. 

II.  The  arms,  accouterments,  and  knapsack  of  each  man  will  be  dis- 
posed of  with  a view  to  convenience  and  security,  and  the  ammunition, 
in  cartridge-boxes,  will  be  so  placed  as  to  be  entirely  secure  from  fire. 

III.  Every  precaution  will  be  taken  against  fire.  Smoking  between 
decks  or  in  the  cabins  will  be  prohibited.  No  lights  will  be  permitted 
between  decks,  except  such  ship-lanterns  as  may  be  directed  to  be  sus- 
pended in  secure  positions. 

IV.  As  transports  on  sea  voyages  can  carry  but  a limited  supply  of 
water,  every  precaution  will  be  taken  to  prevent  waste  or  its  unneces- 
sary use.  The  daily  allowance  per  man,  including  that  required  for 
cooking  purposes,  will  be  limited  to  one  gallon,  and  the  allowance  for 
each  horse  to  three  gallons.  This  quantity  may  be  reduced  by  the  senior 
officer  on  each  transport,  if  deemed  necessary. 

V.  A sufficient  guard  will  be  mounted  daily,  with  side-arms,  and  so 
posted  as  will  best  i)revent  fire  and  any  improper  use  of  water. 

VI.  No  arm  will  be  loaded  on  board  of  transports  without  proper  or- 
ders. Both  arms  and  ammunition  will  be  kept  in  a serviceable  condi- 
tion, and  at  all  times  in  readiness  for  use  at  a moment’s  notice.  Keserve 
ammunition  will  be  deposited  in  a safe  position,  the  master  of  the  trans- 
port to  be  consulted  as  to  its  location. 

VII.  The  master  of  each  transport  will  be  requested  by  the  senior  offi- 
cer on  board  to  provide  wind-sails  sufficient  to  keep  the  men  below  decks 
comfortable  at  all  times. 

VIII.  Much  attention  will  be  paid  to  the  cooking.  Such  arrangements 
will  be  made  with  the  masters  of  transports  as  will  insure  a regular  sup- 
l)ly  of  meals  to  all.  The  caboose  will  be  kept  free  of  all  persons  not  sent 
to  it  on  duty.  Fancy  cooking — such,  for  instance,  as  frying  meats  and 
dough  in  fat — is  prohibited.  Soups,  boiled  meats,  and  hard  bread  com- 
pose the  true  and  healthy  diet  of  the  soldier  on  transports  at  sea. 

IX.  The  Quartermaster’s  Department  will  supply  the  proper  disinfect- 
ing agents  to  secure  the  comfort  and  health  of  the  command. 

By  order  of  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman : 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain,  Fifteenth  Infantry,  Act  Asst  Adjt  Generat 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


179 


Washington,  October  17,  1861. 
General  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  Annapolis: 

If  General  McClellan  should  consent  to  spare  the  New  York  Seventy- 
ninth  Eegiment  to  join  your  expedition  with  General  Stevens,  do  you 
want  them,  and  have  you  transportation  for  them  Answer  immedi- 
ately. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT. 


Annapolis,  October  17,  1861. 

Hon.  Thomas  A.  Scott, 

, Assistant  Secretary  of  War: 

Have  received  your  dispatch.  I want  the  Highlanders  (Seventy-ninth), 
and  I'have  transportation.  Send  them  on  immediately. 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN. 


War  Department,  October  17,  1861. 

General  McClellan  : 

If  Generals  Stevens  and  Sherman  want  the  New  York  Seventy-ninth 
to  go  with  expedition,  can  you  spare  them  without  serious  loss  or  incon- 
venience? Please  answer. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT. 


Camp  Griffin,  October  17,  1861. 

Hon.  Thomas  A.  Scott, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War: 

I gave  General  Sherman  all  the  regiments  he  asked  for.  At  least  two 
of  those  originally  intended  for  him,  and  promised  to  me,  have  been 
diverted  from  me.  The  artillery  promised  me  to  replace  Hamilton’s 
battery  have  not  been  given  to  me.  I will  not  consent  to  one  other  man 
being  detached  from  this  army  for  that  expedition.  I need  far  more  than 
I now  have  to  save  this  country,  and  cannot  spare  any  disciplined  regi- 
ment. Instead  of  diminishing  this  army,  true  policy  would  dictate  its 
immediate  increase  to  a large  extent.  It  is  the  task  of  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  to  decide  the  question  at  issue.  No  outside  expedition  can  effect 
the  result.  1 hope  that  I will  not  again  be  asked  to  detach  anybody. 

GEO.  B.  McClellan, 

Major • General^  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  15.  j Annapolis^  ilid.,  October  17,  1861. 

The  embarkation  of  the  troops  of  this  division  will  commence  imme- 
diately and  in  accordance  with  the  following  order  and  assignment: 

I.  First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  Viele,  commanding. 

Third  Eegiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  to  steamer  Atlantic. 
Porty-sixth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers  to  steamer  Webster. 
Forty-seventh  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers  to  steamer  Eoanoke, 
Forty-eighth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers  to  steamer  Empire 
City. 

Eighth  Eegiment  Maine  Volunteers  to  steamer  Ariel. 

^ The  horses  and  wagons  pertaining  to  the  First  Brigade  are  assigned 
to  the  steamers  Belvidere  and  Philadelphia. 


180  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

II.  Second  Brigade,  Brig.  Gen.  1. 1.  Stevens,  commanding. 

Eonndhead  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  to  steamer  Ocean 

Queen. 

Five  companies  of  the  Fiftieth  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  to 
steamer  Ocean  Queen. 

Five  companies  of  the  Fiftieth  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  to 
steamer  Vanderbilt. 

Eighth  Eegiment  Michigan  Volunteers  to  steamer  Vanderbilt. 

The  horses  and  wagons  pertaining  to  the  Second  Brigade  are  assigned 
to  the  steamer  Ben  De  Ford. 

III.  Third  Brigade,  Brig.  Gen.  H.  G.  Wright,  commanding. 

Fourth  Eegiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  to  the  steamer  Baltic. 

Sixth  Eegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers  to  the  steamers  Marion  and 

Parkersburg. 

Seventh  Eegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers  to  the  steamer  Illinois. 

Ninth  Eegiment  Maine  Volunteers  to  the  steame  r Coatzacoalcos. 

The  horses  and  wagons  pertaining  to  the  Third  Brigade  are  assigned 
to  the  steamer  Baltic. 

IV.  Hamilton’s  light  battery  to  steamer  Ericsson. 

V.  The  Battalion  of  Volunteer  Engineers  (now  at  Fortress  Monroe, 
Va.)  to  the  steamer  Star  of  the  South. 

VI.  The  regiment  of  Ehode  Island  volunteers  (now  at  Fortress  Mon- 
roe, Va.)  to  the  steamer  Cahawba. 

VII.  Division  headquarters  to  the  steamer  Atlantic  and  the  horses 
pertaining  thereto  to  the  steamer  Ericsson. 

VIII.  Each  brigade  commander  will  select  from  the  transports  as-  ’ 
signed  to  his  brigade  the  one  upon  which  the  headquarters  will  em- 
bark, the  name  of  the  transport  thus  selected  to  be  reported  to  these 
headquarters. 

IX.  The  horses  and  equipments  of  mounted  officers  will,  as  far  as 
practicable,  be  so  placed  as  to  be  disembarked  at  the  shortest  notice. 

X.  Brigade  commanders  will  issue  and  enforce  such  orders  as  will 
effectually  jmevent  any  person  not  belonging  to  the  military  organization 
from  embarking  on  their  transports,  and  will  prevent  any  stores  from 
being  shipped  but  the  necessary  provisions  and  supplies,  including  the 
authorized  allowance  of  camp  and  garrison  equipage. 

XI.  No  sutler  but  the  one  appointed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  will  be 
recognized  in  any  manner  or  received  on  board  the  transports  belonging 
to  this  command. 

By  order  of  General  T.  W.  Sherman: 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain j Fifteenth  Infantry^  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  16.  I Annapolis,  Md.,  October  17,  1861. 

It  is  confidently  expected  that  General  Orders,  No.  15,  current  series, 
from  these  headquarters  will  be  enforced  with  vigor  and  promptitude.  The 
officers  concerned  will  infuse  into  their  men  a spirit  ofenergy  adequate  to 
the  occasion ; they  will  see  that  their  respective  commands  move  with 
life  and  alacrity ; that  all  work  is  so  systematized  that  every  man  and 
body  of  men  maj-  work  to  advantage. 

Each  officer  and  man  will  apply  his  every  effort  to  the  task  set  before 
him,  and  will  exhibit  at  all  times  and  upon  all  occasions  that  spirit  of 


Chap.  XV.) 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


181 


energy  and  industry  so  essential  in  every  well-disciplined  command  and 
without  which  successful  war  cannot  be  prosecuted. 

Whilst  the  general  commanding  expects  in  this  way  the  support  of  his 
command,  he  regrets  to  say  that  he  has  recently  noticed  a few  instances 
of  a lax,  loose,  and  lazy  bearing  on  the  part  of  a few  men  when  on  duty. 
This  spirit,  if  generally  diffused,  would  ignore  all  usefulness  and  destroy 
all  prospects  of  successful  operations. 

Commanders  should  at  once  bring  to  their  official  notice  all  cases  of 
this  nature,  and  if  shame  will  not  bring  the  offender  to  a sense  of  duty, 
punishment  must  be  resorted  to. 

If.  All  horses  and  wagons  that  the  chief  quartermaster  decides  can- 
not be  taken  on  the  transports  will  be  transferred  to  the  quartermaster 
of  the  post,  with  the  requisite  invoices. 

By  order  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman : 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain^  Fifteenth  Infantry^  Actg.  Asst,  Acljt,  General, 


Washington,  October  18,  1861. 
General  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  Annapolis^  Md.  : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received  and  shown  to  General  McClel- 
lan. I have  promised  him  to  not  break  his  army  here  without  his  con- 
sent. 

I do  not  think  I shall  go  to  Annapolis. 

. A.  LINCOm. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  19.  s 'iSteamer  Atlantic,  October  23,  1861. 

This  command  will  sail  for  its  destination  in  a very  few  days,  under 
convoy  of  a naval  squadron,  commanded  by  Commodore  DuPont.  The 
transports  will  move  in  three  columns  and  in  rear  of  the  main  body 
of  the  squadron.  The  transports  belonging  to  the  First  Brigade  will 
compose  the  right  column,  those  of  the  Second  Brigade  and  the  Third 
Eh  ode  Island  Eeginient  the  center,  and  those  of  the  Third  Brigade  and 
the  Battalion  of  Volunteer  Engineers  the  left  column.  Each  vessel  will 
retain  its  order  in  column,  and  the  columns  will  move  in  parallel  lines, 
equidistant,  regulating  from  the  right.  The  sail  vessels  and  other 
transports  inadequate  to  the  task  of  sailing  with  the  fleet  will  be  towed 
by  such  steamers  as  the  chief  quartermaster  may  designate.  Commo- 
dore DuPont,  in  co-operation  with  the  land  forces,  has  kindly  made  such 
an  arrangement  of  his  fleet  as  will  secure  the  transports  from  unneces- 
sary diffusion,  and  all  senior  officers  on  transports  and  masters  of  vessels 
will  enter  into  the  spirit  of  and  conform  to  these  arrangements,  a plan 
of  which  will  be  duly  given. 

II.  The  general  commanding  announces  to  the  expeditionary  corps 
that  it  is  intended  to  make  a descent  on  the  enemy’s  coast,  and  probably 
under  circumstances  which  will  demand  the  utmost  vigilance,  coolness, 
and  intrepidity  on  the  part  of  every  officer  and  man  of  his  command. 
In  consideration  of  the  justness  and  holiness  of  our  cause,  of  the  ardent 
l)atriotism  which  has  prompted  the  virtuous  and  industrious  citizens  of 
our  land  to  fly  to  their  country’s  standard  in  the  moment  of  her  peril, 
he  most  confidently  believes  that  he  will  be  effectually  and  efficiently 
supported  in  his  efforts  to  overthrow  a zealous,  active,  and  wily  foe, 
whose  cause  is  unholy  and  principles  untenable. 


182  COASTS  OF  S,  C,,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

III.  On  the  approach  of  the  transports  to  the  place  of  clisembark- 
ment  each  brigade  commander  will  anchor  his  transports  as  near  each 
other  as  practicable,  and  will  at  the  proper  time  superintend  the  disem- 
bark men  t of  his  brigade.  The  surf-boats,  with  other  means  for  disem- 
barkment  on  hand,  are  believed  to  be  capable  of  landing  at  once  from 
3,000  to  4,000  men.  The  surf-boats  are  of  difterent  sizes.  Two  of  the 
largest  may  take  the  officers  and  men  of  a company  of  100  men ; 
two  of  the  next  size  a company  of  70  men,  and  so  on  in  proportion.  The 
other  means  of  transportation  may  take  the  remainder  of  a brigade, 
with  probably  one  or  two  sections  of  field  artillery. 

IV.  The  disembark  ment  will  be  made  in  three  lines.  The  first  line  will 
be  the  brigade  of  General  Wright,  flanked  by  two  sections  of  Hamil- 
ton’s light  battery,  and  accompanied  by  the  squad  of  Regular  Sappers 
and  Miners,  and  tw^o  companies  of  SerrelFs  volunteer  engineers,  with 
a sufficient  supply  of  intrenching  tools  and  sand  bags.  The  second  line 
will  be  the  brigade  of  General  Stevens,  and,  if  necessary,  accompanied 
by  a section  of  Hamilton’s  battery  and  two  field  pieces,  to  be  manned  by 
a company  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Regiment.  The  reserve  will  be 
composed  of  General  Viele’s  brigade,  the  remaining  portion  of  Serrell’s 
volunteer  engineers,  and  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Regiment,  and  will  be 
disposed  of  according  to  circumstances. 

V.  The  boats  of  not  only  each  company,  but  of  each  regiment  and 
brigade,  will  land  abreast  as  far  as  practicable,  and  in  the  order  of  battle. 
The  utmost  effort  will  be  made  to  effect  the  landing  in  that  order. 
Should  it  be  found  impracticable  to  land  immediately  from  the  lighters, 
then  the  surf- boats,  when  emptied,  will  immediately  proceed  to  the  rapid 
landing  of  the  men  from  the  lighters,  and  as  soon  as  the  whole  line  is 
landed  all  the  boats  will  return  and  bring  forward  in  like  manner  the 
troops  of  the  second  line,  and  so  with  the  reserve. 

VI.  The  general  officers  and  commanders  of  battalions,  &c.,  will  be 
furnished  in  time  with  the  plan  of  descent  and  the  particular  order  of 
battle.  It  is  probable  that  the  first  line  will  have  to  conquer  the  ground 
on  which  to  establish  itself,  and,  if  opposed  by  greatly  superior  num- 
bers, to  maneuver,  and  perhaps  to  momentarily  intrench.  If  not  seri- 
ously opposed,  the  first  line,  after  overcoming  immediate  difficulties, 
will  continue  to  drive  backward  the  enemy,  but  will  not  venture  beyond 
supporting  distance  from  the  shore  before  the  landing  of  the  general 
commanding  or  without  his  special  orders. 

VII.  The  commanding  officer  of  the  naval  squadron  has  kindly  con- 
sented to  furnish  300  sailors  to  assist  in  launching  and  manning  the 
surf-boats,  and  he  appeals  to  the  patriotism  of  the  masters,  mates,  and 
sailors  of  the  several  transports  to  furnish  an  additional  number  of 
coxswains  and  oarsmen.  Any  deficiency  of  oarsmen  in  surf- boats  will 
be  supplied  from  the  platoons  on  board  of  these  respectively,  so  that 
each  boat,  when  ready,  may  be  rapidly  rowed  ashore.  The  soldier  oars- 
men will  land  and  form  with  their  platoons. 

VIII.  General  and  field  'officers,  with  their  respective  staffs,  will 

endeavor  to  obtain  landing  boats  for  themselves,  with  the  necessary 
coxswains  and  oarsmen  from  the  transports  and  other  hired  vessels  of 
the  fleet.  * 

IX.  The  senior  officer  of  the  troops  on  board  each  transport  will 
arrange  with  the  master  for  voluntary  helps  of  this  kind  which  may 
be  needed  and  can  be  given,  and  will  make  a special  report  to  these 
headquarters  as  early  as  practicable  of  the  assistance  thus  rendered. 

X.  As  soon  as  the  landing  shall  have  been  effected  the  surf  and  other 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  183 

landing  boats  will  revert  to  the  chief  quartermaster  for  immediate 
supplies. 

• XI.  The  sick  and  non-effective  men  will  remain  on  board  the  several 
transports  until  provision  can  be  made  for  them  on  shore.  The  non- 
effectives  will  be  specially  charged  with  the  care  of  the  sick,  under 
directions  to  be  left  by  the  respective  medical  ofiicers. 

XII.  Medical  officers,  excepting  one  from  each  brigade,  to  be  desig- 
nated by  the  respective  brigade  commanders,  will  land  with  the  troops. 
The  three  medical  officers  left  afloat  will,  under  the  directions  of  the 
medical  director,  divide  the  duty  of  visiting  all  the  sick  on  board,  in- 
cluding those  of  the  Third  Khode  Island  Eegiment  and  the  Battalion  of 
Volunteer  Engineers. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman : 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain,  Fifteenth  Infantry,  Actg,  Asst.  Adjt.  General. 


Circular.]  Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

U.  S.  F.  Wabash,  October  2G,  1861. 

In  consequence  of  the  present  unexpected  delay  in  putting  to  sea,  on 
account  of  unfavorable  weather,  it  is  considered  indispensable  to  imi)ress 
upon  the  minds  of  all  commanding  officers  of  troops  on  transports  the 
strict  necessity  of  conforming  to  orders  heretofore  given,  respecting 
cleanliness  and  the  economy  in  the  use  of  water. 

To  still  further  secure  the  command  from  an  eventual  want  of  water, 
all  steam  transports  will,  whilst  lying  still,  be  occupied  in  condensing  as 
much  water  as  practicable. 

It  is  probable  that  some  of  the  transports  will  hold  their  troops  from 
twenty  to  thirty  days. 

All  commanding  officers  will  see  the  necessity  of  having  everything 
in  readiness  for  a prompt  debarkation.  The  field  artillery  particularly 
will  have  its  guns,  carriages,  horses  and  harness  ready  to  disembark 
without  unnecessary  delay.  All  obstructions  on  board  preventing  this 
liromptness  must  be  removed  as  soon  as  the  transports  get  to  sea. 

Every  transport,  as  well  as  the  troops  on  board,  must  be  ready  to  sail 
at  any  moment,  when  the  proper  signals  are  given. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman : 

L.  H.  PELOEZE, 

Captain,  Fifteenth  Infantry,  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  General. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Hampton  Roads,  October  27,  1861. 

General  M.  0.  Meios, 

Quartermaster-General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  I).  G. : 

The  unexpected  delay  of  the  expedition  at  this  point,  owing  to  the 
stormy  and  unfavorable  state  of  the  weather  for  our  light  vessels  and 
tugs,  will,  it  is  very  much  to  be  apprehended,  produce  a failure  in  our 
supply  of  water. 

Our  horses  have  already  been’  on  board  some  thirteen  days  and  men 
a week.  Although  all  the  vessels  were  loaded  with  all  the  water  they 
could  carry,  some  of  the  transports  are  already  reduced  to  a supply  for 
nine  days. 


184  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Major  Belger  lias  been  written  to,  with  an  urgent  request  for  him  to 
forward  immediately  to  this  place  200,000  gallons,  and  as  we  shall  leave 
here  the  very  first  favorable  moment,  tlie  post  quartermaster  Avill  have 
sealed  instructions  for  the  water  transports,  directing  to  what  point  they 
shall  proceed. 

The  resources  of  Fort  Monroe  are  not  at  our  disposal,  even  if  they 
had  more  water  than  they  want  themselves. 

Will  you  please  to  instruct  Major  Belger  to  iiroinjitly  send  forward 
the  water  asked  for?  The  weather  is  such  that  Commodore  DuPont 
decides  it  yet  unsafe  for  our  fleet  to  put  to  sea. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEBMA^^, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  October  28,  i861. 

Hon.  Simon  Cameron, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  By  special  messenger  I would  inform  you  that  the  expedition 
under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Sherman  is  still  in  Hampton 
Eoads.  Brigadier  General  Sherman  has  been  here  since  Tuesday  last. 
On  his  arrival,  in  order  to  hasten  his  departure,  I gave  him  a large 
amount  of  supplies,  among  others  350,000  rounds  of  cartridges.  It 
appears  that  his  ammunition  was  stored  at  the  bottom  of  his  ships,  and 
could  not  be  got  at  short  of  four  days.  To  prevent  this  delay  I granted 
him  the  ammunition,  which  leaves  me  less  than  100  rounds  to  each  man 
of  my  comnc'ud,  which  I earnestly  request  that  you  will  have  increased 
to  the  number  delivered  to  Brigadier-General  Sherman  with  as  little 
delay  as  practicable.  When  I gave  the  ammunition  I was  under  the 
impression  that  the  expedition  would  leave  immediately.  It  is  now 
nearly  seven  days  since  the  general  received  the  ammunition,  and  the 
fleet  is  still  in  port,  and  when  it  will  sail  is  more  than  I can  tell.  I am 
now  furnishing  ten  days’  rations  for  the  soldiers,  and  for  the  same  rea- 
sons assigned  for  the  ammunition  furnished,  that  their  rations  are  stowed 
where  they  cannot  be  got  at  without  several  days’  delay.  I will  venture 
to  assert  that  a worse-managed  expedition  could  not  well  be  contrived. 
Every  opportunity  has  been  given  the  rebels  to  be  iirepared  to  meet 
them  at  any  point  on  the  coast.  Among  other  opportunities  a deserter 
from  the  fleet,  a petty  oflicer  (the  party  referred  to  I find  upon  inquiry 
to  be  Mr.  Hale,  a young  officer  connected  with  the  Navy,  and,  I believe, 
a relative  of  Secretary  Welles,  a native  of  Virginia),  carried  with  him 
the  signal  book,  and,  as  he  said,  a knowledge  of  the  destination  of  the 
expedition. 

My  object,  however,  in  making  this  communication  is  to  hasten  a 
supply  of  ammunition  for  small-arms.  In  supplying  Brigadier-General 
Sherman’s  command,  I have  not  now  100  rounds  for  each  man  remain- 
ing in  store.  I would  again  call  your  attention  to  the  garrison  of  Fort 
Monroe.  I am  deficient  in  artillerists,  both  in  officers  and  men.  I 
could  not  man  more  than  ten  guns.  I made  a special  report  on  this 
subject  to  Lieutenant  General  Scott,  26th  instant. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major  General, 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  1 85 


Abstract  from  reiimi  of  the  Expeditionary  Corps,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas 
W.  Sherman,  for  October  28,  1861. 


Present. 


Commands. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Aggregate. 

1 For  duty. 

' Total. 

For  duty. 

Total. 

Division  staff 

26 

26 

25 

25 

51 

First  Brigade 

185 

192 

3,  682 

3,  796 

3,988 

Second  Brigade 

137 

141 

3,  015 

3,  196 

3,  337 

Third  Brigade 

147 

193 

3,  574 

3,  747 

3,  900 

Troops  not  brigaded 

61 

62 

1,  242 

1,315 

1,  377 

Total 

556  j 

574 

i 11,538 

1 1 

12,  079 

1 

12,  653 

Organization  of  the  Expeditionary  Corps.,  commanded  hy  Br  ig.  Gen.  Thomas 
W.  Sherman.  U.  S.  Army,  October  28,  18G1. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele. 

Stli  Maine,  Col.  Lee  Strickland. 

3d  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Enoch  Q.  Fel- 
lows. 

46th  New  York,  Col.  Rudolph  Rosa. 
47th  New  York,  Col.  Henry  Moore. 

4Sth  New  York,  Col.  James  H.  Perry. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens. 

8rh  Michigan,  Col.  William  M.  Fenton. 
79th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  William  H. 
Nobles. 

50th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  B.  C.  Christ. 
100th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Daniel  Lea- 
sure. 


Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G,  Wright. 

6th  Connecticut,  Col.  John  L.  Chatfield. 
7th  Connecticut,  Col.  Alfred  H.  Terry. 
9th  Maine,  Col.  Rishworth  Rich. 

4th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Thomas  J. 
Whijiple. 

Troops  not  brigaded. 

Ist  New  York  Engineers,  Col.  Edward 
W.  Serrell. 

3d  Rhode  Island,  Col.  Nathaniel  W. 
Brown. 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E,  Capt. 
John  Hamilton. 


Circular.]  Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

U.  S.  F.  Wabash  (off  Port  Royal,  8.  C.),  Nov.  4,  1861. 

The  general  commanding  has  the  unparalleled  gratification  to  congrat- 
ulate the  officers  and  men  of  his  command  upon  their  safe  arrival  at  this 
point,  after  a most  perilous  and  tempestuous  passage  from  Hampton 
Eoads. 

Some  vessels  probably  have  been  lost,  but  it  is  believed  that  the  hand 
of  Providence  has  saved  the  lives  of  all.  For  this  let  us  be  thankful  to 
the  Euler  of  our  destinies,  in  whom  we  must  ever  trust  for  protection. 

Soldiers!  Let  the  dangers  you  have  encountered  and  the  anxieties 
you  have  exi^erienced  be  an  incentive  to  a greater  exertion  on  your  part 
in  the  hoi}-  cause  in  which  you  are  engaged.  The  eyes  of  your  country 
are  upon  you.  She  expects  you  to  conquer.  Deceive  not  her  expecta- 
tions. Be  cool  and  determined.  Act  only  at  the  command  of  your 
officers,  and  be  prompt  to  do  so.  Be  not  led  away  by  a vain  and  spon- 
taneous enthusiasm,  nor  restrained  by  a want  of  willingness  or  alacrity. 
Let  your  officers  judge  when  you  are  to  act  j to  do  otherwise  would  lead 
to  conlusiou  and  disgrace.  Some  of  you  have  not  had  proper  opportu- 
nities for  instruction  ; let  coolness,  firmness,  and  the  cold  steel  take  the 
l^lace  of  better  instruction. 


186  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Soldiers  ! You  are  contendiug  against  an  enemy  who  depreciates  your 
manhood,  who  denies  that  your  prowess  is  equal  to  his.  Belie  this  sen- 
timent, or  you  will  disgrace  yourselves  and  your  nativity. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman  : 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain^  Fifteeiitli  Infantry^  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  General. 


Hilton  Head, 

Port  Royal.)  8.  0.,  November  9,  1861. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  arrival  at  this  place  of  all 
the  vessels  which  I chartered  in  New  York,  having  on  hoard  General 
Sherman^s  entire  command,  with  the  greater  part  of  the  supplies.  For 
your  approval  of  the  care  exercised  in  the  selection  of  vessels  for  the 
transportation  of  troops,  I wish  to  mention  that  we  rode  out  one  of  the 
severest  gales  which  have  occurred  on  this  coast  fora  long  time  without 
losing  a single  man. 

The  fleet  left  Hampton  Eoads  on  the  29th  of  October.  On  the  1st  of 
November  it  encountered  a heavy  gale,  which  scattered  it  in  every 
direction.  The  quartermaster’s  steamer  (Winfield  Scott,  Captain  Seldy) 
lost  all  her  cargo,  and  was  so  much  injured  that  she  can  never  leave  this 
port.  The  quartermaster’s  steamer  (Union)  with  stores,  it  is  reported, 
went  ashore  on  the  South  Carolina  coast,  and  was  lost ; her  crew  taken 
prisoners.  The  steamers  Peerless  and  Osceola,  sent  by  Colonel  Tomp- 
kins from  New  York,  with  cattle,  were  lost.  The  crew  of  the  Peerless 
was  saved.  The  steamer  Belvidere,  from  Baltimore,  with  horses,  was 
compelled  to  put  back  to  Hampton  Eoads,  having  thrown  overboard  a 
portion  of  her  horses.  On  the  3d  of  November  the  fleet  arrived  at  this 
place.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  report  that  so  far  the  expedition 
has  been  a complete  success.  We  are  now  in  complete  possession  of  the 
finest  harbor  in  the  South,  where  the  largest  ships  can  enter  and  r ide  at 
anchor  in  safety.  In  the  heart  of  the  richest  part  of  the  cotton  district, 
with  direct  and  easy  communication  by  water  inland  with  Charleston 
and  Savannah,  it  possesses  unrivaled  advantages  for  a quartermaster’s 
and  naval  depot,  and  in  the  future  a great  commercial  city  must  grow 
up  here. 

A place  of  such  importance  cannot  be  held  for  any  great  length  of 
time  without  large  re-enforcements.  All  the  stores  have  now  to  be  landed 
through  the  surf;  a laborious,  tedious  operation,  detaining  these  large 
ships  a long  time  in  discharging  their  cargo.  Economy  requires  that  a 
substantial  wharf  should  be  built.  I have  made  a requisition  on  Colonel 
Tompkins  for  a steam  pile-driver  and  scow  and  the  plank  necessary  to 
cover  the  pier.  If  this  meets  your  approval,  I hope  that  Colonel  Tomp- 
kins may  be  directed  to  send  them  as  soon  as  practicable. 

The  water  ships  have  arrived.  The  brilliant  victor^^  gained  by  the 
naval  fleet  enabled  the  troops  to  land  much  sooner  than  was  expected 
when  the  request  for  water  was  sent,  and  rendered  our  wants  in  this 
respect  less  pressing  than  they  would  have  been  under  other  circum- 
stances. An  abundance  of  good  water  can  be  had  by  sinking  wells. 

In  order  to  insure  regularity  and  promptness  in  forwarding  supplies 
to  the  troops,  I would  respectfully  call  your  attention  to  the  propriety 
of  keeping  two  or  three  first-class  steamers  like  the  Atlantic  and  Baltic 
running  constantly  between  this  place  and  New  York. 

Contraband  negroes  are  coming  in  in  great  numbers.  In  two  days 


Chap.  XV.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  187 

150  have  come  in,  mostly  able-bodied  men,  and  it  will  soon  be  necessary 
to  furnish  them  with  coarse  clothing’. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  SAXTON, 

Ca^ytain,  U.  8.  Army^  Assistant  Quartermaster. 


[Indorsements.  | 

November  15,  1801. 

Eespectfully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  The  requisition  for 
pile-driver  has  been  approved.  The  safe  escape  of  all  the  vessels  engaged 
by  Captain  Saxton  did  credit  to  his  care  and  judgment. 

There  should  be  a regular  line  of  large  steamers  between  New  York 
and  Port  Koyal  now  running  as  transports.  1 know  of  none  better 
than  the  Atlantic  and  Baltic,  and  I suggest  the  propriety  of  purchas- 
ing instead  of  chartering  for  the  consideration  of  the  Department  of 
War. 


Eespectfully, 


M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster-  General. 


November  16,  1861. 

I read  the  indorsement  to  the  Secretary,  who  decides  that  the  Baltic 
and  Atlantic  may  be  purchased.  Eequested  Mr.  Tucker  to  see  to  this. 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  24.  i Milton  Head,  8.  0.,  November  11,  1861. 

The  general  commanding  is  pained  to  know  that  some  of  the  troops 
of  his  command  have,  without  orders,  invaded  the  premises  of  private 
individuals  and  committed  gross  depredations  upon  their  property,  and 
what  he  considers  a matter  of  still  graver  character  and  most  preju- 
dicial to  the  discipline  of  the  command  and  the  interests  of  the  service 
is,  that  some  commissioned  officers  (it  is  hoped  but  few)  have  not  only 
connived  at  these  outrages,  but  have  actually  participated  in  them. 

The  rights  of  citizens  to  be  secure  in  their  property  and  the  character 
of  the  American  Army  are  too  important  to  allow  such  transactions  to 
go  unrebuked.  The  first  duty  of  the  soldier  is  the  protection  of  the 
citizen.  The  political  character  of  the  citizen  is  not  to  be  judged  and 
weighed  in  this  manner  by  the  soldier,  and  there  must  be  hj  him  no 
molestation  of  his  lawful  rights.  The  Government  alone  is  to  decide 
how  far  the  present  unfortunate  condition  of  this  portion  of  the 
country  is  to  authorize  or  demand  a departure  from  the  well-settled 
principles  of  American  law. 

Brigade  commanders  and  all  other  commanding  officers  will  at  once 
see  that  these  depredations  cease,  and  endeavor  to  ascertain  the  names 
of  the  perpetrators,  that  they  may  be  brought  to  justice. 

All  horses,  cattle,  and  other  private  property  which  have  been  taken 
off  any  of  the  plantations  and  now  in  the  hands  of  officers  or  soldiers, 
will  be  immediately  surrendered  to  the  chief  quartermaster,  who  will 
cause  an  inventory  to  be  taken  of  the  same,  stating,  if  practicable,  to 
whom  the  property  belongs,  and  make  a report  to  these  headquarters. 

II.  All  public  property  left  by  the  enemy,  such  as  muskets,  accouter- 
ments, &c.,  and  now  in  the  hands  of  soldiers  or  citizens,  will  be  immedi- 
ately turned  over  to  the  chief  ordnance  officer,  Lieut.  Francis  J.  Shunk. 


188  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

III.  All  Iversons  found  outside  the  pickets  without  a pass  will  be 
arrested  and  reported  to  these  headquarters. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  T.  W.  Sherman : 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain^  Fifteenth  Infantry^  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  General. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Hilton  Head^  8.  G.,  November  15,  1861. 
The  Adjutant -General  IJ.  S.  Army, 

Washington.,  D.  G.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulty 
and  great  amount  of  labor  in  landing  our  stores,  some  delay  must  neces- 
sarily occur  in  continuing  operations^  This  delay  is  as  distasteful  to  us 
as  it  must  be  to  the  authorities  at  Washington.  In  the  mean  while  a 
matter  of  the  first  importance  is  to  erect  proper  defenses  at  Hilton  Head 
as  well  as  to  strengthen  the  land  side  of  the  fort,  to  the  end  of  securing 
this  important  point  with  the  least  number  of  men.  This  is  being  done, 
and  a plan  of  the  same  will  be  furnished  as  soon  as  it  can  be  prepared. 

In  conducting  operations  here  two  modes  suggest  themselves: 

First,  to  hold  Hilton  Head  and  Phillip^s  Island  with  a strong  force, 
and  iiroceed  with  a sufficient  force,  in  connection  with  the  naval  fleet 
under  Commodore  DuPont,  and  open  another  important  harbor.  This 
would  be  carrying  out  the  original  and  actual  object  of  the  expedition, 
as  I understand  it,  and  for  which  object  only  our  means  have  been 
provided. 

Second,  to  occupy  the  points  first  mentioned  as  well  as  Beaufort  as  a 
base  of  operations,  and  act  thence  on  a line  of  operations  embracing 
Port  Royal  Island  and  the  road  to  Pocotaligo,  the  nearest  point  of  the 
Savannah  and  Charleston  Railroad,  into  the  southern  counties  of  the 
State,  threatening  Savannah,  &c.,  or  to  operate  from  the  base  of  Hilton 
Head  through  the  interior  creeks  and  channels  leading  into  the  Savan- 
nah River  below  Savannah  and  near  Fort  Jackson,  thus  laying  siege 
to  Savannah  and  cutting  off  Fort  Pulaski. 

For  these  last  operations  the  former  would  require  more  land  trans- 
portation than  we  are  provided  with,  and  the  latter  would  require  an 
outfit  of  boats,  that  we  are  also  insufficiently  provided  with.  The 
former  would  also  require  a small  cavalry  force.  The  only  course, 
therefore,  at  present  is,  notwithstanding  the  apparent  opening  for  more 
brilliant  operations,  the  first  and  original  plan. 

The  surrounding  country  evacuated  by  the  whites,  as  described  in 
my  last,  has  upon  it  an  abundance  of  valuable  property,  including 
ungathered  crops  and  cotton  mostly  gathered.  I have  directed  all  the 
means  of  transportation,  such  as  boats,  scows,  wagons,  &c.,  to  be 
collected  for  the  use  of  the  Army  j but  in  regard  to  other  private  prop- 
erty, such  as  can  be  made  of  no  injury  to  us  in  the  operations  of  the 
enemy,  I have  directed  not  to  be  interfered  with.  This,  however,  is  a 
difficult  matter,  and  there  exists  too  great  a propensity  to  rob  and 
pillage  the  houses  and  plantations  left  in  charge  only  of  the  blacks.  I 
hope  to  receive  instructions  on  this  point ; tliat  is,  in  a country  entirely 
deserted  by  its  white  inhabitants,  all  of  whom  are  known  to  be  disloyal, 
how  far  I am  to  authorize  the  appropriation  of  private  property. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEIiMAN, 
Brigadier- General.,  Gommanding. 


181> 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Expeditionary  Corps, 

*]No.  29.  i Rilton  Read^  8.  C.,  November  15,  1801. 

* * * * * # 

III.  The  fort  on  Hilton  Head  will  be  known  as  Fort  Welles,  and  the 
one  on  Bay  Point,  heretofore  called  Fort  Beauregard,  will  be  known  as 
Fort  Seward. 

* # * * * * * 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman  : 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain,  Fifteenth  Infantry,  Aetg.  Asst.  Adjt.  General. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Rilton  Read,  8.  G.,  November  17,  1861. 
The  Adjutant -General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington,  R.  C.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  position  of  the  forces  here 
necessitates  the  most  active  operations  during  the  coming  winter,  the 
cUmateand  localities  of  these  islands  rendering  it  impracticable  to  carry 
on  operations  upon  them  after  April  next.  We  have  now  possession  of 
the  valuable  harbors  of  Port  Eoyal  and  Saint  Helena.  One  more  will 
probably  be  in  our  possession  in  a short  time.  A fort  should  be  con- 
structed on  Hunting  Island,  to  secure  that  important  roadstead  of  Saint 
Helena.  After  well  securing  these  important  points,  and  establishing 
a firm  base  from  which  to  operate  inland,  there  will  not  be  left  a very 
large  force  disposable  for  internal  operations.  I would  therefore  recom- 
mend that  an  additional  force  of  10,000  men  be  sent  to  this  point  as  early 
as  practicable,  and  among  them  some  regular  troops,  including  some 
companies  of  artillery,  for  garrisoning  the  forts  ] the  volunteer  force  not 
being  adapted  to  the  artillery  service. 

W’e  shall  require  three  or  four  steamers,  drawing  not  over  9 feet,  and 
capable  of  conveying  800  or  1,000,  for  operations  in  the  rivers  and  creeks, 
and  a couple  of  ferry-boats,  drawing  not  over  5 or  6 feet  of  water,  would 
be  of  the  greatest  advantage.  We  would  require  also  about  100  row- 
boats, capable  of  carrying  from  40  to  50  men  each,  with  hedges  and  oars* 
A few  of  them  should  be  large  enough  and  so  constructed  as  to  trans- 
port pieces  of  artillery  with  their  carriages,  including  siege  guns.  I also 
take  the  liberty  of  recommending  that  the  light-ship  formerly  stationed 
at  the  entrance  of  Port  Royal  channel  be  replaced,  and  that  the  light- 
house on  Hunting  Islands,  Saint  Helena  Sound,  be  relighted.  It  is  my 
duty  also  to  recommend  that  some  more  engineer  officers  be  sent  here. 
The  duties  of  that  corps  are  too  important  and  too  extended  to  be  left 
to  the  few  we  have  here.  It  is  also  important  to  have  at  least  three 
more  ordnance  sergeants  here  for  the  several  artillery  statious,  the  two 
heretofore  furnished  having  been  absorbed  at  Forts  Welles  and  Seward. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  32.  ) Rilton  Read,  8.  G.,  November  17,  1861. 

The  following  troops  wiU  be  put  in  readiness  to  embark,  as  follows : 
Forty-sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers  on  the  steamer  Empire 
City. 


190  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Forty-seventh  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers  on  the  steamer  Star 
of  the  South.  ; 

Forty-eighth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers  on  the  steamer  Ca- 
hawba. 

Eighth  Eegiment  Maine  Volunteers  on  the  steamer  Ariel. 

Third  Eegiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  six  companies  on  the 
steamer  Daniel  Webster  and  four  companies  on  the  steamer  Marion. 

Two  companies  of  the  Eegiment  of  Volunteer  Engineers  on  the  steamer 
Oriental. 

Three  companies  of  the  Third  Eegiment  Ehode  Island  Volunteers  on 
the  steamer  Matanzas. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman  : 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  0.,  November  25,  1861. 
The  Adjutant-General  IJ.  S.  Army, 

Washington^  D.  C.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  we  have  found  stowed  away  on 
Ladies  Island  two  light-house  apparatus,  including  lamps  and  reflectors, 
with  a large  quantity  of  oil.  1 thought  it  best  to  turn  the  same  over  to 
Commodore  DuPont,  as  he  has  better  facilities  for  keeping  them  safe 
and  secure  than  we  have.  He  had  before  one  also  which  he  found  at 
Beaufort. 

It  having  been  learned  by  a reconnaissance  sent  to  the  neighbor- 
ing island  that  the  forts  on  Tybee  Island  had  been  deserted  by  the  rebels, 
I informed  Commodore  DuPont  of  the  same,  whereupon  he  yesterday 
started  some  gunboats  down  there,  and  discovered  it  to  be  a fact.  We 
have  therefore  another  light-house,  which  should  be  relighted  at  once. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  0.,  November  25,  1861. 
The  Adjutant-General  H.  S.  Army, 

Washington,  H.  G.  : 

Sir  : Our  scouts  have  found  the  fort  on  Ladies  Island  covering  the 
Coosaw  Eiver,  which  was  deserted  by  the  rebels  at  the  time  of  the  cap- 
ture of  this  place.  The  scouts  spiked  the  guns,  but  we  shall  remove 
them  as  soon  as  practicable  to  this  place.  Our  scouts  have  been  up  into 
the  vicinity  of  Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  and  discovered  that  the  advanced  out- 
' post  of  the  enemy  is  at  that  iioint  and  that  their  main  body  is  at  Poco- 
taligo.  There  is  another  large  force  also  collecting  at  Grahamville, 
nearer  to  Savannah,  and  also  on  the  railroad,  the  advance  post  of  which 
is  at  Bluffton,  a small  village  some  10  or  14  miles  from  here.  The  object 
of  these  forces  is  undoubtedly  to  protect  the  railroad  and  cover  the  in- 
terior of  the  State  against  our  invasion  in  that  direction,  which,  from 
all  the  information  I can  gather,  they  are  daily  expecting. 

I have  already  briefly  referred  to  our  facilities,  or  rather  want  of  facil- 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


191 


ities,  for  such  an  operation,  and  the  propriety  of  confining  ourselves  with 
our  present  means  to  establishing  a firm  and  secure  base  on  the  coast, 
and  thus  be  prepared  for  any  ulterior  movements  inland  that  the  service 
may  demand. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAK, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Expedition,  . 


Office  Chief  Topographical  Engineer  E.  C., 

Hilton  Heady  S,  (7.,  November  26 y 186X 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Fifteenth  Infantry y Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir:  In  accordance  with  instructions  from  General  Sherman,  I have 
examined  the  ferries  from  this  island  to  the  main-land,  situated  at  Ferry 
Point  and  Spanish  Wells,  and  have  to  report  as  follows: 

The  distance  from  Ferry  Point  to  the  large  white  house  opposite  is 
2,714  yards,  or  1.54  miles.  The  landing  on  this  side  is  tolerably  good, 
the  slope  of  the  beach  being  sufficiently  abrupt  to  allow  small  boats  to 
land,  and  vessels  of  l5  feet  draught  to  come  within  50  yards  of  the 
shore  j but  from  the  intermixture  of  sand  and  mud  it  is  hardly  firm 
enough  for  anything  but  infasitry  to  march  upon.  The  shape  of  the 
point  and  the  approaches  to  it  are  such  that  a small  body  of  men  could 
easily  prevent  the  landing  of  a hostile  force.  A flat  or  marsh  600  yards 
wide,  at  the  large  white  house,  extends  entirely  around  the  south  point 
of  the  main  land  between  May  Eiver  and  the  small  creek  on  the  east 
side  of  the  ferry,  thus  rendering  the  debarkation  of  troops  in  numbers 
on  the  main  impracticable.  At  high  tide  small  boats  can  be  run  over 
the  flat  in  front  of  the  house  and  infantry  landed,  but  at  low  tide  the 
only  means  of  approaching  the  shore  is  by  a small  slough  running  nearly 
east  through  the  flat.  In  this  way  one  or  two  boats  at  a time  can  be 
pushed  to  within  200  yards  of  the  house,  but  the  men  can  only  reach 
the  solid  ground  by  bogging  through  the  mud.  The  negroes  living 
on  the  adjacent  plantations  inform  me  that  this  ferry  is  only  used  at 
high  tide,  and  at  such  times  men,  horses,  and  carriages  can  be  crossed 
in  light-draught  scows. 

Spanish  Wells  is  situated  opposite  the  mouth  of  May  Eiver.  It  has 
a good  landing,  on  a tolerably  firm  sand  beach,  and  deep  water  at  50 
yards  from  shore.  The  first  lauding  on  the  main  is  up  May  Eiver, 
distant  about  5 miles,  at  a point  in  front  of  the  farm-houses  of  Mrs. 
Calk.  At  this  place  boats  of  considerable  draught  can  lie  alongside  the 
shore,  and  land  men  by  putting  out  the  ordinary  stage-planks.  The 
channel  all  the  way  is  deep  enough  for  boats  drawing  15  feet.  This 
place  is  in  every  way  suitable  for  a steam  ferry.  Its  communications 
with  Hilton  Head  are  by  the  usual  roads  of  the  island. 

The  rebel  picket  of  six  or  eight  horsemen  did  not  attempt  to  resist 
our  landing  at  Buckingham  Ferry,  but  fled  upon  our  approach.  Shortly 
afterwards  the  cotton-house  on  an  adjoining  plantation,  said  to  belong 
to  a Mr.  Baynard,  was  observed  to  be  on  fire,  and  later  in  the  evening 
one  owned  by  Mrs.  Calk  was  also  set  on  fire  and  burned.  The  pickets 
on  the  main-land,  stationed  at  the  places  of  exit,  seemed  to  be  intended 
to  keep  the  negroes  from  running  off  rather  than  to  prevent  our  approach. 
I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieut.y  Top.  Eng.y  Chief  Top.  Eng.  Exp'y  Corps. 


192  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  INIIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjutant  General’s  Office, 

Washington^  November  27,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  A., 

Fort  Royals  S.  G.: 

Sir:  Your  letters  of  the  11th,*  15th,  and  17th  instant  have  been 
received.  Four  additional  regiments  have  been  ordered  to  join  your 
command.  The  General-in-Ohief  desires  you,  through  your  quarter- 
master, to  seize  all  cotton  and  other  property  which  may  be  used  to  our 
prejudice.  The  cotton  and  such  other  articles  as  may  not  be  required 
for  the  use  of  your  command  will  be  shipped  by  return  transports  to  the 
quartermaster  in  New  York,  there  to  be  sold  on  public  account.  The 
services  of  negroes  will  be  used  in  picking,  collectiug,  and  packing  cot- 
ton, as  well  as  in  constructing  defensive  works,  &c.  Private  property 
of  individuals  should  not  be  interfered  with,  unless  it  be  of  military 
utility  under  the  circumstances  you  mention,  and  you  will  be  justified 
in  taking  measures  to  prevent  pillage  or  any  outrage  so  far  as  the  exi- 
gencies of  the  service  will  permit,  no  matter  what  relations  the  persons 
or  property  may  bear  to  the  United  States  Government. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  THOMAS, 
Adjutant-  Genera  L 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Hilton  Eeadj  S.  (7.,  November  27,  1861. 
Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Armv, 

Washington^  D.  C. : 

Sir  : For  the  want  of  an  engineer  ofQcer  (one  being  sick,  one  engaged 
on  a reconnaissance  on  Saint  Helena  Sound,  and  the  remaining  one 
necessarily  employed  here)  I went  down  to  Tybee  Island  last  evening, 
and  this  morning  made  a sufiicient  reconnaissance  of  that  island  as  to 
ascertain  its  general  topography  and  the  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns  on 
Fort  Pulaski.  I find  it  not  impossible  to  reduce  Pulaski  from  this  island, 
though  it  will  be  a work  of  time.  Mortar  and  breeching  batteries  may 
be  constructed  so  as  not  to  be  very  seriously  anuoyed  by  their  guns.  I 
find  that  their  casemate  guns  will  hardly  range  to  the  island,  while  their 
barbette  guns  will  explode  shells  upon  the  island  with  certainty  and 
considerable  accuracy.  A further  reconnaissance  will  be  made  as  soon 
as  an  engineer  officer  can  be  spared. 

Not  hearing  from  the  Department  to-day  as  to  our  future  operations, 
(as  the  Bienville  has  just  returned),  I shall  have  to  act  from  my  own 
judgment  alone,  or  be  the  cause  of  a delay  in  operations  that  will  mili- 
tate seriously  to  our  disadvantage  on  account  of  the  rapidity  of  time 
that  must  be  made  use  of  to  avoid  being  caught  by  earliness  of  spring. 
In  order,  therefore,  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  operations  of  this  portion 
of  the  Army,  I have  to  request  that  as  much  cavalry,  not  exceeding  a 
regiment,  ten  regiments  of  infantry,  and  one  regiment  of  regular  artil- 
lery be  sent  here  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  steamboats,  ferry-boats, 
and  small  boats  required  were  mentioned  in  my  letters  of  the  17th  and 
21st.  It  would  be  of  the  greatest  advantage  in  having  a small  force  of 
regular  infantry  to  leaven  the  mass  of  raw  volunteers  of  which  this  com- 
mand is  composed. 

I have  also  to  call  the  attention  of  the  Department  to  the  proportions 

*See  capture  of  Fort  Walker,  &c.,  p.  5. 


Chap.  XV. j CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION.  193 

we  are  developing  in  these  operations.  Our  coast  is  becoming  more 
and  more  extended.  The  operations  of  the  engineer,  ordnance,  and  artil- 
lery departments  are  of  the  greatest  importance.  We  have  not  othcers 
enough  to  manage  them,  particularly  with  raw  troops,  where  every  man 
must  be  instructed  to  avail  anything.  I recommend  that  three  more 
engineer  officers,  two  ordnance  officers,  and  several  artillery  officers  be 
sent  here  at  once.  The  want  of  direction  among  our  raw  hands,  a 
direction  which  the  few  officers  here  cannot  sufficiently  give,  is  a serious 
cause  of  delay  in  everything  we  undertake  to  do.  I also  ask  that  an 
officer  of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department,  of  rank  and  great  experi- 
ence, be  sent  to  control  the  operations  of  that  department  here.  A good 
pontoon  bridge  would  also  be  desirable  here. 

V ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Fort  Royal,  8.  December  1,  18G1. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TJ.  8.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C.  : 

Sir  : Since  my  letter  of  the  27th  ultimo  Tybee,  Island  has  been  thor- 
oughly examined,  and  I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  the  report  of  the 
engineer.  Captain  Gillmore,  whose  opinion  is  in  accordance  with  my 
own  as  to  the  feasibility  of  shelling  Fort  Pulaski,  and,  if  not  demolish- 
ing it,  of  rendering  it  untenable.  I am  about  occui^ying  that  island 
with  a regiment,  and  as  soon  as  practicable  shall  mount  some  sea-coast 
guns  in  the  work  near  the  light-house,  so  as  to  secure  the  channel  enter- 
ing the  river  in  the  absence  of  naval  vessels. 

The  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski  will  require  an  armament  from  the 
North,  and  I inclose  herewith  the  amount  of  ordnance  we  shall  require, 
which  I beg  may  be  forwarded  to  Tybee  Island  at  the  earliest  practica- 
ble moment,  in  charge  of  an  active  and  experienced  ordnance  officer,  if  a 
suitable  artillery  officer  cannot  be  obtained  j for  I repeat  from  former 
communications  that,  this  command  being  composed  of  raw  volunteers 
and  a dearth  of  experienced  and  instructed  officers,  an  impossibility  now 
exists  of  obtaining  proper  hands  to  direct. 

Tne  shelling  of  Pulaski  may  have  an  important  effect  in  favor  of  some 
other  movement  that  it  might  be  possible  to  carry  on  at  the  same  time. 
Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Bigadier-  General,  Commanding, 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Chief  Enuineer  Officer  E.  C., 

Hilton  Head,  8.  C.,  December  1,  18G1. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  8.  C. : 

Sir  : Agreeably  to  your  orders  I proceeded  in  the  steamer  Ben  DeFord, 
on  the  afternoon  of  the  29th  ultimo,  to  Tybee  Island,  to  make  a military 
examination  of  that  locality.  We  arrived  at  the  Tybee  light-house 
about  7 p.  m.,  when  I called  upon  the  senior  naval  officer  present,  and 
made  arrangements  with  him  for  disembarking  my  escort  (three  com- 
panies of  the  Fourth  New  Hamiihshire  Volunteers,  under  Major  Drew)  at 
13  R R VOL  VI 


194  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CHAr.  XV. 

7 o’clock  on  the  following  morning.  There  was  some  delay  in  landing, 
so  that  I was  not  ready  to  commence  the  work  of  the  day  before  9 a.  m. 

I first  endeavored  to  determine  the  prominent  topographical  features 
of  the  island,  and  found  that  at  high  water  it  is  nearly  divided  into  two 
parts  by  a marsh,  or  rather  two  marshes,  which  make  up  from  the  inlet 
or  creek  v^hich  bounds  the  island  on  the  southwest.  This  marsh,  or  a 
great  part  of  it,  is  slightly  submerged  at  high  tide,  and  is  difficult  to 
pass  even  at  low  water.  Men  might  pick  their  way  across  it,  but  troops 
could  not  maneuver  on  it.  To  pass  from  the  northwest  point  of  the 
island,  opposite  Fort  Pulaski,  to  the  southeast  part,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
iulet,  I found  it  necessary  to  come  back  within  300  yards  of  the  light- 
house. 

On  the  west  end  of  Tybee  Island,  opposite  Fort  Pulaski,  a parapet  for 
infantry  100  yards  long  has  been  thrown  across  the  neck  of  land  to  pre- 
vent troops  from  approaching  from  the  direction  of  the  light  house.  W est 
of  this  troops  have  been  encamped  in  bush  tents.  In  a southwesterly 
direction  on  the  other  side  of  the  creek  the  land  appears  to  be  low  and 
marshy,  except  a small  area  in  a southerly  direction  from  the  earthwork, 
occupied  by  a house.  Eeturniug  to  the  old  tower  near  the  light-house, 

1 took  its  ])rincipal  dimensions  and  those  of  the  unfinished  earthwork 
which  surrounds  it.  The  tower  is  built  of  shell  concrete } its  walls  are 
10  feet  thick,  and  it  is  three  stories  in  height.  The  first  story  is  9 feet 
high,  with  but  one  opening  (4  feet  wide)  to  the  exterior.  In  it  is  a good 
magazine  G by  7 feet  and  7 feet  high,  with  brick  walls  feet  thick. 
The  second  story  is  about  9 feet  high,  and  has  one  communication  with 
the  exterior.  It  is  on  the  west  side.  The  third  story  is  pierced  with 
twelve  loop-holes,  at  equal  distances  apart,  1 by  1 foot  at  the  throat  and 

2 by  2 feet  on  the  exterior.  Four  fire-places  exist  on  this  story.  Above 
the  floor  covering  the  third  story  the  wall  is  carried  up  flush  with  the 
inside,  so  as  to  form  a breast-height  4 feet  thick  and  4J  feet  high. 

The  tower  is  surrounded  by  an  unfinished  field  work,  which  could 
with  little  labor  be  made  a strong  position,  that  would  control  the  prin- 
cipal entrance  to  Savannah  Eiver,  and  thus  render  efficient  services  to 
the  blockade  in  case  the  fleet  should  be  driven  off  by  stress  of  weather. 
One  or  two  siege  guns  could  be  mounted  on  the  tower. 

I give  a rough  sketch  of  the  tower  and  its  surroundings. 

I proceeded  to  the  southern  point  of  the  island  along  the  main  shore 
and  thence  up  the  inlet  on  the  southwest,  in  order  to  get  a near  view, 
if  possible,  of  the  battery  which  controls  Warsaw  Inlet.  My  guide  (Mr. 
Ferguson,  of  the  steamer  Flag)  is  of  opinion  that  this  battery  contains 
four  guns  and  is  located  on  the  second  Tybee  Island,  as  it  had  been  fir- 
ing seaward  the  day  before,  when  he  was  on  the  south  point  of  North 
Tybee,  and  had  a very  good  opportunity  to  judge.  A large  derrick, 
plainly  visible,  with  all  its  rigging,  had  been  erected  since  he  last  saw 
it.  I am  unal)!e  to  say  whether  he  is  correct  or  not,  and  three  naval 
officers  with  whom  I conversed  could  furnish  me  with  no  positive  in- 
formation on  the  subject.  Its  thorough  examination  can  only  be  made 
by  using  boats,  either  directly  from  the  sea  or  by  passing  over  to  the 
second  Tybee  Island.  To  do  this  would  have  detained  me  from  Hilton 
Head  all  of  to-day  and  a portion  of  (perhaps  all  of)  to-mcrrow,  as  the 
l)ilot  of  the  Ben  HeFord  requires  daylight  to  navigate  his  ship  in.  My 
hurried  departure  on  Friday  left  my  duties  here  iu  a condition  that 
would  not  warrant  so  lengthy  an  absence.  I therefore  thought  it  proper 
to  report  to  you  for  further  orders. 

The  exact  position  of  the  battery  controlling  Warsaw  Inlet  has,  how- 
ever, no  bearing  on  the  prominent  points  to  which  my  attention  was 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


195 


directed  in  your  verbal  instructions,  viz,  the  propriety  of  occupying  and 
bolding  the  first  Tybee  Island,  and  the  practicability  (and,  if  deemed 
practicable,  the  best  method)  of  reducing  Fort  Pulaski.  I deem  tlie 
reduction  of  that  work  practicable  by  batteries  of  mortars  and  rifled 
gnus  established  on  Tybee  Island.  I think  it  probable  that  a nearer 
position  on  firm  ground  (though  very  shallow,  and  therefore  ill-adapted 
to  mortar  and  sunken  batteries)  can  be  found  on  the  island  west  of 
Tybee.  I would  establish  these  batteries  from  20  to  25  yards  apart,  one 
gun  or  one  mortar  in  each,  behind  the  ridge  of  sand  on  the  shore,  west- 
ward from  the  light- house.  I would  sink  the  mortar  batteries  as  low 
as  the  water  would  permit,  and  the  guns  sufficiently  low  to  leave  a 
high  parapet  in  front.  On  the  sides  and  rear  of  each  I would  have  a 
high  mound  of  earth,  and  I should  cover  each  with  a horizontal  bomb- 
proof shelter  of  logs,  covered  with  earth,  and  supported  by  logs  planted 
vertically  in  the  ground.  The  embrasures  for  the  guns  should  be  deep, 
narrow,  and  of  very  little  splay.  I estimate  that  after  once  obtaining 
the  range  five-eighths  of  the  shells  from  mortars  can  be  lodged  inside 
of  the  fort.  I would  have  enough  mortars  to  throw  one  shell  a minute 
into  the  fort,  and  as  many  guns  as  mortars.  The  batteries  should 
operate  day  and  night.  For  landing  the  ordnance  required  for  these 
operations  I would  have  built  two  or  three  broad  flat-bottomed  bateaux 
or  scows,  such  as  are  commonly  used  on  rope  ferries.  I think  these 
could  be  built  here. 

There  are  now  probably  at  Fort  Pulaski  700  good  troops.  About  200 
landed  yesterday,  and  the  ISTavy  officers  informed  me  that  at  least  500 
have  entered  the  fort  within  the  last  three  days,  while  some  (probably 
raw  recruits  or  portions  of  the  Home  Guard)  have  gone  away.  It  may 
be  their  design  to  land  on  Tybee  and  hold  the  west  end  of  it,  to  prevent 
the  erection  of  batteries  against  the  fort.  I therefore  recommend  the 
immediate  occupation  of  Tybee  Island  by  one  good  regiment  until  the 
question  of  attempting  the  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski  be  determined. 

I learned  while  at  Tybee  that  offers  have  been  made  by  negroes  to 
burn  two  of  the  principal  bridges  on  the  railroad  between  Charleston 
and  Savannah.  One  of  these  l3ridges  is  said  to  be  nearly  two  miles 
long.  In  a military  point  of  view  its  destruction  would  be  of  great  value 
to  us,  and  I recommend  the  subject  to  your  attention. 

Very  respectfull}^  vour  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMOKE, 

Captain^  and  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps. 


[Indorsement.] 

Approved,  and  I fully  concur  in  the  plan  of  Captain  Gillmore  for  reduc- 
ing Fort  Pulaski,  except  possibly  the  use  of  rifled  guns,  until  their  effect 
has  l)een  more  fully  tested.  All  that  can  be  done  with  guns  is  to  shake 
the  walls  as  far  as  practicable  in  a random  manner.  As  the  nearest 
distance  at  which  batteries  can  be  constructed  is  miles  from  Pulaski, 
if  rifled  guns  are  found  to  be  non  effective  at  that  distance,  which  is 
certain  if  it  is  discovered  that  the  shot  will  not  strike  point  foremost, 
then  I think  that  a few  10-inch  columbiads  may  be  used  in  addition  to 
the  mortars,  for  they  may  be  employed  with  solid  shot  for  direct  fire 
against  the  walls  or  as  mortars  for  the  interior. 

It  is  impracticable  to  establish  batteries  nearer  Pulaski  than  above 
stated,  whether  on  Tybee  or  the  island  west  of  it.  A few  days  before 
this  reconnaissance  I drew  the  fire  of  the  fort,  and  ascertained  that  their 
casemate  guns  came  a little  short  of  the  shore  at  the  position  of  the  fort 


196  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

constructed  on  the  narrow  neck  which  Captain  Gillmore  describes,  but 
that  their  barbette  guns  effectually  shell  the  shore.  Now,  as  you  proceed 
west,  you  are  constantly  shortening  the  line  between  the  island  and 
Pulaski.  In  a word,  though  guns  will  be  of  much  importance  to  assist 
in  the  work,  yet  if  the  place  is  to  be  reduced,  it  is  to  be  done  with  mor- 
tars of  the  heaviest  caliber,  and  if  it  should  even  turn  out  that  the  bomb- 
proofs  cannot  be  ruptured,  the  place  can  be  made  untenable. 
Kespectfully  submitted. 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier-  General^  Cominanding. 

December  4,  1861. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Hilton  Headj  IS.  C.,  December  6,  1861. 

Col.  Eudolph  Eosa, 

Commanding  Forty -sixth  Neiv  TorJc  Volunteers : 

Colonel  : The  commanding  general  directs  that  you  take  post  with 
your  regiment  on  North  Tybee  Island  with  as  little  delay  as  practicable, 
and  at  once  take  up  a defensive  position,  so  as  to  hold  the  entire  island. 
Your  men  will  occupy  as  quarters  the  buildings  near  the  light  house, 
and  you  will  establish  a camp  on  the  clear  ground  near  the  light-house, 
always  keeping  out  pickets  at  the  salient  points  of  the  island.  Your 
attention  is  particularly  called  to  the  narrow  neck  of  land  west  of  the 
light-house,  as  a iioint  which  should  always  be  guarded.  The  work 
thrown  up  by  the  enemy  at  this  point  should  be  torn  down  to  the  ground 
as  soon  as  possible,  and,  to  avoid  the  effects  of  the  lire  from  Fort  Pulaski, 
this  should  be  done  in  the  night.  You  must  take  every  precaution 
against  being  surprised,  and  in  the  mean  time  take  particular  care  that 
the  works  thrown  up  about  the  light-house  are  not  injured  or  defaced 
in  any  way,  as  guns  are  to  be  mounted  in  them  as  soon  as  they  can  be 
got  there.  You  will  take  particular  care  of  your  supplies,  and  see  that 
they  are  not  in  any  way  wasted  or  destroyed.  You  will  see  that 
vessels  sent  there  are  unloaded  as  soon  as  possible  and  sent  back  to 
this  i)lace.  You  will  keep  these  headquarters  informed  of  all  passiug 
events. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain^  Fifteenth  Infantry^  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Camp  Ninth  Maine  Eegiment, 

December  6,  1861. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Sherman^  Command: 

As  directed,  on  Thursday,  October  [November]  28,  with  three  com- 
panies from  this  regiment,  I relieved  Captain  Ely  at  Graham^s  plantation, 
and  posted  pickets  at  points  most  advantageous  for  observation  and 
defense.  There  had  been  none  previously  posted  on  Baynard’s  plantation, 
on  the  point  at  Spanish  Wells,  on  account  of  its  distance  from  the  reserve,- 
but  I judged  it  expedient  to  station  a small  force  there,  with  a horse,  in 
order  to  bring  me  word  if  anything  important  should  occur. 

The  picket  at  that  point  reports  that  on  Sunday  night,  December  1, 
at  about  2 o’clock,  a boat  filled  with  armed  men,  apparently,  came  from 
the  direction  of  Hunting  Island,  with  the  seeming  intention  of  entering 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


197 


Broad  Creek.  On  hailing  and  receiving  no  reply  they  fired  upon  the 
boat,  when  considerable  confusion  ensued,  the  boat  turning  and  row- 
ing rapidly  back. 

On  Saturday  I made  a reconnaissance  of  Pinckney  Island  and  vicinity. 
Prom  Muddy  Point,  the  western  extremity  of  the  island,  I saw  the  rebel 
ihcket  at  Topping  Landing,  on  the  main,  scarcely  a rifle-shot  distance. 
Prom  negroes  who  came  over  that  day  I found  that  they  have  mounted 
pickets  at  Port  Point,  3 miles  above  Topping  Landing,  at  the  junc- 
tion of  Mackay^s  Creek  and  Broad  Eiverj  also  at  Hog  Bluff,  1 mile 
below  Topping  Landing;  at  Buckingham,  or  Perry  Landing,  and  on 
Hunting  Island,  so  called — in  reality  a peninsula,  extending  into  Skull 
Creek  in  a northeasterly  direction  from  Bluffton. 

On  Monday  I reconnoitered  Bull’s  Island.  There  is  a large  quantity 
of  corn  and  cotton  there,  about  200  head  of  cattle,  and  100  sheep  ; also 
a small  steam-engine,  in  good  repair,  of  about  8-inch  cylinder  and 
18-inch  stroke.  I learned  that  the  rebels  constantly  come  over  in  the 
night,  in  small  parties,  and  carry  off*  the  stock.  Negroes  are  constant!}’- 
coming  from  the  main,  and  report  the  rebel  force  in  and  about  Bluff’ton 
to  be  400,  two  companies  of  which  aie  infantry,  composed  mostly  of  boys 
and  old  men ; the  remainder  mounted. 

On  Tuesday  night  John  and  Rollin  Kirk,  brothers,  and  a Mr.  Pinck- 
ney, landed  on  Pinckney  Island,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  off’  the  stores ; 
but  the  negroes  getting  off*  in  boats  and  raising  an  alarm,  they  left  the 
island  without  accomplishing  their  object. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SABINE  EMERY, 

Major^  Commanding  Detachment 


Headquarters  District  of  Port  Royal, 

Beaufort^  S.  (7.,  December  8,  18G1. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  8.  C.: 

General  : At  8.30  o’clock  I moved  forward  towards  the  ferry  with 
Hamilton’s  section,  under  Lieutenant  Ransom,  and  600  infantry.  Cap- 
tain Burket  is  now  proceeding  cautiously,  with  100  men,  in  the  same 
direction,  and  is  about  4 miles  from  this  point.  My  information  is 
that  the  enemy  are  on  the  island,  with  140  cavalry  and  100  infantry. 
It  is  reported  that  Captain  Barmode  was  wounded  in  the  arm  in  the 
affair  of  pickets  night  before  last. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier ’ General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  Port  Royal, 

Beavfort,  8.  C.,  December  8,  1861. 

Lieut.  Col.  Brenholts, 

Commanding  Detachment,  Port  Royal  Ferry : 

Sir  : In  command  of  the  three  companies  of  the  Piftieth  Pennsylvania 
Regiment  which  have  been  assigned  to  you,  you  will  move  at  5 o’clock 
to-morrow  morning,  proceed  to  Port  Royal  Perry,  and  relieve  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Armstrong,  now  stationed  there.  Tents  will  not  be  required,  as 


198  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

there  are  buildings  sufficient  for  the  accommodation  of  your  command. 
You  will  observe  closely  the  ferry,  the  adjacent  main,  and  the  shores  of 
Port  Koyal  Island  on  either  hand.  You  will  send  small  parties,  each 
under  the  charge  of  an  officer,  to  the  neighboring  plantations,  to  ascer- 
tain the  amount  of  transportation,  forage,  and  provisions  they  will  sui)ply 
to  this  command,  and  will  take  the  necessary  measures  to  save  them 
for  its  use.  It  is  said  the  navigation  of  the  river  separating  the  island 
from  the  main  has  been  obstructed,  both  above  and  below  the  ferry, 
by  piles  driven  across.  Ascertain  the  facts  and  stop  further  proceed- 
ings of  the  kind.  You  will  take  every  x>recaution  to  guard  against 
surprise ; will  endeavor  to  send  in  daily  reports,  noting  carefully  every- 
thing you  learn  in  regard  to  the  several  points  to  which  your  attention 
has  been  called. 

Truly  and  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

ISAAC  I.  STEYEYS, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  District  of  Port  Eoyal, 

Beaufort^  C.,  December  9,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman: 

General  : I have  received  information  that  since  my  visit  to  Port 
Eoyal  Ferry  yesterday  the  Confederates  liave  commenced  the  erection 
of  a battery  on  the  main  near  by,  and  at  a distance  of  about  1,000 
yards  from  the  firm  land  on  the  island.  I shall  at  daylight  to-morrow 
morning  have  the  two  guns  of  Hamilton's  battery  in  position,  and  I 
shall  open  fire  upon  the  Confederates.  In  the  event  they  persist  in  the 
construction  of  the  battery  I will  most  urgently  ask  that  a gunboat  be 
sent  to  the  same  general  vicinity,  to  co-o])erate  with  tlie  land  force.  It 
is  the  manifest  purpose  of  the  Confederates  to  close  the  passage.  Shall 
a movement  be  made  with  the  re- enforcement,  or  perhaps  with  troops 
which  they  can  replace,  to  seize  the  railroad  crossing  on  Broad  Eiver 
and  silence  it  by  works  This  would  involve  crossing  the  Port  Eoyal 
Ferry  and  occupying  the  main.  I will,  at  all  events,  stop  furtlier  pro- 
ceedings in  the  defense  of  the  passage  between  Port  Eoyal  and  the 
main,  and  await  your  further  instructions. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVEYS, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Eoyal,  8.  (7.,  December  10,  1861. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TJ.  8.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Otter  Island  has  been  occupied 
by  six  companies,  with  an  armament  sufficient  for  the  iwotection  of 
Saint  Helena  Sound  and  our  right  Hank  from  any  incursions  of  the 
enemy  by  the  way  of  the  Ashepoo  Eiver  and  South  Edisto  from  the 
direction  of  Charleston. 

I have  also  to  report  that  Tybee  Island  is  now  in  the  occupancy  of 
one  regiment,  and  that  an  armament  is  being  prepared  sufficient  to 
cover  the  channel  leading  into  Savannah  Eiver.  This  armament,  how- 


Chap.  XV. J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


199 


ever,  is  independent  of  that  required  for  the  reduction  of  Fort  Ihdaski. 
I have  also  to  report  that  I have  occupied  Port  Koyal  Island  wit  h 
General  Stevens’  brigade.  I very  much  regret  the  necessity  of  this 
measure,  as,  although  fully  convinced  of  its  untenability  by  the  enemy, 
he  has  commenced  against  us  a system  of  blockade  by  constructing 
piles  and  stockades  across  the  Ooosaw  Eiver,  Avashing  the  northern  and 
western  sides  of  the  island,  and  thus  intercepting  the  navigation  around 
the  island.  General  Stevens  bas  driven  olf  his  pickets,  and  now  holds 
both  sides  of  Port  Koyal  Ferry.  This  island  can  be  held  by  a small 
force,  and  I hope  to  be  able  to  make  use  of  part  of  that  brigade  ibr 
other  movements.  At  the  same  time  I repeat  my  former  recommenda- 
tion for  more  troops  here  and  some  cavalry. 

The  enemy’s  line^  can  be  considered  strategically  as  occupying  the 
country  from  Ossabaw  Sound  through  Savannah  and  the  important 
places  on  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Kailroad,  viz,  Hardeeville, 
Grahamville,  Coosawhatchie,  Pocotaligo,  and  so  on  to  the  left.  Some 
point  on  this  line  should  be  struck  soon,  but  nothing  but  the  develoj)- 
ment  of  circumstances  and  the  quantity  and  kind  of  means  in  hand  will 
fully  solve  the  important  question. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEKMAiSr, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

P.  S. — Three  regiments  of  Pennsylvanians  have  arrived — one  of  them 
without  arms. 


Headquarters  District  of  Port  Koyal, 

Beaufort.,  S.  6'.,  Beccmoer  10,  18G1. 

Brigadier-General  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps : 

General  : Lieutenant  Kansom  and  the  section  of  Hamilton’s  batxeiy 
under  his  command  moved  at  3 o’clock  this  morning,  and  I followed 
with  two  members  of  my  staff.  Acting  Aides-de-Oamp  Tiusk  and  Taylor, 
of,  respectively,  the  Highlanders  and  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania,  a half  liour 
afterwards.  We  reached  the  ferry  at  daylight.  I found,  however,  on 
careful  examination  that  the  Confederates  had  not  commenced  the  erec- 
tion of  any  works  since  our  occupation  of  the  island.  After  an  exan)i- 
iiation  of  the  country  adjoining  the  ferry,  especially  of  the  old  ferry  at 
Seabrook,  a mile  and  a half  to  the  westward  of  the  present  ferry,  I 
determined  to  take  positive  possession  of  both  sides  of  the  existing 
ferr^g  esi)ecially  as  an  effort  had  been  made  during  my  absence  at  Sea- 
brook  to  lire  the  ferry  building  on  the  island  side.  Lieutenant  Kansom, 
bringing,  under  my  direction,  his  battery  into  i)osition  at  Stuart’s  place, 
fired  four  shots  and  dispersed  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Bren  holts,  commanding  the  detachment  at  the  ferry,  advanced  imme- 
diately a picket  of  12  men  to  the  ferry,  and  took  possession  of  botli 
banks,  with  some  four  boats.  These  have  since  been  secured.  A small 
block-house  commanding  the  ferry  on  the  main  was  destroyed.  1 left 
the  battery  at  the  ferry,  with  instructions  to  return  to-morrow,  unless, 
after  conference  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brenholts,  Lieutenant  Kansom 
should  be  satisfied  from  the  unexpected  developments  of  circumstances 
he  ought  to  remain  at  the  ferry.  In  this  event  he  was  iiromjnly  to 
advise  me  by  messenger. 

I have  had  the  points  carefullj^  examined  where  it  was  alleged  stock- 
ades were  being  built  to  close  the  channel.  East  of  the  ferry  the  attemiit 


200  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

was  actually  made,  but  uotbing  was  accomplished.  I have,  with  the 
assistance  of  my  aides  and  s(;outing  parties,  examined  nearly  all  i)or- 
tions  of  the  island  to-day.  The  conduct  of  the  troops  is  exemplary, 
and  there  will  be  considerable  additions  made  to  our  stock  of  quarter- 
master’s stores. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  yours,  most  obediently, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier-  General  Commanding, 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Agency, 

Br.  Jenldns’’  Plantation^  Saint  Helena  Island^  December  10,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade  Expeditionary  Corps  : 

Sir  : I send  you  herewith  copies  of  the  letters  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W. 
Sherman  and  Chief  Quartermaster  Expeditionary  Corjis  E.  Saxton, 
captain,  U.  S.  Army,  appointing  me  agent  for  the  United  States  Gov- 
ernment to  take  possession  of  all  the  cotton,  commissary  and  quarter- 
masters’ stores,  and  all  public  property  that  I may  find  in  any  part  of 
the  State  of  South  Carolina  deserted  by  the  inhabitants” ; also  a copy  of 
my  letter  appointing  James  A.  Suydam  my  assistant,  with  full  authority 
with  myself.  I have  taken  possession  of  all  the  property  on  Saint  Hel- 
ena, Ladies,  and  Cat  Islands,  and  have  directed  Lieutenant  Hamilton, 
of  the  Fifth  Company,  and  Lieutenant  Graham,  of  the  Eighth  Company, 
Seventy-ninth  Eegiment  New  York  State  Militia,  to  collect  and  deliver 
to  me  all  the  property  on  those  islands.  Mr.  Suydam  will  establish  his 
headquarters  at  Beaufort,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  possession  of  all 
the  property,  as  directed  in  my  instructions. 

Eesiiecttully,  yours,  &c., 

WM.  H.  NOBLES, 

United  States  Agent, 

[InclosTires.] 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Boyalj  S.  C.,  December  3,  1861. 

William  H.  Nobles,  Esq.: 

Sir  : The  inhabitants  of  the  deserted  islands  having  been  warned  of 
the  destruction  of  their  property  by  the  negroes  and  invited  to  return 
and  take  charge  of  their  plantations,  with  a promise  of  ample  protec- 
tion to  all  loyal  citizens,  and  -such  invitation  and  promise  of  protection 
having  been  set  at  naught  by  tbeir  refusal  to  return  and  by  several 
instances  of  ordering  their  cotton  to  be  burned,  I deem  it  proper  to  take 
steps  for  the  preservation  of  as  much  of  this  article  as  practicable,  in 
order  that  such  disposition  may  be  made  of  it  as  the  Go^an•nment  may 
direct.  You  are  therefore  appointed  an  agent  of  the  United  States 
Government  to  collect  and  put  into  store,  at  the  most  convenient  ])oints 
occiq)ied  by  the  United  States  troops,  such  quantities  of  cotton  as  you 
may  find  in  any  part  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina  deserted  by  the 
inhabitants.  A correct  and  explanatory  statement  will  be  made  by  you 
weekly  to  the  headquarters,  showing  the  amount  of  cotton  stored,  its 
quality,  whether  baled  or  unbaled,  from  whose  plantation  obtained, 
and  all  o:her  information  which  in  your  judgment  may  be  necessary  to 
convey  a correct  idea  of  its  value  and  the  lixing  of  its  ownership,  so 
that  the  Government  will  not  be  at  a loss  to  dispose  of  the  questions 


201 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

of  its  disposition  or  of  remuneration  to  its  owners  if  such  questions 
should  arise. 

You  will  employ  negroes  in  picking,  collecting,  and  packing  the  cot- 
ton, who  on  your  vouchers,  properly  made  out  and  certihed  to,  will  be 
paid  by  the  Quartermaster’s  Department.  Your  services  will  oe  com- 
pensated by  allowing  you  6 per  cent,  on  the  market  value  of  the  cotton 
stored  as  above. 

Very  respecirfully,  &c., 

T.  W.  SHERMAK, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Office  Chief  Quartermaster  Exped’y  Corps, 

Fort  Welles,  IS.  €.,  December  0,  18G1. 

I hereby  appoint  James  Adrian  Suydam  my  assistant  in  the  execu- 
tion of  the  above  orders  from  Brigadier-General  Sherman  and  Captain 
Saxton  and  of  all  future  orders  from  their  departments  to  me  as  agent 
for  the  United  States  Government,  his  orders  and  directions  to  be 
obeyed  as  mine,  and  his  acts  as  agent  to  be  recognized  by  me. 

WM.  H.  NOBLES, 

United  States  Agent. 


Headquarters  District  of  Port  Royal, 
Beaufort,  S.  G.,  December  10,  18G1. 
William  H.  Nobles,  Esq.,  Collector  of  Cotton: 

Sir  : I have  received  your  letter  and  inclosures  of  this  date,  claiming 
that  you  are  authorized  to  take  possession  of  the  cotton  in  the  deserted 
portions  of  South  Carolina,  and  also  of  all  other  public  property.  The 
instructions  of  Brigadier-General  Sherman  clearly  give  you  authority 
to  collect,  gin,  and  pack  cotton.  I am  not  advised  of  the  extent  of  your 
authority  in  regard  to  quartermaster  and  commissary  stores.  ‘ The  letter 
of  instructions  of  Captain  Saxton  does  not  give  the  information.  I have, 
however,  to  inform  you  that  I have  taken  military  possession  of  Ladies 
Island,  and  shall  proceed  to  collect  and  take  charge  of  such  quarter- 
master and  commissarj^  stores  as  my  parties  may  take  possession  of — 
not  interfering,  however,  with  your  operations  in  collecting  cotton  on 
that  island  or  the  quartermaster  or  commissary  stores  you  have  already 
collected. 

I shall  not  permit  you  to  establish  an  agency  at  Beaufort,  or  to  inter- 
fere in  any  way  with  the  steps  already  taken  by  the  commauding  gen- 
eral to  collect  the  cotton  and  the  quartermaster  and  commissary  stores 
on  Port  Royal  island  and  its  dependencies. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  December  10,  18G1. 

General  Meigs, 

Washington,  D.  G. : 

Dear  General  : After  the  representations  of  the  medical  director, 
and  my  own  observations  as  to  the  great  number  of  deaths  here  and 
the  continued  sickness  among  the  troops,  I gave  the  quartermaster  di- 
rections to  put  up  a temporary  hospital  to  accommodate  300  men.  This 


202  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CiiAr.  XV. 


is  not  a healthy  climate ; not  near  as  healthy  as  the  Potomac.  The  actual 
temperatare  has  but  little  to  do  with  it;  it  is  the  deadly  malaria  that 
arises  from  the  swamps  and  the  very  sudden  changes  from  hot  to  frosty 
cold.  The  mortality  here  is  alarming,  considering  the  season  of  the 
year.  I have  not  directed  any  temporary  barracks,  and  of  course  they 
will  not  be  constructed  without  directions  from  Washington.  The  hos- 
pital will  not  cost  much.  It  is  to  be  single  story  and  very  temporary. 

Beaufort  will  answer  for  the  sick  we  may  have  there,  but  it  will  be 
absolutely  necessary  to  have  one  here,  especially  in  the  summer,  and 
this  point  must  be  occupied,  for  the  whole  safety  of  the  harbor  depends 
on  it  and  Bay  Point.  The  thing  was  so  absolutely  iiecessarj^,  that  I 
gave  Oaptain  Saxton  his  directions,  I presume,  before  he  wrote  to  you 
on  the  subject.  It  will  cost  but  little  more  than  an  ordinary  store-house 
of  the  same  dimensions. 

Our  labor  here  is  enormous.  Thus  far  the  negroes  have  rendered  us 
but  little  assistance.  Many  come  in  and  run  oft*.  They  have  not  yet 
been  organized  to  an  extent  we  desire.  The  large  families  they  bring 
with  them  make  a great  many  useless  mouths.  Before  long — after  they 
have  consumed  all  they  have  on  the  plantations — they  will  come  in  in 
greater  numbers,  and  no  doubt  will  give  us  many  laborers;  but  where 
we  get  one  good,  able-bodied  man,  we  have  five  to  six  women  and  chil- 
dren. They  are  a most  prolific  race. 

In  fitting  out  this  expedition  an  opportunity  for  marching  rapidly 
into  the  interior  was  not  anticipated.  The  object  was  to  seize  on  two 
imx)ortant  points  of  the  coast  and  hold  them  for  the  protection  of  our 
blockading  squadron.  Therefore  no  more  transportation  was  taken  along 
than  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  wood,  water,  and  drayage  of  quarter- 
master and  commissary  stores,  and  only  boats  enough  to  assist  in  land- 
ing. Indeed,  the  number  and  description  of  boats  I had  nothing  to  do 
with;  that  was  left  to  Captain  DuPont.  I have  always  regretted  this, 
as  we  would  have  been  far  better  off  had  we  relied  entirely  on  ourselves 
and  not  had  to  trust  to  the  i^^avy.  I am  at  times  perfectly  heljiless  with- 
out the  Navy,  and  had  I not  depended  on  them,  I have  not  a doubt  but 
we  would  have  been  able  to  land  at  the  time  of  the  fight,  and,  if  not  as- 
sisted in  reducing  the  work,  at  least  have  taken  the  whole  garrison  i^ris- 
oners. 

Captain  DuPont  always  insisted  that  he  would  be  able  to  and  would  ^ 
put  us  ashore,  but  two  things  prevented : First,  the  loss  of  all  his  ferry- 
boats; and,  second,  his  failure  to  supply  me,  according  to  promise,  with 
oarsmen  from  his  ships.  I repeatedly  asked  him,  when  in  New  York,  if 
there  would  be  any  uncertainty  in  his  fulfilling  that  i>romise,  and  if  there 
were  the  least  I desired  to  know  it  then,  in  order  to  take  measures  to 
provide  for  it  in  time.  He  repeatedly  assured  me  there  was  none,  and 
that  he  would  see  that  I was  landed.  So  you  see  that  I have  been  com- 
l)letely  at  his  mercy.  I never  wish  again,  general,  to  co-operate.  It  is  a 
thankless  task. 

As  it  turned  out,  I was  compelled  to  agree  not  to  attempt  a landing. 
Had  I known  how  things  were  to  turn  out,  I should  have  made  quite 
different  arrangements  in  many  things,  and,  among  them,  should  have 
come  down  here  equipx)ed  perfectly,  independent  of  the  Navy. 

We  have  now  a wide  field  before  us,  but  we  want  boats,  cavalry,  and 
more  force.  The  enemy’s  line  extends  from  the  Ossabaw  Inlet  through 
Savannah  and  n[)on  the  railroad  beyond  Pocotaligo,  and  we  have  to 
choose  on  which  point  of  that  extended  and  well-garrisoned  line  to  make 
amain  attack,  which  i^oint  must  depend  on  the  amount  and  description 
of  means  at  our  disposal. 


Chap.  XV.l 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


‘203 


We  liave  not  yet  gone  down  to  F . The  Navy  liad  to  send  for  more 

ammunition,  and  we  have  been  constantly  employed  on  our  depot  and 
base.  Events  multiply,  and  it  is  impossible  to  say  exactly  what  we  shall 
do  or  how  we  shall  do  it.  Had  I the  means,  I would  have  been  on  the 
Charleston  and  ►Savannah  Kailroad  long  ere  this.  Movements  on  water, 
through  winding  and  shallow  creeks,  with  men  unaccustomed  to  boats, 
is  slow",  tedious,  and  ticklish,  and  1 have  got  to  see  my  way  pretty  clear 
now  before  attempting  it. 

It  is  hoped  that  a plenty  of  boats  will  be  soon  sent  here. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Eoyal,  C.,  Deceynher  14,  1861. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C.: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  to  the  consideration 
of  the  General-in-Chief  and  to  the  War  Department: 

The  object  of  this  expedition  was  to  seize  upon  at  least  two  important 
points  of  our  Southern  coast,  and  hold  the  same  for  the  protection  of 
our  blockading  squadron  when  compelled  to  seek  a harbor,  as  well  as 
to  create  something  of  a diversion  in  favor  of  our  armies  in  the  held. 
After  the  taldug  of  Port  Royal  it  was  intended  to  proceed  to  Fernan- 
dina  and  get  possession  of  that  harbor,  but  in  consequence  of  circum- 
stances unnecessary  here  to  particularly  relate  that  part  of  the  expedi- 
tion has  not  yet  been  accomplished,  and,  although  I have  been  for  some 
time  prepared  for  it,  a still  further  delay  arises  from  the  fact  that  the 
gunboats  of  the  Navy  have  hrst  to  be  occupied  in  the  work  of  disposing 
of  the  stone  fleet  just  arrived  from  the  North;  but  our  operations  result- 
ing from  the  capture  of  Port  Royal  have  become  so  developed  as  to  lead 
to  the  occupation  of  Saint  Helena  Sound,  the  Tybee,  and,  in  short,  to 
the  full  possession  of  the  coast  from  South  Edisto  to  Tybee,  and  to 
which  may  be  added  Warsaw  and  Ossabaw  Sounds,  which,  if  not  yet 
occupied  by  us,  have  been  deserted  by  the  enemy. 

In  the  mean  time  there  is  a formidable  strategic  line  formed  and  form- 
ing in  our  front,  its  right  resting  on  Green  Island,  in  Vernon  River, 
passing  by  Thunderbolt,  or  Augustine  Creek,  at  both  of  which  places 
there  are  earthworks  mounted  with  heavy  guns,  through  Fort  Jackson, 
Savannah,  and  thence  aloug  the  line  of  the  Savannah  and  Charleston 
Railroad  indefinitely  towards  Charleston,  this  line  having  its  principal 
bodies  of  troops  between  Vernon  River  and  Savannah,  at  Savannah, 
Hardeeville,  Grahamville,  Coosawhatchie,  Pocotaligo,  Saltketcher,  &c., 
and  its  most  advanced  posts  at  Pulaski,  New  River  Bridge,  Blufl’ton, 
Port  Royal  Ferry,  &c.  The  object  of  this  line  appears  to  be  to  resist 
an  invasion  of  the  main-land,  and  not  to  attack  the  occupied  coast, 
which,  from  all  that  can  be  learned,  the  enemy  have  concluded  they 
cannot  maintain,  and  given  up  all  idea  of  doing  so.  It  may  be  hence 
inferred  that  the  main  object  of  the  expedition  has  been  already  accom- 
plished, and  that  the  point  of  Fernandina  is  now  of  so  secondary  a 
character  as  to  render  it  uot  only  almost  insignificant,  but  the  operation 
of  taking  it  actually  prejudicial  to  the  great  work  which  the  develop- 
ment of  circumstances  appears  to  have  set  before  us. 

I am  aw"are  of  the  good  effect  that  the  capture  of  this  place  would 


204  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

have  oil  the  public  mind,  but  the  military  is  the  only  point  of  view  tlnit 
should  be  taken  of  it.  It  is  no  point  from  which  to  oi)erate,  and  will 
probably  fall  of  itself  the  moment  Savannah  is  occupied  by  our  forces, 
and  therefore  the  resources  of  the  Navy  and  Army  here  should  be  hus- 
banded lor  a more  important  operation,  viz,  the  attack  of  the  enemy’s 
line  the  moment  preparations  can  be  made. 

The  precise  point  of  the  hostile  line  to  be  struck  and  mode  of  attack 
cannot  now  be  specifically  set  out  without  first  knowing  the  means  to 
be  placed  in  our  hands,  and  must  therefore  be  left  to  time  and  circum- 
stances; but  in  my  judgment,  with  the  necessary  means.  Savannah 
should  be  the  point,  and  to  be  accomplished  somewhat  in  this  way: 
Pulaski  to  be  vigorously  shelled,  as  already  recommended  in  a former 
communication ; at  the  same  time  the  gunboats  of  the  naval  squadron 
to  shell  out  the  garrisons  of  the  forts  on  Vernon  and  Augustine  Elvers, 
to  be  closely  followed  up  by  the  landing  of  the  land  forces  in  the  vicinity 
of  Montgomery  and  Beaulieu,  thus  taking  Augustine  Eiver,  Port  Jack- 
son,  and  Savannah  in  reverse ; this  operation  to  be  connected  at  the 
same  time  with  one  from  this  point  on  Bluffton,  New  Eiver  Bridge,  and 
Hardeeville,  to  get  effectual  possession  of  the  railroad  crossing  the  Sa- 
vannah Eiver,  and  prevent  re-enforcements  arriving  at  Savannah  from 
the  center  and  left  of  their  line.  A small  head  of  column  shown  at  Port 
Eoyal  Ferry  would  have  its  effect  in  aiding  this  demonstration.  I am 
firmly  convinced  that  an  operation  of  this  sort  would  not  only  give  us 
Savannah,  but,  if  successful  and  strong  enough  to  follow  up  the  success, 
would  shake  the  so-called  Southern  Confederacy  to  its  very  foundation. 

Not  knowing  precisely  what  forces  the  enemy  may  have  available,  it 
is  difficult  to  estimate  for  the  men  and  means  necessary  to  the  success 
of  this  operation.  But  I must  modify  the  terms  of  my  letter  of  the  27th 
November,  which  did  not  look  to  this  precise  operation,  and  recommend 
that  the  one  ‘‘  regiment  of  cavalry,  one  regiment  of  regular  artillery,  ten 
regiments  of  infantry,  and  one  pontoon  bridge”  be  extended  to  one  reg- 
iment of  cavalry,  one  regiment  of  regular  artillery,  and  twenty  regiments 
of  infantry,  and  as  many  pontoon  bridges  as  can  be  sent  here.”  An  ad- 
dition to  our  armament  wdl  also  be  required  to  enable  us  to  carry  on  a 
siege,  if  necessary,  for  which  the  ordnance  officer  will  make  requisition. 
I do  not  say  but  the  thing  can  be  done  with  less  troops,  but  it  would 
be  better  to  have  too  many  than  too  few,  particularly  as  any  success 
shouhl  be  followed  up  rapidly  and  with  sufficient  force.  I must,  at  the 
risk  of  being  considered  importunate,  again  repeat  the  necessity  of  hav- 
iug  some  more  experienced  staff  officers,  particularly  a quartermaster  of 
rank  and  great  experience,  artillery  officers,  and,  if  they  cannot  be  had, 
ordnance  officers. 

All  our  work,  which  is  immense,  is  done  by  volunteer  soldiers,  and 
it  all  drags  for  the  want  of  a sufficient  number  of  able  directors.  The 
negro  labor  expected  to  be  obtained  here  is  so  far  almost  a failure. 
They  are  disinclined  to  labor,  and  will  evidently  not  work  to  our  satis- 
faction without  those  aids  to  which  they  have  ever  been  accustomed, 
viz,  the  driver  and  the  lash.  A sudden  change  of  condition  from  serv- 
itude to  apparent  freedom  is  more  than  their  intellects  can  stand,  and 
this  circumstance  alone  renders  it  a very  serious  question  what  is  to  be 
done  with  the  negroes  who  will  hereafter  be  found  on  conquered  soil. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION.  205 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Fort  Royal,  S.  (7.,  December  15,  18G1. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  8.  Army,  Washington,  D.  G.: 

Sir:  For  the  information  of  the  proper  authoiities,  and  for  fear  lest 
the  Government  may  he  disappointed  in  the  amount  of  labor  to  be 
gathered  here  from  the  contrabands,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that 
from  the  hordes  of  negroes  left  on  the  plantations  but  about  320  have 
thus  far  come  in  and  offered  their  services.  Of  these  the  quartermas- 
ter has  but  about  60  able-bodied  male  hands,  the  rest  being  decrepit, 
and  women  and  children.  Several  of  the  320  have  run  off’.  Every  in- 
ducement has  been  held  out  to  them  to  come  in  and  labor  for  wages, 
and  money  distributed  among  those  who  have  labored.  The  reasons 
for  this  apparent  failure  thus  far  appear  to  be  these : 

1st.  They  are  naturally  slothful  and  indolent,  and  have  always  been 
accustomed  to  the  lashj  an  aid  we  do  not  make  use  of. 

2d.  They  appear  to  be  so  overjoyed  with  the  change  of  their  condi- 
tion that  their  minds  are  unsettled  to  any  i)lan. 

3d.  Their  present  ease  and  comfort  on  the  plantations,  as  long  as  their 
provisions  will  last,  will  induce  most  of  them  to  remain  there  until  com- 
pelled to  seek  our  lines  for  subsistence.  ■ 

Although  comparatively  few  have  thus  far  come  in,  it  is  therefore 
probable  that  in  time  many  will,  and  it  they  are  to  be  received  and 
taken  care  of,  some  provision  should  be  made  to  cover  them.  They  are 
a prolific  race,  and  it  will  be  found  that  for  every  able-bodied  male 
there  will  be  five  to  six  females,  children,  and  decrepit.  It  is  really  a 
question  for  the  Government  to  decide  what  is  to  be  done  with  the  con- 
trabands. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN^, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

% 

P.  S. — Besides  those  who  have  come  in  there  are  many  still  on  the 
plantations  employed  in  gathering  cotton. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Beaufort,  8.  C.,  December  16,  1861. 

Captain  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  E.  G.,  Port  Royal,  8.  G. : 

Sir  : I inclose,  for  the  information  of  the  brigadier-general  command- 
ing, reports  received  from  Col.  B.  C.  Christ  last  evening  and  early  this 
morning,  in  regard  to  affairs  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  and  also  a report  from 
Mr.  Eockwell,*  received  early  this  morning. 

From  these  reports  it  will  appear  that  the  channel  of  the  river  is  not 
obstructed  sufficiently  to  prevent  the  passage  of  the  lighter-draught  gun- 
boats, and  that  the  enemy  has  no  guns  in  position.  I have  endeavored 
to  make  all  portions  of  the  command  vigilant  and  attentive,  especially 
at  the  ferry,  and  am  having  nightly  careful  inspections  of  the  pickets 
and  camps  in  that  quarter. 

The  gunboat  which  went  up  Port  Eoyal  Eiver  day  before  yesterday 
did  not  proceed  to  the  ferry,  but  made  the  main -land  some  three  and  one- 
half  miles  to  the  right  of  or  below  the  ferry,  and  yesterday  morning  was 
anchored  off  of  Lane’s  Point,  Ladies  Island.  At  8 o’clock  last  evening 


Not  found. 


206  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

I sent  a dispatch  to  the  captain  of  the  gunboat,  urging  him  to  proceed 
to  the  ferry,  but  on  its  arrival,  about  11  o’clock,  at  the  point,  the  gun- 
boat had  left  and  gone  in  the  direction  of  Saint  Helena  Sound.  Such 
is  the  report  of  Lieutenant  Lyons,  Avho  bore  my  dispatch. 

I will  again  urge  with  all  possible  earnestness  that  a gunboat  be  sent 
without  delay  up  Broad  Eiver  and  through  the  Port  Eoyal  passage,  and 
if  this  meets  your  approval,  I trust  you  may  succeed  in  getting  Commo- 
dore DuPont  to  dispatch  one  to-day.  I shall  telegraph  to  this  effect 
this  morning. 

It  is  my  purpose  to  go  to  the  ferry  in  the  course  of  an  hour  or  two, 
and  may  remain  there  until  to-morrow  evening;  but  I shall  make 
arrangements  to  have  your  dispatches  forwarded  without  delay. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  >our  most  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  1.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  l.J 

Headquarters  Port  Eoyal  Perry, 

December  15,  1861. 

General  Isaac  I.  Stevens, 

Commanding  Port  Royal  District: 

Sir  : I have  to  report  that  no  demonstration  of  a hostile  character  has 
occurred  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  since  my  last  dispatch,  save  a report 
(verbally)  from  Captain  Elliott,  Company  I,  Seventy-ninth  New  York 
Eegiment,  that  400  men  appeared  last  evening  on  the  shore  occupied 
by  the  enemy  about  1 mile  above  Seabrook.  Captain  Elliott  reports, 
through  Major  Morrison,  that  he  mounted  a log  on  two  cart-wheels  and 
ran  it  on  the  beach,  which  had  the  effect  to  scatter  the  enemy  in  all 
directions. 

Lieutenant  Colonel  Brenholts,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Kellogg, 
Company  K,  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Eegiment,  with  four  men,  left  Port 
Eoyal  Ferry  yesterday  morning  at  9 o’clock  and  proceeded  down  the 
river  (on  our  right)  2^  miles,  taking  soundings  of  the  channel  IJ  miles 
below  the  ferry  (on  right).  Stockades  were  driven  and  timber  sunk,  so 
as  to  leave  but  7 feet  of  water  in  the  channel  at  low  tide,  but  the  obstruc- 
tion does  not  extend  half  way  across  the  river.  Our  side  of  the  channel 
is  clear  (the  enemy  from  some  cause  or  other  having  abandoned  the 
work  before  finishing  it).  I wish  it  distinctly  understood  that  I am 
correct  in  this,  that  not  one-half  the  channel  is  obstructed ; that  the 
obstructions  are  all  on  the  enemy’s  side,  and,  if  necessary,  could  be  easily 
removed;  further,  that  Lieutenant  Colonel  Brenholts  reports  outside  ot 
the  obstructions  a channel  112  feet  wide,  with  12  feet  of  water  at  low  tide 
and  10  feet  of  water  at  high  tide.  This  is  reliable,  and,  so  far  as  oar 
observations  extend,  no  other  obstructions  exist  in  the  channels. 

Our  pickets  are  so  posted  as  to  command  the  shore  from  Seabrook  to 
a x)oint  opposite  a brick-yard  2J  or  3 miles  below  the  ferry  (our  right), 
said  brick  yard  being  separated  from  that  portion  of  the  island  we  occupy 
by  a stream,  supposed  to  be  the  outlet  of  the  stream  crossed  by  a bridge 
4 miles  Irom  Beaufort.  Discovered  that  the  i)oint  on  which  the  brick- 
yard is  located  is  occupied  by  a detachment  from  the  Eighth  Michigan 
Eegiment,  under  Cax)tain  Elder.  Pickets  have  been  j^osted  from  the 
point  last  indicated  to  Seabrook,  and  every  precaution  taken  to  guard 
against  surprise.  I would  add  that  on  the  opposite  shore,  2 miles 
below  the  ferry  (our  right),  what  was  supposed  at  first  to  be  a picket 
station  of  the  enemy  on  a more  careful  examination  proves  to  be  an 


CnAP.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC  — UNION.  207 

entire  regiment,  ^^’othing  further  or  more  dehnite  than  that  contained 
in  my  previous  dispatch  has  been  ascertained  relating  to  the  guns  sup- 
posed to  be  mounted  opposite  to  and  commanding  the  causeway. 

The  outer  pickets  (on  our  right)  report  that  this  morning  at  8 o’clock 
a white  steamer  landed  on  the  enemy’s  shore  about  3J  or  4 miles  below 
the  ferry  (our  right),  and  remained  there  about  one  hour;  what  it  un- 
loaded, if  anything,  or  what  it  took  on  board,  they  cannot  say. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

B.  C.  CUEIST, 

Col.  Fiftieth  Regt.  Pa.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Port  Royal  Ferry, 

[Iiiclos’.irc  Xo.  2.] 

Headquarters  Port  Koyal  Perry, 

Deeemher  15,  1861 — 1)  o’clock. 

General  Isaac  I.  Stevens, 

Commanding  Port  Royal  District : 

Sir:  Your  dispatch  just  received.  Have  no  knowledge  of  pile  driv- 
ing to  the  left  (or  right)  of  the  ferry.  The  party  who  gave  you  the  in- 
formation must  have  mistaken  the  chopping  of  wood  for  the  driving  ot 
piles.  I am  certain  that  it  is  not  so.  They  cannot  (i.  c.,  the  enemy)  do 
anything,  from  Seabrook  down  to  2J  miles  on  the  right  of  the  ferry,  but 
our  pickets  must  see  them,  either  day  or  night.  No  pickets  asleep  on 
post  last  night  have  been  reported  to  me.  I will  inquire  into  the  matter, 
and  if  any  pickets  have  been  guilty  of  neglect  of  duty  they  will  be 
promptly  arrested  and  their  names  reported  to  headquarters  as  soon  as 
liracticable. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

B.  C.  CHRIST, 

Col.  Fiftieth  Regt.  Pa.  Yols.^  Co7ndg.  Port  Royal  Ferry. 


Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  Deeemher  19,  1861. 

General  McClellan, 

Commanding  TJ.  S.  Army^  W ashington,  D.  C. : 

Dear  General  : I have  received  your  kind  letter  of  the  5th, and 
hasten  to  say  that  I think  that  the  trip  to  Fernandiua  is  lost  for  the 
present.  I have  been  in  readiness  for  some  time,  keeping  all  the  vessels 
destined  thither  waiting  for  the  Navy  to  be  ready,  but  have  found  that 
the  latter  has  a new  job  on  its  hands,  viz,  the  convoying  and  sinking 
the  vessels  of  the  stone  fleet ; also,  for  reasons  already  given  in  an  offi- 
cial letter,  I believe  that  the  public  interests  will  be  much  advanced  by 
deferring  it  now — it  has  been  postponed  so  long.  It  was  unfortunate 
that  the  naval  fleet  had  to  send  for  more  ammunition  after  the  affair 
of  Port  Royal,  as  Fernandina  would  have  been  taken  then  without 
much  trouble,  and  no  doubt  it  could  be  easily  taken  now ; but  it  has 
been  re-enforced,  and  fresh  artillery  sent  there.  It  has  a garrison  of 
about  1,300  men  and  four  forts,  one  of  which  is  on  Cumberland  Island. 
Fort  Clinch,  though  never  yet  finished,  has  a partial  armament.  We 
have  understood  that  Brunswick  has  quite  a large  garrison,  but  cannot 
find  out  any  particulars. 

Commodore  DuPont  thinks  he  will  be  ready  for  Fernandina  in  a week 
or  two,  but  I am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  wants  of  Tybee  and  Saint 
Helena  will  divide  him  too  much  until  those  places  are  made  perfectl3^ 
secure.  Already'  the  Georgians  are  making  serious  threats  on  Tybee, 


Not  found. 


208  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

and  I bad  to  send  General  Wright  down  there  yesterday  with  another 
regiment,  and  DuPont  has  sent  three  of  his  gunboats,  in  addition  to 
two  vessels  he  had  there.  Tatnall  is  busy  reconnoitering  with  his  fleet, 
and  Pulaski  has  been  filled  with  men  during  the  past  few  days.  They 
may  probably  make  a desperate  effort  to  retake  it  before  our  guns  are 
up,  but  every  care  will  be  taken  that  they  do  not. 

I have  opened  the  passage  around  Port  Eoyal  Island,  which  the  enemy 
attempted  to  close,  but  their  batteries  fired  into  our  boat  and  hit  her 
once,  doing  no  damage. 

As  it  will  be  some  time  before  x^roper  preparations  can  be  made  for 
Savannah,  I am  inclined  towards  seizing  upon  the  south  end  of  the 
Charleston  and  Savannah  Eailroad  as  soon  as  I can  get  the  cavalry. 
To  do  this  I must  be  sure  of  success,  for  it  is  quite  a vital  point  in  our 
success  on  Savannah.  I think  it  can  be  done  at  a dash,  x)roperly  exe- 
cuted, but  then  the  security  of  our  communications  will  have  to  be 
looked  to  against  forays  from  Coosawhatchie,  a point  on  the  railroad 
strongly  fortified.  I have  tried  to  get  this  railroad  destroyed,  but  thus 
far  without  success,  though  our  x^arty  has  not  returned. 

. As  to  the  point  of  Charleston,  of  which  you  desire  me  to  speak,  I 
will  have  the  pleasure  of  writing  you  in  a day  or  two.  If  we  are  to 
ox)erate  inward,  I think  another  light  battery  here  very  necessary,  as 
well  as  a regiment  of  cavalry  and  infantry,  as  stated  in  my  official 
communication. 

Very  truly  and  respectfully, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAK 


Port  Welles,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C., 

December  20,  1861. 

General  M.  0.  Meigs: 

My  Dear  General  : I have  received  your  letter  informing  me  that 
all  my  requisitions  on  Colonel  Tompkins  were  to  be  filled.  I shall  use 
every  endeavor  to  carry  out  your  views  with  regard  to  economy. 

I have  thus  far  and  shall  continue  to  erect  buildings  of  most  tempo- 
rary character,  consistent  with  utility. 

Immediately  upon  the  reception  of  your  first,  I took  stexis  to  collect 
the  cotton,  and  was  so  far  successful  as  to  send  about  the  value  of  $30,000 
of  it  by  the  steamship  Atlantic,  consigned  to  Colonel  Tomxjkins. 

By  the  Vanderbilt,  which  has  just  arrived,  came  the  agent  of  the 
Treasury  Department,  and  I have  turned  the  whole  business  over  to 
him.  He  finds  the  parties  all  organized,  in  successful  oxieration,  so  that 
he  will  have  little  to  do  but  take  the  credit  of  collecting  a couple  mill- 
ions dollars’  worth  of  cotton. 

I very  much  wish,  general,  that  you  would  visit  Port  Eoyal.  It  is  bat 
seventy  hours’  sail  from  New  York  City,  and  your  stay  here  could  be 
governed  entirely  by  the  time  at  your  disposal.  I think  you  would  be 
able  to  get  a better  idea  ofiits  wants  and  of  our  successes  already 
achieved  or  in  x)rosx)ect  than  any  I could  give  by  letter.  The  steam- 
ship Atlantic  will  leave  New  York  in  a few  days  after  this  reaches  you 
for  this  xilace.  I am  very  sure  that  your  visit  would  x>rove  xfieasant  to 
yourself  and  advantageous  to  the  service.  I have  endeavored  to  carry 
out  your  suggestions  with  regard  to  burning  the  bridges,  with  what 
success  the  future  may  disclose.  Some  of  my  contrabands  inform  me 
that  they  have  been  expecting  that  Charleston  would  be  burned,  and 
they  think  the  negroes  did  it. 

General  Sherman  has  strengthened  the  occupation  of  Tybee  Island 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC UNION.  209 

by  an  additional  regiment,  and  guns  are  being  put  in  i)Osition  bearing 
on  Fort  Pulaski ; the  garrison  in  that  place  is  about  2,000. 

I think  before  long  we  shall  have  accounts  of  the  burning  of  Savannah. 
I do  not  think,  however,  that  we  can  advance  upon  either  it  or  Charles- 
ton without  re- enforcements. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  general,  yours,  sincerely, 

E.  SAXTON. 


Port  Eoyal,  S.  C.,  December  21,  1861. 

Hon.  Simon  Cameron, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  You  will  pardon  me  for  writing  to  you  in  this  direct  manner, 
but  the  newspapers  of  the  country  appear  in  some  degree  dissatisfied 
tliat  we  have  not  moved  ahead,  and  it  may  be  that  the  Government 
shares  in  this  feeling. 

I have  for  a long  time  been  ready  to  move  to  Fernandina,  but  the 
Navy  is  not,  even  now;  after  the  commodore  had  waited  for  his  ammu- 
nition from  the  North  a new  job  fell  upon  his  hands : the  convoying  and 
sinking  the  stone  fleets.  And  it  is  now  so  uncertain  when  the  Nav^^ 
will  be  ready,  that  my  attention  has  been  turned  off  from  that  expe- 
dition to  objects  which  the  development  of  circumstances  is  bringing 
about,  and  have  kept  the  Department  duly  advised  of  my  acts  and  my 
views. 

The  operations  on  the  main  and  towards  Savannah  were  not  antici- 
pated in  preparing  the  expedition.  We  have  no  cavalry  yet,  and  are 
not  sufficiently  supplied  with  field  artillery.  We  came  prepared  to  take 
possession  of  certain  harbors  and  fortify  them ; that  is  all.  All  the 
boats  furnished  were  prepared  by  Commodore  DuPont,  only  sufficient, 
or  what  were  thought  to  be,  for  landing  xiurposes.  It  must  therefore  be 
easily  seen  that  any  move  of  our  troops  into  the  interior  of  South  Caro- 
lina, under  the  circumstances,  was  a sheer  impossibility.  I could  long 
ago  have  landed  and  established  part  of  my  force  on  the  main,  but  I 
have  particularly  avoided  doiug  anything  of  the  kind  until  I can  ascer- 
tain what  means  are  to  be  furnished  me  tor  moving  onwards.  There 
are  several  points  to  be  chosen,  and  it  would  not  answer  to  reveal  that 
point  to  the  enemy  before  I am  ready  to  immediately  follow  up  the 
movement.  No  one  is  more  anxious  than  myself  to  push  on  and  crush 
out  this  rebellion,  but  there  is  some  judgment  and  proper  prudence  to 
be  exercised  in  this  matter.  I do  not  desire  to  initiate  a failure. 

Our  base  is  now  well,  very  well,  established,  and  am  ready  to  move  as 
soon  as  I can  get  some  cavalry  and  proper  re  enforcements  to  insure  and 
follow  up  success. 

The  point  of  Savannah  is  now  the  point,  but,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
public  interest,  my  own  professional  reputation  would  not  permit  me  to 
make  dashes  without  object  and  without  lasting  result.  The  work  be- 
fore us  is  a great  one.  It  requires  thought,  system,  and  prudence. 

I have  presumed  to  write  you  thus,  as  I am  pained  to  believe  that 
there  is  a growing  distrust  among  a portion  of  the  people  as  to  the 
activity  and  usefulness  of  this  portion  of  the  Army. 

The  amount  of  labor  and  activity  here  I would  gladly  submit  to  the 
judgment  of  the  most  enlightened  men.  We  have  done  all  that  men 
can  properly  do  under  the  circumstances. 

With  the  highest  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding, 

14  R R — VOL  VI 


210  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Headquartees  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Fort  Eoyalj  S.  0.,  December  22,  1861. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C,: 

Sir:  I have  just  been  informed  by  Commodore  DuPont  that  a recon- 
naissance, nuder  Commander  Drayton,  with  the  gunboats  Pawnee  and 
Seneca,  has  discovered  that  the  rebel  forts  at  both  South  and  North 
Edisto  are  abandoned  and  guns  withdrawn.  He  also  states  that  a camp 
of  500  men,  in  the  vicinity  of  North  Edisto,  left  with  their  arms  on  the 
approach  of  the  gunboats,  leaving  tents,  provisions,  and  camp  equipage 
in  his  possession. 

I think  it  would  be  well  to  occupy  Edisto  Island,  and  would  do  so 
with  part  of  my  own  forces  were  it  not  necessary  to  remain  here  as 
much  concentrated  as  possible,  to  be  ready  for  movements  already  con- 
templated. Troops  pushed  up  towards  Stono  Inlet  at  this  time  would 
l)rodiice  a good  effect  at  Charleston. 

From  all  the  information  I can  gather  the  South  Carolinians  are 
strongly  fortifying  Charleston  Neck  and  James  Island,  on  the  Stono 
Iliver,  and  are  removing  some  of  the  guns  from  Fort  Sumter  and  the 
islands  for  that  object,  evidently  suiiposing  that  Charleston  is  to  be 
attacked  by  land. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding, 


Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  December  23,  1861. 
General  George  B.  McClellan,  IT.  S.  A. : 

Dear  General  : I have  not  yet  been  able  to  see  Commodore  Du- 
Pont, but  have  thought  somewhat  of  the  Charleston  problem,  which  is 
rather  difficult  to  solve,  and  will  demand  much  thought;  but  the  prem- 
ises on  which  much  of  the  data  must  be  based  are  that  the  South 
Carolinians  have  long  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Charleston  is  to  be 
attacked  by  land.  Some  time  ago  they  removed  several  of  the  barbette 
guns  from  Sumter  and  guns  from  the  island  batteries  to  idace  on  the 
Neck.  They  have  abandoned  Edisto  Island  entirely  and  removed  the 
guns  to  some  works  they  have  thrown  up  on  the  Stono — I believe  three 
in  number,  including  the  one  at  the  mouth.  Several  vessels  have  been 
sunk  in  this  river.  They  are  making,  therefore,  a desperate  effort  to 
l)revent  a landing  on  James  Island.  What  they  have  done  on  the 
north  side  of  Charleston  I have  not  learned.  Without  looking  at  the 
thing  satisfactorily,  yet  I am  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  easiest 
way  to  take  or  destroy  the  city  is  by  the  route  of  Sullivan’s  and  Morris 
Islands,  erecting  batteries  there,  carrying  Moultrie,  seizing  on  Point 
Pleasant  (making  a demonstration  by  Bull’s  Bay,  if  necessary),  and 
reducing  Sumter,  then  bringmg  forward  the  Navy  and  shelling  the  city, 
assisted  by  mortar  batteries  on  land,  if  necessary;  but  the  objection 
will  now  arise  to  this  that  the  channel  has  been  stopped  up  by  a stone 
fleet.  If  so  stopped,  of  course  this  mode  would  not  be  so  convenient, 
though  it  will  be  very  possible  to  shell  Charleston  from  Sumter  and 
Point  Pleasant  and  other  points  that  will  readily  be  seized  upon  when 
Sumter  has  fallen.  I have  heard  it  said,  however,  by  officers  of  the 
Navy  that,  if  found  necessary  for  the  gunboats  to  enter  Charleston 
Harbor,  it  can  yet  be  done.  As  soon  as  I can  get  Captain  DuPont’s 
views  I will  write  again. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  ^ 211 

I believe  that  the  South  Carolinians  are  under  the  conviction  that 
we  are  about  to  strike  their  center  by  Port  Royal  Ferry.  We  want  to 
keep  up  the  delusion,  and  if  I only  had  some  cavalry  would  feel  justified 
in  moving  the  bulk  of  our  force  to  the  southern  end  of  the  railroads 
^ and  shutting  off  South  Carolinia  from  Savannah,  and  preparing  the  way 
' to  effectually  take  the  city  by  the  southern  route.  I have  written  also 
for  another  battery  of  light  artillery. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  December  26,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding^  Port  Boyal,  S.  C. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  21st  is  received.  You  are  correct  in 
your  belief  “that  there  is  a growing  distrust  among  a portion  of  the 
people  as  to  the  activity  and  usefulness  of  this  (your)  ])ortion  of  the 
Army.”  I do  not  share  in  that  distrust,  for  my  confidence  in  your 
ability  is  very  great.  I must  confess,  however,  that  I am  constrained 
to  believe  that  all  the  operations  of  our  Army  have  been  too  much 
delayed,  and  that  there  has  been  too  great  a desire  to  avoid  responsi- 
bility rather  than  force  the  enemy  into  early  action.  The  fact  seems 
to  be  overlooked  that  while  we  are  i)reparing  our  enemy  is  also  engaged 
in  preparation,  and  that,  being  in  his  own  country,  he  can  do  so  much 
more  rapidly  than  ourselves.  It  will  give  me  much  pleasure  to  hear 
from  you  frequently.  I shall  be  especially  glad  at  this  time  to  know 
the  actual  force  under  your  command,  the  number  of  troops  you  need, 
and  the  kind  of  which  you  are  most  in  want.  You  refer  in  your  letter 
to  a want  of  cavalry.  This  is  the  first  intimation  I have  had  that  any 
were  needed  by  you.  Let  me  know  the  number  required  and  they 
shall  be  sent  at  once,  as  well  as  any  other  force  that  you  may  deem 
necessary. 

At  this  distance  from  the  field  of  your  operations  this  Department 
will  not  attempt  to  give  you  specific  instructions.  You  will  have  to  rely 
upon  your  own  judgment,  in  which  I have  every  confidence ; but  let  me 
add  that  I trust  you  will  soon  be  able  to  accomplish  something.  Winter 
is  now  half  over;  spring  is  coming,  and  our  forces  must  soon  be  useless 
in  a region  so  far  south. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

SIMOiST  CAMERON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  December  26,  1861. 
General  McClellan,  U.  S.  A., 

Washington,  D.  C.  : 

General  : I have  been  unable  to  get  Commodore  DuPont  to  in- 
vestigate with  me  the  problem  of  Charleston,  and,  as  time  is  important,  I 
have  conferred  with  Captain  Gillmore  on  the  subject  confidentially,  and 
after  the  most  serious  •deliberation  of  his  views  and  my  own  have  come 
to  the  conclusion  that  but  two  modes  suggest  themselves  as  practical 
operations : 

First.  In  the  preliminary  taking  of  Sullivaffs  and  Morris  Islands  and 
the  reduction  of  Sumter  from  these  two  points.  When  Sumter  is 
reduced,  the  naval  fleet  to  pass  into  the  harbor  and  shell  the  city,  with 


212 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


assistance,  possibly,  of  the  Army,  that  will  have  obtained  possession  of 
Point  Pleasant  in  the  mean  while.  When  the  city  is  thus  reduced  the 
country  around  will  probably  become  abandoned,  and  a base  thus  formed 
for  further  offensive  operations. 

Second.  In  operating  by  Stono  Inlet  and  Stono  Eiver,  getting  pos- 
session of  James  Island,  and  shelling  the  city  from  the  northern  side  of 
the  island,  leaving  Sumter  and  Moultrie  intact,  to  fall  of  themselves. 

The  difficulty  in  operating  on  this  line  consists  in  the  preparations 
the  enemy  have  made  on  Stono  Eiver  for  the  defense  of  James  Island. 
So  far  as  I have  been  able  to  learn  they  consist  of  two  forts  near  or  at 
the  mouth — one  near  its  junction  with  Wappoo  Creek  and  one  at  Guerin’s 
Perry.  Several  vessels,  too,  have  been  sunk  in  the  river  at  points  not 
yet  ascertained.  Now  that  the  channels  entering  Charleston  Harbor 
have  been  blocked  up  by  stone  vessels  (except  Mafhtt’s  Channel,  the 
shoalest)  the  first  plan  seems  impracticable — at  least  until  nature  opens 
a new  channel,  which  time  alone  can  determine.  The  operation  will 
probably  have  to  be  confined  to  the  second  plan,  assisted,  probably,  by 
a demonstration  by  way  of  Bull’s  Bay ; and  if  a landing  can  be  effected 
on  fast  land  not  far  from  the  mouth  of  the  Stono,  after  the  taking  of  the 
forts  near  the  mouth,  a victorious  battle  fought  on  James  Island  will 
enable  us  to  plant  siege  batteries  in  a position  for  the  effectual  shelling 
of  Charleston.  At  a rough  estimate  I should  consider  the  means  neces- 
sary to  be  20,000  infantry,  1,000  cavalry,  two  light  batteries,  thirty  siege 
pieces,  with  a sufficiencj"  of  8 and  10  pounder  mortars.  Two  or  three 
pontoon  bridges  also  would  be  necessary  for  operating  about  the  Stono 
and  James  Island. 

If  the  railroad  to  the  north  is  to  be  so  cut  as  to  open  that  side  to 
demonstrations  from  the  north,  I would  diminish  the  assailing  force  ar. 
least  one-third. 

I inclose  the  views  of  Captain  Gillmore,  to  which  I have  agreed  in 
most  points. 

Yery  truly,  yours, 

T.  W.  SHE  EM  AN. 


P.  S. — I am  still  waiting  to  hear  from  you  in  the  way  of  re-enforcements. 
I really  do  not  consider  it  prudent  to  make  a grand  attack  on  the  main 
without  cavalry.  The  enemy  has  a plenty  of  it.  Would  prefer  vastly 
my  general  plan  carried  out,  as  expressed  in  olficial  letter  of  the  14tli 
instant,  but,  to  quiet  the  public  mind,  which  is  getting  furious,  would 
make  a dash  on  the  railroad  at  once  if  I had  cavalry  to  assist  me  and 
boats  enough. 

[Inclosure.J 

Office  of  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Hilton  Read,  S.  C.,  December  25,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  8.  C. : 

Sir:  In  response  to  your  verbal  directions  to  me  I have  the  honor 
to  submit  a plan,  or  rather  the  prominent  features  of  a plan,  for  obtain- 
ing possession  of  the  city  of  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Three  projects  for  attaining  this  object  naturally  suggest  themselves 
for  our  examination,  viz: 

1st.  By  way  of  Morris  and  Sullivan’s  Islands,  involving  the  reduction 
of  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  Johnson,  and  Castle  Pinckney,  and  the 
subsequent  bombardment  of  the  city.  The  fall  of  Forts  Sumter  and 
Moultrie  would  insure  the  success  of  this  project  if  the  Navy  could  co- 
operate with  us  afterwards. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


213 


2(1.  By  way  of  Stono  Inlet  and  Eiver  and  James  Island,  taking*  Fort 
Johnson,  ancl  leaving  Forts  Sumter,  Moultrie,  and  Castle  Pinckney  on 
the  right  for  the  time  being.  We  could  not  occui)y  Fort  Johnson,  how- 
ever, until  Sumter  had  been  reduced. 

3d.  By  way  of  Bull’s  Bay,  leaving  all  the  forts  in  the  harbor  on  the 
left,  and  taking  the  city  in  the  rear  by  Wando  and  Cooper  Rivers. 

The  Bull’s  Bay  project  presents  the  greatest  difficulties  in  the  way  of 
land  and  water  transportation;  would  i)robably  for  other  reasons  be  the 
most  difficult  of  execution,  and  I therefore  would  not  recommend  a prin- 
cipal attack  in  that  direction.  A feint  there  in  force  would  in  my  oi)in- 
ion  very  materially  second  the  initial  steps  of  anj^  offensive  operations 
on  James  Island  via  Stono  Eiver. 

As  between  the  other  two  projects  I distinctly  favor  that  by  James 
Island  for  the  following  prominent  reasons,  without  going  into  details, 
viz : 

First.  The  recent  blockade  of  the  channels  leading  into  Charleston 
Harbor  by  old  hulks.  Although  it  will  most  likely  eventuate  in  open- 
ing one  good  channel  for  vessels  of  moderate  draught,  it  will,  for  some 
time  to  come  at  least,  jiractically  exclude  any  effective  co-operation  of 
the  Eavy  in  a direct  attack  from  the  sea ; 

Second.  The  complete  success  of  the  first  project  (by  first  reducing 
the  forts)  would  neither  give  us  the  possession  of  Charleston  as  the  ob- 
jective point  nor  a good  base  of  oioerations,  unless  we  had  all  of  James 
Island  also;  while. 

Third.  If  we  have  James  Island  we  command  and  can  even  hold  the 
city,  and  of  course  secure  all  the  real  advantages  which  its  possession  is 
su])posed  to  confer,  even  if  the  forts  in  the  harbor  (that  is,  Sumter  and 
Moultrie)  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

Fourth.  The  attack  by  James  Island  would  render  it  necessary  for 
the  Eavy  first  to  shell  out  the  battery  or  batteries  on  Stono  Inlet  and 
Eiver,  so  as  to  secure  to  us  the  undisputed  command  of  those  waters  up 
to  the  first  good  landing  place  on  the  island,  probably  Turnbull’s.  Hav- 
ing a looting  on  the  island,  we  would  have  to  fight  a battle  for  its  pos- 
session. If  beaten,  a position  on  the  south  of  the  island  could  be  main- 
tained against  very  great  odds,  even  in  the  absence  of  any  active  assist- 
ance from  the  Navy. 

It  would  be  equally  necessary  to  fight  and  gain  this  battle  on  James 
Island  in  order  to  hold  and  occupy  Charleston,  even  if  we  first  cap- 
tured the  harbor  se  by  reducing  the  forts  by  a siege.  Once  in  pos- 
session of  James  Island  and  holding  the  sea,  the  forts  fall  into  our  hands 
in  due  time  as  a matter  of  course.  The  reduction  of  Fort  Sumter,  or 
even  Fort  Moultrie,  with  an  investment  by  water  only,  is  a matter  of 
no  small  moment. 

As  an  isolated  movement,  not  really  seconded  by  descent  on  other 
important  points  of  this  coast,  I would  consider  the  following  force  suf- 
ficient to  carry  this  project  by  James  Island  into  effect.  Our  knowledge 
of  the  extent  of  the  preparations  against  such  an  attempt  by  us  is  quite 
meager,  and  radical  modifications  of  this  plan  may  be  necessary  so  far 
as  it  relates  to  the  proportion  of  the  different  arms  when  a thorough 
reconnaissance  shall  have  placed  us  in  possession  of  more  facts.  I 
should  consider  the  following  as  simply  a near  approximation  to  what 
is  required,  viz : 14,000  infantry,  1,000  cavalry,  12  pieces  light  artillery 
(two  light  batteries),  20  siege  guns,  with  a large  proportion  of  20-i)ounder 
and  30-pounder  Parrott  guns. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMOEE, 

Captairij  and  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps, 


214  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Port  Koyal,  S.  C.,  December  27, 18C1. 
General  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Army: 

Dear  General:  The  Ocean  Queen  arrived  yesterday  with  a mail, 
but  brought  no  news  of  any  cavalry.  Had  I cavalry  and  another  light 
battery  this  would  be  a fine  opportunity  to  strike  for  the  railroad  and 
cut  off  Savannah,  and  thus  prepare  ourselves  for  operations  south  of  it. 

It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  do  something  here  soon,  without  waiting 

for  our  armament  for  P S . The  rebels  are  exceedingly 

active.  They  are  erecting  earthworks  around  Port  Eoyal  Island — one, 
I understand  to  day,  on  the  Ashepoo,  above  Otter  Island,  and  another 
below  Thunderbolt,  on  Skidaway  Island,  making  two  on  this  last  island. 
In  a word,  they  are  erecting  a cordon  of  earthworks,  armed  with  heavy 
cannon,  a certain  distance  from  the  coast,  just  far  enough  back  to  avoid 
fire  from  gunboats. 

I shall  try  to  organize  a dash  on  the  forts  about  Port  Eoyal  Island, 
and  also  to  the  railroad,  if  not  running  too  much  risk  without  cavalry 
and  artillery.  It  will  require  much  consideration.  It  would  not  do  to 
sustain  here  a defeat.  We  are  badly  in  want  of  boats,  too.  * 

We  are  quite  secure  here  now.  The  place  is  well  fortified,  and  can 
be  held  by  2,500  or  3,000  men  against  any  force  that  can  be  brought 
against  it.  Had  I the  means,  now  is  the  time  to  do  something.  These 
fellows  are  getting  stronger  and  stronger  every  day. 

Yery  truly,  yours, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAK 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Fort  Foyalj  8.  (7.,  January  2,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,  U.  S.  A., 

W ashington,  D.  C, : 

General  : I ordered  a dash  on  the  enemy^s  batteries  oiiposifce  Port 
Eoyal  Island,  but  no  doubt  you  will  have  perceived  the  object  of  ad- 
A’anciug  no  farther,  which  the  public  will  not.  I want  to  make  no  real 
movement  in  that  direction,  yet  I want  the  enemy  to  think  I do,  which 
he  evidently  does.  I want  to  make  a great  dash  on  the  north  side  of 
Savannah  Eiver,  thus  occupying  the  road  to  that  city,  the  whole  coun* 
try  between  Broad  Eiver  and  Savannah  Eiver,  and  the  southern  end  of 
the  railroad,  and  at  the  same  time,  if  found  practicable,  the  islands  in 
this  river  north  of  Pulaski. 

But  to  do  this  I must  have  a regiment  at  least  of  cavalry  and  at  least 
another  strong  battery  of  light  artillery.  Circumstances  are  develop- 
ing themselves  wonderfully  here.  The  time  has  come  to  act  j every 
day’s  delay  now  is  a sad  loss. 

Let  me  take  i)ossession  of  that  country  now,  and  the  siege  of  the 
south  of  Savannah  will  be  comparatively  light  and  easy.  I think  Pu- 
laski need  not  be  shelled.  I can  cut  it  off,  I think. 

Important  information  has  been  obtained  with  regard  to  the  topog- 
raphy of  the  country  about  Savannah  Eiver  which  we  never  knew 
before.  I hope  to  lay  the  whole  subject  before  you  in  an  official  and 
topographical  form  as  soon  as  it  can  be  prepared.  But  we  are  so  hard 
pushed  for  i)roper  engineers  that  they  have  no  time  for  office  work. 

I think  a terrible  blow  struck  here  will  aid  your  important  work  most 
materially,  but  we  must  have  cavalry  and  light  artillery.  You,  general, 
are  to  be  the  savior  of  this  country,  if  it  is  saved.  Let  me  aid  you  in 


Chap.  XV.] 


COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


215 


the  work.  But  I must  act  militarily,  and  not  to  please  the  superficial 
and  nonsensical  views  of  the  public  press,  by  which  I have  been  soundly 
berated  for  not  playing  the  militiaman  and  egotistical  soldier. 

I am!  general,  yours,  truly, 

T.  W.  SUEEMAK 


Office  Chief  Topographical  Engineer  E.  C., 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  January  2,  18G2. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Fifteenth  Infantry,  A.  A.A,G.  Hdqrs.  E.  C.,  Hilton  Head,  S.  G. : 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  the  verbal  instructions  of  the  general  com- 
manding I have  made  an  examination  of  the  land  and  water  between 
the  Cooper  and  Savannah  Eivers,  and  have  to  report  as  follows : 

The  communications  between  Cooper  and  New  Eivers  by  the  channel 
around  the  north  side  of  Long  Pine  Island  are  practicable  and  compar- 
atively easy  at  all  times  for  vessels  of  10  or  12  feet  draught.  Soundings 
to  a distance  of  2 miles  beyond  Box^s  plantation  were  made,  and  show 
^lOwhere  less  than  18  feet  water.  From  this  fact  and  those  referred  to 
in  my  former  report  (evidence  of  the  negroes,  tides,  &c.)  there  is  no 
doubt  that  boats  of  the  draught  mentioned  can  pass  up  New  Eiver 
to  or  even  beyond  Eed  Bluli*  or  Whitehead^s  Landing. 

From  Bloody  Point,  the  western  extremity  of  Daufuskie  Island, 
through  Bull  or  New  Eiver  to  Walks  Cut  and  thence  both  by  Wright 
and  Mud  Eivers  to  the  Savannah,  accurate  soundings  were  made.  They 
show  a sufficient  depth  of  water  through  the  lower  entrance  of  Wright 
Eiver  for  gunboats  of  15  feet  draught,  but  from  the  cut  to  the  Savan- 
nah by  the  Mud  Eiver  Channel  only  boats  of  6 or  7 feet  draught  can 
pass  at  full  hood  tide.  The  former  route  conducts  into  the  shij)  chan- 
nel of  the  Savannah  about  2 miles  above  Fort  Pulaski,  the  latter  about 
6.  Walks  Cut  is  straight,  about  250  yards  long,  and  has  a water-way  of 
near  100  feet.  At  the  distance  of  120  yards  from  either  end  a bark  90 
feet  long  and  24  feet  beam  has  been  sunk ; beyond  her  three  rows  of 
square  piles  have  been  hrmly  driven  into  the  bed  of  the  stream  from 
side  to  side.  Originally  the  bark  was  placed  directly  athwart  the  chan- 
nel, completely  obstructing  it,  but  she  is  at  present  lying  diagonally 
across  it,  with  a water-way  of  20  feet  on  both  sides.  An  examiuation 
revealed  the  fact  that  there  is  but  little  mud  or  ballast  in  her,  and,  in- 
stead of  being  stationary,  she  swings  and  careens  with  the  tide.  When 
first  visited  she  was  at  least  20  feet  from  the  first  line  of  piles,  careened 
into  the  direction  of  the  tide.  When  I returned  four  or  five  hours  after- 
wards she  was  in  the  same  place,  but  careened  in  the  opposite  direction. 
When  visited  the  second  time  her  stern  had  drifted  against  the  piles, 
l^artly  removing  several.  From  these  circumstances  I conclude  that 
little  difficulty  will  be  experienced  in  removing  her  entirely  from  the  cut. 

The  piles,  thirty-three  in  number,  of  squared  timber,  are  on  the  far- 
ther side  of  the  vessel,  arranged  in  three  rows,  so  as  to  completely  close 
the  channel,  but  from  the  softness  of  the  soil  into  which  they  are  driven 
they  can  be  removed  quickly  and  easily  by  attaching  an  anchor  chain 
to  each,  hitching  to  a tug-boat,  and  running  her  at  full  speed  from  it. 

All  the  islands  between  New  and  Savannah  Eivers  are  low  salt 
marshes,  subject  to  overflow  at  full  flood  tide  aided  by  strong  winds,  and 
are  impracticable  for  the  transportation  of  troops  or  stores.  Long  Isl- 
and and  all  the  other  islands  in  the  Savannah  below  Fort  Jackson  are 
of  the  same  character. 

Wright  Eiver,  although  navigable  for  some  distance,  has  no  other 


216  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

I)racticable  communication  with  the  Savannah  than  those  described 
above.  It  runs  throughout  its  entire  course  through  the  marsh  and 
finally  becomes  lost. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieutenant  Topo.  Fngrs.y  and  Chief  Top.  Engr.  E.  G. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Eoyal,  8.  (7.,  January  4,  1862. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TJ.  8.  Army.,  Washington.,  E.  C.: 

Sir:  Keconnaissances  are  being  made  on ‘both  sides  the  Savannah 
Eiver  to  ascertain  the  practicability  of  getting  gunboats  into  it  from 
either  or  both  sides  and  establishing  batteries  on  the  islands  between 
Fort  Pulaski  and  Savannah,  and  thus  cutting  oh*  Pulaski  and  reducing 
it  without  the  slow  and  expensive  mode  of  bombarding  it  from  Tybee. 
I have  already  had  the  creeks  and  inlets  on  this  side  examined,  and  the 
result  of  the  examination  is  this:  1st.  Steamers  of  light  draught  can 
get  into  the  Savannah  Eiver  from  this  side,  entering  it  by  the  south 
end  of  Jones  Island,  about  2 miles  above  Fort  Pulaski,  provided  it  may 
be  found  practicable  to  remove  the  obstruction  i>laced  across  Walks  Cut, 
which  consists  of  a brig  90  feet  in  length  sunk  across  it  and  secured 
by  three  rows  of  piles.  2d.  That  Jones  Island  and  Long  Island  are 
entirely  marsh,  and  that  it  is  hardly  practicable  to  construct  batteries 
upon  them.  It  is  believed,  however,  that  batteries  may  be  erected  on 
Elba  Island,  above  both  the  former,  though  our  party  did  not  examine 
it.  Important  information,  moreover,  has  recently  been  received  of  a 
route  possibly  practicable  for  small  gunboats  from  Warsaw  Sound  into 
the  Savannah  Eiver,  turning  the  forts  now  on  Skidaway  Island  and 
Thunderbolt.  Captain  Gillmore  leaves  to-day  to  examine  the  Wilming- 
ton Narrows  for  this  object.  I am  just  sending  off  a party  to  attempt 
removing  the  hulk  and  piles  in  Wall’s  Cut. 

I hope  to  be  soon  able  to  report  some  of  our  command  in  the  Savan- 
nah Eiver.  I should  at  once  seize  upon  all  the  country  between  here 
and  Savannah  Eiver,  including  the  south  end  of  the  railroad,  if  I had 
some  cavalry  and  more  light  artillery. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier-  General.,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Poyal,  8.  C.,  January  7,  i8G2. 

Hon.  Simon  Cameron, 

8ecretary  of  War.,  Washington,  7).  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  26 th  ultimo. 

I feel  thankful  for  the  confidence  still  reposed  in  me,  and  trust  that  I 
may  do  nothing  that  will  diminish  it. 

The  intimation  in  my  letter  of  a want  of  cavalry  was  made  with  a view 
of  bringing  your  mind  to  the  subject  in  case  my  previous  letters  to  the 
Adj  utant- General  had  not  reached  the  attention  of  the  Department.  In 


Cjur.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,,  ETC. UNION. 


217 


my  letter  of  the  15tli  of  Kovember  I mentioned  the  subject.  In  my  let- 
ter of  the  27th  November  I asked  for  not  exceeding  a regiment,”  and 
in  a letter  of  December  14  repeated  the  request. 

From  the  letters  above  referred  to  it  may  be  seen  that  if  we  attack 
Savannah  on  both  sides  a very  large  force  will  be  requisite.  I think 
the  force  should  be  sent,  so  that  we  can  not  ouly  meet  any  emergency 
and  attack  in  the  manner  that  circumstances  will  prove  to  be  the  best, 
but  so  that  we  can  have  a force  large  enough  to  follow  up  rapidly  our 
success. 

I am  trying  to  open  Wall’s  Cut,  and,  if  successful,  the  Navy,  I think, 
will  be  able  to  throw  gunboats  into  Savannah  Fiver,  and  we  to  erect 
batteries  on  some  of  its  islands,  cut  oft*  Fort  Pulaski,  shell  Fort  Jackson, 
and  afterwards  the  city,  without  the  slow  and  exi)ensive  process  of  first 
bombarding  Pulaski. 

The  north  side  of  Savannah  will  also  have  to  be  looked  to,  and  I pro- 
pose taking  i^ossession  of  tit  at  district  of  country  as  soon  as  1 can  get 
some  cavalry  and  more  light  artillery. 

But  should  we  be  not  successful  in  getting  into  Savannah  Eiver,  the 
siege  of  Savannah  will  be  imperative  in  order  to  take  it.  This  will 
require  extensive  operations  from  Ossabaw  Sound  in  addition  to  those 
north  of  Savannah  Eiver.  I have  made  all  the  necessary  estimates  for 
the  operation. 

The  actual  force  under  my  command  is  14,708,  rank  and  file,  including 
about  600  in  Saint  Helena  Sound,  3,000  on  Port  Eoj  al  Island,  200  at 
Fort  Seward,  1,400  at  Tybee,  leaving  about  9,500  on  hand  in  Hilton 
Head.  I calculate  to  have  available  for  the  field  out  of  this  force,  say, 
9,000  men.  These  troops  are  all  infantry  except  one  company  of  light 
artillery.  Before  a step  can  be  taken  towards  the  enemy’s  forces  we 
should  have  a full  regiment  of  good  cavalry  and  at  least  another  battery 
of  light  artillery. 

The  number  of  additional  troops  we  need  I would  estimate  at  10,0:  0 
infantry,  1,000  cavalry,  one  regiment  of  regular  heavy  artillery,  and 
one  or  two  light  batteries  j but,  whatever  number  of  infantry,  the  cav- 
ahy  is  indispensable. 

1 have  just  received  the  latest  news  from  Savannah,  which  confirms 
that  received  the  other  day,  that  there  are  about  20,000  men  in  and 
around  the  city,  among  which  some  two  or  three  regiments  of  cavalry 
and  four  batteries  of  light  artillery.  Besides  the  works  on  Skidaway 
Island  at  Thunderbolt  and  Green  Island,  and  the  masonry  work  of  Fort 
Jackson,  the  city  is  being  covered  with  a line  of  intrenchments. 

The  force  in  our  immediate  front  is  estimated  at  about  9,000  men, 
stationed  on  the  railroad  between  Savannah  Eiver  and  Pocotaligo, 
among  which  are  said  to  be  about  two  regiments  of  cavalry  and  two 
batteries  of  light  artillery,  besides  some  earthworks  at  various  points. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  with  the  highest  respect, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commandmg. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  A.  G.  O., 

No.  3.  j Washington j January  11,  1862. 

I.  A new  military  department,  to  be  known  as  the  Department  of 
Key  West,  is  hereby  constituted,  with  the  following  bounds : Key  West, 
the  Tortugas,  and  the  main-land  on  the  west  coast  as  far  as  Apalachicola 
and  to  Cape  Canaveral  on  the  east  coast. 


218  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


Brig.  Geii.  J.  M.  Brannan,  U.  S.  voluuteers,  is  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand. 

# # « # # # # 


By  command  of  Major-General  McClellan : 


L.  THOMAS, 
Adjutant-  General. 


Adjutant-General^s  Office, 

Washington^  January  13,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix,  Baltimore: 

Send  to  General  Wool,  at  Fort  Monroe,  by  this  evening’s  boat,  the 
following  order: 

On  the  arrival  of  the  steamer  Constitution  from  Boston,  send  her  to  Port  Royal,  with 
her  troops,  to  re-enforce  General  Sherman. 

L.  THOMAS, 
Adjutant-  Genera  1. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

. Port  Royal,  8.  C.,  January  15,  1862. 

To  the  Adjutant-General  IJ.  S.  Army, 

Washington,  J).  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  ask  the  attention  of  the  War  Department 
to  a subject  upon  which  I have  before  hinted,  but  which  is  of  so  much 
importance,  that  I cannot  refrain  from  again  intruding  it  upon  its  notice. 
Of  the  large  numbers  of  negroes  on  the  islands  in  our  possession  some 
have  come  into  the  camps  and  obtained  work,  bringing  with  them  their 
families.  These  are,  therefore,  cared  for,  and  the  work  of  the  able- 
bodied  men,  numbering  probably  one  out  of  five  or  six  of  a family,  will 
be  sufficient,  with  the  rations  issued,  to  support  them.  Those  still 
remaining  on  the  plantations  are  now  living  on  the  corn  and  potatoes 
left  there,  and  when  these  are  all  consumed  the  negroes  will  be  in  a 
suffering  condition  or  thrown  upon  the  commissariat  of  the  Army  for 
support. 

For  the  future  maintenance  of  these  people  some  system  must  be 
established,  and  one  which  will  permit  them  to  sustain  themselves;  but 
before  they  can  be  left  entirely  to  their  own  government  they  must  be 
trained  and  instructed  into  a knowledge  of  personal  and  moral  responsi- 
bility— which  will  be  a matter  of  time.  I have,  therefore,  the  honor  to 
recommend  that  suitable  instructors  be  sent  to  them,  to  teach  them  all 
the  necessary  rudiments  of  civilization,  and  secondly,  and  in  the  mean 
time,  that  agents,  properly  qualified,  be  employed  and  sent  here  to  take 
charge  of  the  plantations  and  superintend  the  work  of  the  blacks  until 
they  are  sufficiently  enlightened  to  think  and  provide  for  themselves. 
They  should  receive  wages,  and  the  profits  of  the  plantations,  after  all 
expenses  are  paid,  should  go  to  the  Government.  I can  see  no  other 
way  to  lay  a groundwork  for  future  usefulness  with  this  unfortunate 
class  of  people., 

I would  also  suggest  that  a quantity  of  negro  clothing  be  sent  out 
here  as  soon  as  practicable,  and  this  should^include  stuff  for  women’s 
and  children’s  wear. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAl!^, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


219 


Office  Chief  Topographical  Engineer  E.  C., 

Hilton  Headj  S.  0.,  January  18,  18G2. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Fifteenth  U.  8.  Infantry^  A.  A.  A.  (r..  Headquarters  E.  (7., 

Hilton  Headj  8.  C.: 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  the  verbal  instructions  of  the  general  com- 
manding, I accompanied  Capt.  John  Eodgers,  U.  S.  Navy,  in  a boat 
reconnaissance  of  the  channel  from  Tybee  Loads,  by  Bloody  Point, 
through  Bull  Eiver,  Wall’s  Cut,  and  Wright  Eiver  to  the  Savannah, 
and  have  the  honor  to  state  that  the  opinions  expressed  in  mj^  report  of 
January  2 are  confirmed  in  all  essential  particulars,  and  that  there  is 
no  longer  any  doubt  in  my  mind  concerning  the  practicability  of  passing 
our  gunboats  and  lighter  transports  at  high  tide  into  the  Savannah 
2 miles  above  Fort  Pulaski  and  entirely  beyond  the  effective  fire  of 
that  work.  The  channel  leading  from  Wright  Eiver  into  the  Savan- 
nah gives,  according  to  the  soundings  made  during  the  reconnaissance 
under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant  Barnes,  U.  S.  Navy,  at  least  5 (7)  feet 
of  water  at  mean  low  tide,  which,  added  to  the  mean  rise  of  the  tides, 
would  give  a draught  of  12  (11)  feet  for  navigation  under  the  most 
unfavorable  circumstances. 

The  only  point  upon  which  there  is  any  doubt  is  the  width  of  the 
channel.  On  this  my  mind  is  convinced,  and  the  pilot,  Mr.  Godfrey, 
says  he  has  no  fears  whatever  of  being  able  to  take  through  any  gun- 
boat drawing  12  feet  of  water. 

Herewith  I inclose  a sketch,  taken  from  the  Coast  Survey  charts, 
showing  the  additional  soundings  made  by  Lieutenant  Barnes. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieutenant^  Top.  Fngrs.,  and  Chief  Top.  Engr.  E.  C. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Eoyalj  8.  C.,  January  20,  1862. 
Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington^  D.  C.: 

General  : Eeconnaissances  of  Savannah  Eirer  had  led  me  to  the 
belief  that  Savannah  might  be  taken  by  a combined  operation  of*  the 
Army  and  Navy  by  operating  in  the  river  itself,  which  would  save  the 
slow  and  expensive  process  of  bombarding  Pulaski  by  cutting  it  from 
Savannah,  and  also  the  slow  process  of  besieging  Savannah  from  the 
south,  as  recommended  in  my  letter  of  the  14th  December.  Could 
Savannah  have  thus  been  taken  at  once,  any  future  obstructions  and 
defenses  in  the  vicinity  of  Savannah  by  the  river  would  have  been 
prevented. 

A combined  reconnaissance,  however,  made  by  Commodore  Eodgers, 
of  the  Navy,  and  Lieutenant  Wilson,  of  the  Topographical  Engineers, 
subsequently,  has  led  to  a report  from  the  former  officer  that  the  navi- 
gation of  some  portions  of  the  Savannah  Eiver  is  too  hazardous  to 
attempt  the  running  of  gunboats  and  transports  up  the  river  without 
further  examination. 

It  has  therefore  been  agreed  upon  by  Commodore  DuPont  and  myself 
to  at  once  commence  this  examination  in  force.  This  movement  is  par- 
ticularly calculated  to  the  cutting  off  of  Fort  Pulaski,  and  will  do  it,  I 
believe,  effectually. 


220  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.  XV. 

In  tlie  mean  while  any  operations  by  land  on  the  north  of  Savannah 
Eiver  will  be  out  of  the  question,  because  of  the  want  of  boats,  wagons, 
and  light  artillery,  none  of  which  expected  have  yet  arrived. 

In  case  we  find  it  practicable  to  effect  a landing  at  or  near  Savannah 
by  this  route,  I think  it  would  be  judicious  and  even  necessary  to  send 
the  force  heretofore  asked  for  as  promi^tly  as  possible.  As  the  process 
is  a slow  one,  the  enemy  will  have  an  opportunity  to  accumulate  im- 
mense forces  at  that  point,  and  we  should  be  strong  enough  to  make 
the  thing  sure. 

The  Atlantic  I am  keeping  waiting,  and  must  therefore  close  In  haste. 

Very  respectfully , 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  (7.,  January  31,  1862. 
General  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  &c.  : 

General:  I inclose  for  your  consideration  a brief  draught  of  pro- 
posed operations  with  the  forces  under  my  command.  It  is  drawn  up 
from  my  recollection  of  the  place,  and  may  need  modification  after  con- 
sultation of  the  map  of  the  locality,  a copy  of  which  I asked  for  in  my 
communication  of  this  morning.  If  I am  not  much  mistaken  in  my  rec- 
ollections of  the  locality,  the  whole  plan  is  feasible,  though  for  its  full 
success  more  troops  would  be  desirable  in  case  tlie  enemy  is  in  large 
force.  I feel  confident,  however,  that  a part,  and  perhaps  the  whole, 
may  be  carried  out  with  the  present  force. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


[Inclostire.] 

I propose  landing  on  the  shore  of  Amelia  Island,  to  engage  and  cut 
oft*,  if  possible,  the  retreat  of  the  rebel  force — the  landing  to  be  beyond 
the  reach  of  his  batteries;  the  town  of  Eernandina  to  be  taken  posses- 
sion of  as  soon  as  possible,  as  well  as  the  railroad  beyond.  A floating 
force  (naval)  should  be  pushed  as  rapidly  as  possible  up  the  Amelia 
Eiver  past  Eernandina,  to  intercept  the  retreat  of  the  rebels,  to  prevent 
the  destruction  of  the  railroad  bridge,  and  to  save  any  rolling  stock  of 
the  road  that  may  be  at  Eernandina.  A portion  of  the  land  force  may 
be  pushed  into  the  interior  by  the  railroad,  if  thought  desirable;  and 
another  i)ortion,  taken  on  board  the  gunboats,  may  be  sent  up  Cumber- 
land Sound,  to  intercept  the  retreat  of  the  garrison  on  Cumberland 
Island.  Our  reliance  is  on  the  squadron  for  boats  for  landing  the 
troops  and  for  cover  in  landing. 

It  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  the  full  success  of  our  operations 
that  the  wharves  at  Eernandina,  which  the  enemy  will  no  doubt  attempt 
to  destroy,  should  be  preserved.  They  will  afford  the  means  of  putting 
troops  on  board  the  transports  or  gunboats  for  the  further  operations 
with  great  rapidity,  and  facilitate  the  landing  of  stores,  &c. 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Hilton  Head,  January  31, 1862. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


221 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 
Steamer  Eminre  City^  Warsaw  Sound,  Ga.,  February  3,  18G2. 
General  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  &c.: 

General:  I Lave  the  honor  to  report  that  we  succeeded  in  getting 
into  this  harbor  yesterday  with  the  two  vessels  in  tow  of  the  Empire 
City  without  any  important  damage. 

Yesterday  the  weather  was  too  stormy  for  vessels  to  lay  alongside 
each  other,  and  hence  nothing  could  be  done  toward  coaling,  watering, 
&c.  To-day,  however,  the  weather  is  moderating,  and  work  is  going  on 
with  all  dispatch. 

. The  men  are  so  crowded  on  board  the  Cosmopolitan  and  Boston  that 
I shall  be  compelled  to  transfer  some  from  each  to  the  Marion,  and  take 
the  latter  on  the  expedition,  according  to  the  understanding  I had  with 
the  chief  quartermaster.  Captain  Saxton.  Part  of  the  medicines  to  have 
been  forwarded  by  the  medical  director  have  not  come  to  hand,  accord- 
ing to  the  report  of  the  brigade  surgeon. 

I shall  use  every  endeavor  to  have  the  transports-  ready  by  the  time 
the  naval  force  shall  be  ready  to  move. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  February  5,  1862. 

General  M.  C.  Meigs, 

Washington,  D.  C.: 

Hear  General  : The  light-draught  steamers,  which  we  understand 
left  ]^ew  York  for  this  place  a long  time  ago,  have  not  arrived,  neither 
the  boats,  wagons,  &c.,  which  Saxton  has  been  so  long  exiiecting. 

I fear  now,  as  the  season  has  so  far  advanced,  we  shall  do  little  but 
simply  garrison  the  coast.  I am  not  my  own  master.  My  master  thus 
far  have  been  the  exigencies  created  by  want  of  means  and  facilities  for 
operating  in  a way  desirable  to  both  ourselves  and  the  country  at  large. 
Savannah  should  have  been  in  our  possession  by  this  time,  not  in  the 
way  expected  by  the  anxious  public  on  our  arrival  here ; for  of  all  the 
visionary  and  impracticable  ideas  that  could  have  been  invented,  noth- 
ing could  have  equaled  that  of  marching  on  Savannah  on  landing  here; 
but  by  a distinct  process,  in  combination  with  the  ilavy,  either  in  besieg- 
ing it  by  Montgomery,  or  taking  it  by  the  horns  by  boldly  ascending 
the  Savannah  Kiver  under  cover  of  the  gunboats.  For  the  former  mode 
our  siege  material  has  never  arrived.  For  the  latter  mode  the  opportu- 
nity has  now  unfortunately  iiassed,  and  if  we  can,  after  such  delay  (which 
is  no  fault  of  the  Army),  succeed  in  cutting  oft  Pulaski’s  communications, 
we  ’ll  do  well.  My  firm  conviction  is  that  if  the  gunboats  could  have 
been  induced  to  enter  the  river  as  early  as  the  17th  or  18th  of  last  month, 
when  Wall’s  Out  was  then  opened,  and  the  enemy  had  no  guns  mounted 
at  Savannah  but  those  on  Fort  Jackson,  Savannah  would  have  fallen 
without  a resistance  of  five  hours  duration,  but  it  could  not  have  been 
taken  by  the  land  force  alone  in  that  way. 

As  Savannah  seems  out  of  our  grasp  for  the  present,  we  shall  go  down 
to  Fernandina  as  soon  as  the  Navy  is  ready. 

Very  truly,  yours, 


T.  W.  SHEEMAN. 


222  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Eoyal,  S,  0.,  February  9,  18G2. 

To  the  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  A., 

Washington^  D.  C.: 

Sir  : The  imperative  necessity  of  putting  the  blacks  in  the  way  of 
avoiding  starvation  before  the  planting  season  expires  without  a draw 
on  the  commissariat  to  an  extent  that  would  cripple  the  service,  and 
for  other  reasons  suggested  in  the  general  order  which  I herewith 
inclose,  has  induced  me  to  the  measures  mentioned  therein. 

I would  respectfully  ask  for  a speedy  reply  to  this  communication, 
and  should  the  plan  be  generally  approved,  then  how  far  I shall  be 
authorized  to  hire  instructors.  This  is  a point  whereon  I have  enter- 
tained some  doubts.  I firmly  believe,  however,  that  the  general  agent 
of  instruction  should  be  employed  by  the  Government,  if  not  all  the 
instructors ; but  the  latter,  the  district  or  sub-instructors,  may  possibly 
be  provided  by  the  public  charities. 

This  step  which  I have  taken  is  of  vital  importance,  and  to  be  bene- 
ficial for  the  present  year  must  go  into  operation  at  once.  The  present 
coudition  of  the  blacks,  daily  increasing  in  numbers  and  daily  dimin- 
ishing in  their  resources,  must  be  alleviated  both  for  their  own  welfare 
and  the  great  cause  itself. 

No  correct  census  has  yet  been  taken,  but  I estimate  the  number  of 
blacks  now  on  land  in  possession  of  our  forces  to  be  at  least  9,000,  which 
is  probably  a low  estimate. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

No.  9.  ( • Hilton  Head,  S.  G.,  February  0,  1862. 

The  helpless  condition  of  the  blacks  inhabiting  the  vast  area  in  the 
occupation  of  the  forces  of  this  command  calls  for  immediate  action  on 
the  part  of  a highly-favored  and  philanthropic  people. 

The  occupation  of  a large  portion  of  this  area  of  country  on  the  7th 
of  November  last  led  to  an  address  to  the  people  of  South  Carolina, 
briefly  setting  forth  the  causes  which  led  to  it,  its  objects  and  purposes, 
and  inviting  all  persons  to  the  reoccupation  in  a loyal  spirit  of  their 
lands  and  tenements  and  to  a continuance  of  their  avocations  under 
the  auspices  of  their  legitimate  Government  and  the  protection  of  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States. 

The  conciliatory  and  beneficent  purposes  of  that  proclamation,  except 
in  a few  instances,  have  not  only  been  disregarded,  but  hordes  of  totally 
uneducated,  ignorant,  and  improvident  blacks  have  been  abandoned  by 
their  constitutional  guardians,  not  only  to  all  the  future  chances  of 
anarchy  and  starvation,  but  in  such  a state  of  abject  ignorance  and 
mental  stolidity  as  to  perclude  all  possibility  of  self-government  and 
self-maintenance  in  their  present  condition. 

Adequate  provision  for  the  pressing  necessities  of  this  unfortunate 
and  now  interesting  class  of  people  being  therefore  imperatively  de- 
manded even  by  the  dictates  of  humanity  alone,  an  additional  duty, 
next  only  in  importance  to  that  of  the  preservation  of  a world-revered 
Constitution  and  Union,  is  now  forced  uiDon  us  by  an  unnatural  and 
wicked  rebellion. 


Chap.  XY.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


223 


To  relieve  the  Government  of  a burden  that  may  hereafter  become 
insupportable,  and  to  enable  the  blacks  to  support  and  govern  them- 
selves in  the  absence  and  abandonment  of  their  disloyal  guardians,  a 
suitable  system  of  culture  and  instruction  must  be  combined  with  one, 
providing  for  their  physical  wants.  Therefore,  until  proper  legislation 
on  the  subject  or  until  orders  from  higher  authority,  the  country  in 
occupation  of  the  forces  of  this  command  will  be  divided  oft  into  dis- 
tricts of  convenient  size  for  proper  superintendence.  For  each  of  these 
districts  a suitable  agent  will  be  appointed,  to  superintend  the  manage- 
ment of  the  plantations  by  the  blacks;  to  enroll  and  organize  the  will- 
ing blacks  into  working  parties;  to  see  that  they  are  well  fed,  clad,  and 
paid  a proper  remuneration  for  their  labor ; to  take  charge  of  all  prop- 
erty on  the  plantation,  whether  found  there,  provided  by  the  Govern- 
ment, or  raised  from  the  soil,  and  to  perform  all  other  administrative 
duties  connected  with  the  plantations  that  may  be  required  by  the 
Government. 

A code  of  regulations  on  this  subject,  as  well  as  a proper  division  of 
districts,  will  be  furnished  in  due  time.  In  the  mean  while,  and  until 
the  blacks  become  capable  themselves  of  thinking  and  acting  judi- 
ciously, the  services  of  competent  instructors  will  be  received,  one  or 
more  for  each  district,  whose  duties  will  consist  in  teaching  them,  both 
young  and  old,  the  rudiments  of  civilization  and  Christianity,  their 
amenability  to  the  laws  of  both  God  and  man,  their  relations  to  each 
other  as  social  beings,  and  all  that  is  necessary  to  render  them  competent 
to  sustain  themselves  in  social  and  business  pursuits. 

For  an  efficient  and  complete  organization  of  this  system  there  will  be 
appointed  two  general  agents,  one  to  have  a general  superintendence 
over  the  administrative  or  agricultural  agents  and  the  other  over  the 
educational  department. 

II.  The  above  system  is  not  intended  in  any  respect  to  interfere  with 
the  existing  orders  respecting  the  employment  of  contrabands  by  the 
staff  department  of  the  Army  and  by  the  cotton  agents. 

III.  As  the  blacks  are  now  in  great  need  of  suitable  clothing,  if  not 
other  necessaries  of  life,  which  necessity  will  probably  continue  and  even 
increase  until  the  above  system  gets  into  working  order,  the  benev- 
olent and  philanthropic  of  the  land  are  most  earnestly  appealed  to  for 
assistance  in  relieving  their  immediate  wants. 

Never  was  there  a nobler  or  more  fitting  opportunity  for  the  opera- 
tion of  that  considerate  and  practical  benevolence  for  which  the  North- 
ern people  have  ever  been  distinguished. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman : 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 

Captain^  Fifteenth  Infantry^  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  General. 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 
Steamer  Empire  City,  Warsaw  Sound,  Ga.,  February  10,  1862. 
General  Thomas  W.  Sherman: 

General:  I send  the  steamer  Marion  to  Hilton  Head  to-day  to 
procure  certain  articles  of  property,  officers’  supplies,  &c.,  left  behind, 
which  have  become  essential  to  the  health  and  comfort  of  the  command, 
with  orders  to  the  captain  to  return  as  soon  as  the  objects  of  the  trip 
are  attained,  or  sooner  if  the  remainder  of  the  expedition  should  be 
sooner  ready. 


224  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

The  troops  have  been  landed  and  are  in  camp  on  Warsaw  Island,  but 
the  debarkation  has  been  made  under  unfavorable  circumstances  on 
account  of  the  weather,  and  I fear  the  health  of  the  command  may  suffer 
in  consequence.  So  far  the  health  of  the  men  has  been  good,  notwith- 
standiug  the  confinement,*  much  better  than  at  Hilton  Head. 

A good  deal  of  activity  is  exhibited  by  the  rebels  in  their  works  at 
the  Skidaway  battery. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 

Brigadier- General j Commanding  Expedition. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army,  A.  G.  O., 

Washington^  February  12,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding^  the.,  Port  Eoyal^  S.  C.  : 

Sir:  The  General-in-Chief  directs  that  you  send  about  300  or  400 
contrabands  to  Key  West,  to  be  employed  on  the  iiublic  works  there. 

I am,  &c., 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington^  February  12,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding^  Port  Royal : 

General:  You  will  learn  by  the  mail  that  brings  you  this  of  our 
success  in  the  West  and  East.  The  line  of  the  Tennessee  is  open  to  us. 
Our  gunboats  have  reached  Florence,  Ala.,  after  takiug  Fort  Henry,  on 
the  line  between  Tennessee  and  Kentucky,  and  we  hope  to  hear  to-day 
that  Fort  Donelson,  on  the  Cumberland,  has  also  been  taken. 

Burnside  has  most  gallantly  carried  Roanoke  Island,  with  some  loss, 
but  inflicting  terrible  destruction  upon  the  enemy.  All  their  positions 
are  taken,  their  fleet  of  gunboats  captured  or  destroyed.  Our  raw  troops, 
according  to  the  rebel  accounts,  behaved  most  gallantly. 

General  Meigs  has  just  informed  me  that  he  has  ordered  a large  num- 
ber of  small  boats.  He  is  not  yet  informed  of  their  leaving  port.  I have 
to-day  a dispatch  from  Philadelphia  in  regard  to  shipping  forty-eight 
surf  boats  ready  there  to  go  to  Port  Royal.  They  will  go  forward  at 
once. 

I have  been  daily  expecting  to  hear  more  definite  accounts  of  what 
can  be  done  in  the  Savannah  River  and  of  the  possibility  of  starving 
out  Fort  Pulaski.  While  awaiting  further  re-enforcements,  and  while 
the  rebels  are  pushed  so  much  in  other  quarters,  I would  suggest  for 
your  consideration  whether,  by  reducing  your  garrisons  to  the  mini- 
mum, a successful  combined  attack  cannot  be  made  on  Savannah  so 
soon  as  Pulaski  has  fallen. 

In  great  haste,  I am,  general,  very  truly,  yours, 

GEO^  B.  McCLELLAK, 
Major-General,  U.  S.Army,  Commanding. 


CHAr.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


225 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Wa  slimgton^  Fehmary  14,  1802. 


Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  at  Port  Royal,  &c.  : 

General:  Your  dispatches  in  regard  to  the  occupation  of  Daufuskie 
Island,  &c.,  were  received  to-day.  I saw  also  to-day  for  the  lirst  time 
your  requisition  for  a siege  train  for  Savannah. 

After  giving  the  subject  all  the  consideration  in  iny  power,  I am 
forced  to  the  conclusion  that  under  present  circumstances  the  siege 
and  capture  of  Savannah  do  not  promise  results  commensurate  with  the 
sacrifices  necessary.  When  I learned  that  it  was  possible  for  the  gun- 
boats to  reach  the  Savannah  Eiver  above  Fort  Pulaski,  two  operations 
suggested  themselves  to  my  mind  as  its  immediate  results: 

First.  The  capture  of  Savannah  by  a coup  de  main — the  result  of  an 
instantaneous  advance  and  attack  by  the  Army  and  Navy. 

The  time  for  this  has  passed,  and  your  letter  indicates  that  you  are 
not  accountable  for  the  taiiure  to  seize  the  propitious  moment,  but  that, 
on  the  contrary,  you  j)erceived  its  advantages. 

Second.  To  isolate  Fort  Pulaski,  cut  oil*  its  supplies,  and  at  least 
facilitate  its  reduction  by  a bombardment. 

Although  we  have  a long  delay  to  deplore,  the  second  course  still 
remains  open  to  us;  and  I strongly  advise  the  close  blockade  of  Pulaski 
and  its  bombardment  as  soon  as  the  13-inch  mortars  and  heavy  guns 
reach  you.  I am  confident  you  can  thus  reduce  it.  With  Pulaski  you 
gain  all  that  is  really  essential;  you  obtain  complete  control  of  the 
harbor;  you  relieve  ihe  blockading  fleet,  and  render  the  main  body  of 
your  force  disposable  for  other  operations. 

I do  not  consider  the  possession  of  SaA^annah  worth  a siege  after 
Pulaski  is  in  our  hands.  But  the  possession  of  Pulaski  is  of  the  first 
importance.  The  exj) edition  to  Fernandina  is  well,  and  I shall  be  glad 
to  learn  that  it  is  ours. 

But,  after  all,  the  greatest  moral  effect  would  be  produced  by  the 
reduction  of  Charleston  and  its  defenses.  There  the  rebellion  had  its 
birth;  there  the  unnatural  hatred  of  our  Government  is  most  intense; 
there  is  the  center  of  the  boasted  power  and  courage  of  the  rebels. 

To  gain  Fort  Sumter  and  hold  Charleston  is  a task  well  worthy  of 
our  greatest  efforts  and  considerable  sacrifices.  That  is  the  problem  I 
would  be  glad  to  have  you  study.  Some  time  must  elapse  before  we 
can  be  in  all  resi^ects  ready  to  accomplish  that  purpose.  Fleets  are  en 
route  and  armies  in  motion  which  have  certain  preliminary  objects  to 
accomidish  before  we  are  ready  to  take  Charleston  in  hand,  but  the 
time  will  before  long  arrive  when  I shall  be  prepared  to  make  that 
moA’ement.  In  the  mean  time  it  is  my  advice  and  wish  that  no  attempt 
be  made  upon  Savannah,  unless  it  can  be  carried  with  certainty  by  a 
coup  de  main. 

Please  concentrate  your  attention  and  forces  upon  Pulaski  and  Fer- 
naridina.  Saint  Augustine  might  as  Avell  be  taken  by  way  of  an  inter- 
lude, while  awaiting  the  preparations  for  Charleston.  Success  attends 
us  everywhere  at  present. 

Very  truly,  yours. 


GEO.  B.  McClellan, 
Major-  General,  Commanding  U.  >S’.  Army. 


15  R R — VOL  VI 


226  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Fort  Boyaly  S.  0.,  February  15,  18G2. 
The  Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington,  D.  C.: 

Sir:  As  I iuformed  you  on  the  8th  instant,  General  Viele  had  orders 
to  erect  his  battery  on  the  Savannah  Eiver,  wh«dher  the  Kavy  could 
assist  him  or  not.  Accordingly  a battery  of  six  siege  guns  was  erected 
at  Yenus  Point,  on  Jones  Island,  on  the  night  of  the  11th  instant,  and 
fortunately  without  molestation  from  the  enemy. 

In  order  to  render  the  blockade  of  the  river  complete,  a similar  bat- 
tery is  to  be  erected  at  the  head  of  Long  Island.  The  preparations  for 
this  have,  like  the  other,  been  ready  ever  since  the  day  of  the  reconnais- 
sance, the  28th  of  January. 

As  the  naval  gunboats  cannot  be  prevailed  upon  to  enter  the  river, 
I have  given  General  Viele  orders  to  likeAvise  erect  this  battery  without 
them,  which  I think  will  be  done  without  much  hazard,  now  that  the 
Yenus  Point  battery  is  up. 

Commodore  DuPont  will  leave  two  or  three  light-draught  gunboats 
in  Mud  Piver,  which  will  probably  tend  to  cover  our  batteries  from  gun- 
boats of  the  enemy  coming  down  the  Savannah  and  attempting  to  take 
us  in  rear  by  way  of  Mud  Piver. 

I have  sent  a 10-iuch  columbiad  down  there,  which  will  now  be  neces- 
sary without  the  aid  of  the  gunboats. 

General  WrighPs  troops  are  yet  in  Warsaw  Sound,  waiting  for  the 
Navy. 

Our  delays  since  the  middle  of  January  have  grieved  me  to  almost  a 
state  of  mortification.  The  season  is  rapidly  passing  ; we  can  work  six 
weeks  longer,  and  probably  twelve.  Now,  if  anything  serious  is  to  be 
done  in  that  time  over  and  beyond  the  expedition  that  is  about  to  start, 
I will  state  candidly  and  explicitly  what  will  be  required  at  once ; All 
the  means  of  transportation  that  have  been  asked  for  (which  I believe 
have  been  ordered  but  which  have  never  got  here) ; the  mortars  and 
siege  equipage  (which  are  gradually  arriving,  though  none  of  the  13-inch 
are  here  yet),  and  10,000  infantry  troops. 

The  great  extent  of  coast  we  have  had  to  garrison  and  guard  has 
absorbed  a good  portion  of  our  troops. 

The  mortar  battery  against  Pulaski  will  go  up  as  soon  as  the  mortars 
arrive. 

Savannah  is  out  of  the  question  with  our  present  force,  particularly 
after  the  detachments  to  Fernandina  and  Edisto  Island,  which  I did 
not  desire  to  make  at  present;  but,  in  order  to  do  something  in  the 
absence  of  our  ability  to  get  on  the  main  for  w^ant  of  transportation, 
was  compelled  to  do  so. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEPMAN, 
Brigadier-  Oenera  I,  Commanding. 


[Indorsement.  J 


The  10,000  infantry  asked  for  are  not  at  present  available.  Pecom- 
mend  to  General  Sherman»-to  reduce  Fort  Pulaski  in  preference  to 
attempting  Savannah. 

GEO.  B.  McClellan, 

Major- General. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


227 


War  Department,  February  18,  1802. 
Col.  Daniel  D.  Tompkins, 

Assistant  Quartermaster- General^  New  York  City: 

Colonel  : You  are  hereby  directed  to  furnish  transportation  by  sea 
from  New  York  City  to  Port  Koyal,  S.  C.,to  all  persons  wlio  may  present 
to  you  written  permits,  issued  under  the  authority  of  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  and  setting?  forth  that  such  persons  are  proceeding  to  Port 
Koyal,  under  the  sanction  of  the  Government,  upon  business  relating  to 
the  collection,  safe-keeping,  and  disposition  of  cotton,  rice,  and  other 
property  abandoned  by  persons  inhabiting  any  district  within  the  late 
territorial  limits  of  States  declared  by  proclamation  to  be  in  insurrec- 
tion, and  to  the  condition  and  employment  of  persons  of  color,  there  or 
in  the  vicinity,  lately  held  to  service  or  labor  by  enemies  of  the  United 
States,  and  now  within  the  occupying  lines  and  under  the  military  pro- 
tection of  the  Army.  Said  permits  will  specify  whether  the  transporta- 
tion shall  be  cabin  or  steerage,  and  will  cover  all  baggage,  agricultural 
instruments,  and  other  articles  mentioned  therein. 

You  will  also  make  suitable  provisions  for  supplying  said  passengers 
with  food  during  the  voyage.  Permits  signed  by  the  collector  of  the 
customs  at  New  York  City  will  be  regarded  by  you  as  emanating  from 
the  Treasury  Department. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  February  18, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  at  Fort  Royal,  8.  C. : 

General:  You  are  hereby  directed  to  afford  protection,  subsistence, 
and  facilities,  so  far  as  may  be  consistent  with  the  interests  of  the  serv- 
ice and  the  duties  and  the  objects  of  your  command,  to  all  persons  Avho 
may  present  to  you  written  permits,  issued  to  them  under  the  authority 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  setting  forth  that  said  persons  have 
])roceeded  to  Port  Eoyal  under  the  sanction  of  the  Government,  for  the 
collection,  safe-keeping,  and  disposition  of  cotton,  rice,  and  other  prop- 
erty abandoned  by  the  late  possessors  within  your  military  department, 
and  for  the  regulation  and  employment  of  persons  of  color  lately  held 
to  service  or  labor  by  enemies  of  the  United  States,  and  now  within  the 
occupying  lines  and  under  the  military  protection  of  the  Army. 

Such  permits,  signed  by  the  collector  of  the  customs  at  New  York 
City,  will  be  considered  by  you  as  emanating  from  the  Treasury  De- 
partment. 

Under  the  head  of  subsistence  will  be  included  rations  to  such  per- 
sons as  may  be  employed  under  the  direction  of  the  Treasury  Depart- 
ment in  the  temporary  charge  of  abandoned  plantations,  or,  with  its 
sanction,  in  labors  for  the  instruction  and  improvement  of  the  laboring 
population. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Engineer  Office,  February  21,  1862. 
fMaj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan]  : 

Dear  General  : The  inclosed  pages  were  drawn  up  by  Colonel 
Woodbury  at  my  request.  1 do  not  suppose  you  will  have  time  to  read 


228  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


them ; hut  you  may  skim  over  them  to  get  the  main  points,  and  the 
information  may  be  useful  in  directing  future  operations.  It  is  hardly 
likely  you  would  care  just  now  to  get  up  an  expedition  of  the  magni- 
tude required  to  take  Charleston  (it  ai)pears  to  be  the  most  difficult  point 
of  the  whole  coast } I mean  its  forts),  but  you  might  hereafter  find  oc- 
casion to  attack.  Fort  Pulaski  taken — and  that  ought  to  be  taken 
speedily — perhaps  Sherman’s  and  Burnside’s  army  might  unite  upon 
Charleston.  Woodbury  thinks  that  Burnside  can  take  Forts  Macon 
and  Caswell ; if  so,  it  may  be  a question  whether  he  had  not  better  take 
these  than  go  to  Goldsborough.  But  all  these  things  are  coujectural, 
and  I give  you  the  data,  as  much  as  I can,  to  i)ost  you  for  whatever  may 
turn  up. 

If  those  Tennessee  prisoners  are  really  disposed  to  take  the  oath  of 
allegiance,  would  it  not  be  a wise  policy  to  let  them  go  home"?  We 
want  to  raise  the  State  in  our  favor  as  speedily  as  possible. 

You  had  better  return  me  these  notes  as  soon  as  you  have  glanced  at 
them,  as  they  will  be  of  more  use  in  my  hands  than  yours  just  now. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

J.  G.  BAKNAED. 


[Inclosure.] 


Charleston  Harbor. — Notes  Eel'ative  to  an  Attack. 


We  may  assume  that  we  have  not  now  the  means  required  to  carry  the 
formidable  works  of  Charleston  Harbor  by  a coup  de  main.  History  fur 
nishes  no  precedent  of  the  success  of  such  an  undertaking,  but  does  fur- 
nish many  examples  of  failure.  In  the  war  of  the  Eevolution  a pretty 
formidable  British  fleet  failed  in  a contest  with  old  Fort  Moultrie. 
Since  that  period  the  power  of  fleets  has  been  greatly  increased  bj^  the 
use  of  steam  and  of  iron-plated  vessels  of  war ; but  the  fortifications 
of  Charleston  Harbor  have  gained  jiower  perhaps  in  equal  ratio.  It  is 
quite  possible  that  a few  iron -clad  steamers,  assisted  by  other  vessels, 
might  silence  Fort  Moultrie,  and  batter  down  the  walls  of  Fort  Sumter 
in  a very  few  days,  and  that  the  same  fleet  might  take  in  succession  all 
the  other  fortifications  now  in  possession  of  the  revolutionists  But  we 
have  no  such  fleet,  and  cannot  have  for  many  months.  We  are  com- 
pelled, therefore,  to  resort  to  the  old  methods.  I regard,  however,  as 
essential  to  success  at  least  two  iron-plated  steamers  of  great  power; 
four  such  steamers,  I believe,  would  insure  success ; six,  easy  success. 
The  attack  would  comprise,  I think,  the  following  operations,  the  three 
first  to  be  nearly  simultaneous ; 

1st.  Landing  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and  promptly  investing  Fort 
Moultrie. 

2d.  Landing  on  Morris  Island  with  artillery  to  reduce  Fort  Sumter, 
including  some  twenty  rifle  cannon  of  large  caliber. 

3d.  Two  or  more  iron-clad  war  steamers  must  run  in,  under  cover  of 
l)artial  darkness  or  of  a fog,  and  take  a position  in  Eebellion  Eoads,  to 
keep  off  re-enforcements  from  Sumter  and  Moultrie. 

4th.  The  erection  of  gun  and  mortar  batteries  against  the  forts,  can- 
nonade, bombardment,  breaching,  and  finally  assault,  if  necessary. 

• 5th.  Sumter  and  Moultrie  taken,  Castle  Pinckney  to  be  reduced  by 
continued  cannonade  and  bombardment  from  the  iron-clad  and  other 
vessels.  Some  of  these  vessels  may  i)robably  be  able  to  take  a position 
behind  the  fort. 

0th.  As  soon  as  Sumter  and  Moultrie  are  taken  the  city  of  Charleston 
will  be  virtually  in  our  hands,  unless  the  Confederates  have  powerful 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


229 


batteries  on  both  Cooper  and  Ashley  Elvers ; for  the  iron  steamers  at 
least  may  pass  by  Castle  Pinckney  without  much  damage.  Still,  to 
possess  the  harbor,  it  would  be  necessary  to  take  that  work,  aiul  it 
would  be  easy  to  do  so  by  an  attack  on  all  sides  after  the  capture  of 
the  works  above  mentioned.  Fort  Johnson  and  the  other  works  around 
Charleston  would,  I think,  be  abandoned  by  the  enemj’. 

I will  now  briefly  discuss  the  modus  operandi  and  the  details,  pre- 
mising that  all  our  knowledge  of  the  channels  and  of  the  adjacent 
harbors  is  derived  from  the  charts  and  notes  of  the  Coast  Survey  and 
from  the  excellent  map  of  Col.  Hartman  Bache,  of  the  Topographical 
F]ngineers,  published  in  1825.  I have  myself,  as  light  house  inspector, 
been  somewhat  familiar  with  Charleston  Harbor,  and  have  passed 
through  the  inner  channel  from  that  harbor  to  Bull’s  Bay. 

BASE  OF  OPERATIONS — ADJACENT  nARBORS. 

BuWs  Bay,  21  miles  east  of  Fort  Moultrie,  is  an  excellent  harbor,  of 
easy  entrance,  with  13  feet  on  the  bar  at  low  water  and  18  feet  at  high 
water.  This  place  is  said  to  be  fortified.  There  are  sand  hills  imme- 
diately behind  the  light-house,  some  50  feet  above  the  water,  with  a 
counter-slope  and  ravines  affording  excellent  cover  for  infantry. 

If  the  fortifications  have  been  placed  on  these  hills,  which  are,  accord-  . 
ing  to  my  recollection,  about  one-fourth  mile  from  the  beach,  it  will  be 
necessary,  probably,  in  order  to  seize  them,  to  assail  by  land  as  well  as 
by  w-ater.  Troops  may  be  landed  from  boats  on  the  beach,  as  Professor 
Lache  states,  about  3 miles  from  the  northeast  bluff.  I am  disposed 
to  think  the  enemy  would  abandon  this  place,  if  they  have  not  already 
done  so,  as  soon  as  they  perceived  that  an  attack  was  to  be  made  in 
force.  If  they  make  a stand,  the  entire  garrison  ought  to  be  captured. 
With  one  or  more  iron-clad  vessels  and  some  vessels  of  small  draught 
and  armed  barges  we  can,  I think,  take  possession  of  the  entire  channel 
around  Bull  Island.  Escape  by  water  would  be  impossible.  Escape 
by  laud  could  only  be  made  at* low  water  through  the  marshes  at  the 
divide,  and  this  I think  would  be  very  difficult.  The  next  inlet  of  any 
importance,  proceeding  tow^ards  Charleston,  is 

Bewees^  Inlet,  9 miles  from  Fort  Moultrie,  with  7 feet  on  the  bar  at 
low  water  and  12  feet  at  high  water,  and  a good  anchorage  inside. 

Breach  Inlet,  at  the  eastern  end  of  Sullivan’s  Island,  about  3 miles 
from  Fort  Moultrie,  can  be  entered  by  boats  and  barges  at  high  water. 
Passing  by  Charleston  Harbor,  the  first  inlet  west  is 

Light  House  Inlet,  4J  miles  west  of  Fort  Sumter  and  less  than  1 mile 
from  Charleston  light.  Boats  entering  here  can  i^ass  through  interior 
channels  to  Stono  Eiver  and  to  Charleston. 

Stono  Inlet,  about  8 miles  westerly  from  Charleston  main  bar,  has 
about  8 feet  at  low  w^ater  and  probably  13  feet  at  high  water.  It  is 
said  to  be  fortified. 

North  Edisto  Inlet,  18  miles  southwesterly  from  Charleston  Bar,  has 
13  feet  at  low  water  and  19  feet  at  high  water.  It  is,  or  has  recently 
been,  in  our  i^ossession. 

CHANNELS  OF  CHARLESTON  HARBOR. 

8ullivan\s  Island  Channel,  recently  obstructed  by  “ stone  ships,”  has 
11  feet  at  low  water,  16  or  17  feet  at  high  water. 

North  Channel,  still  open,  8 feet  at  low  water,  13  or  14  feet  at  high 
water. 


230  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


Swash  Channel^  still  open,  9 feet  at  low  water,  14  feet  at  high  water. 

Main  Ship  Channel^  obstriieted,  13  feet  at  low  water,  16  or  19  feet  at 
high  water. 

Lawford’s  Channel^  open,  7 feet  at  low  water,  12  feet  at  high  water. 

TI>IE,  PLACE,  AND  MANNER  OF  LANDING. 

Our  southern  Atlantic  beach  is  alway  rough  on  the  flood  tide  what- 
ever be  the  wind.  It  is  always  rough  on  the  ebb  tide  with  any  con- 
siderable onshore  wind.  But  an  ebb  tide  with  no  wind,  or  a slight  on- 
shore wind,  or  any  kind  of  oftshore  wind,  secures  a good  landing.  As 
these  conditions  are  not  fulfilled  every  day,  or  indeed  every  week,  and 
as  they  cannot  be  predicted  many  hours  ahead,  it  is  necessary  to  have 
a rendezvous  at  hand — the  nearer  the  better.  1 am  disposed  to  thinli: 
there  should  be  two  such  places : Bulks  Bay  for  the  Moultrie  party. 
North  Edisto  for  Sumter.  The  interior  channels  from  each  of  these 
places  to  Charleston  Harbor  may  perhaiis  be  used  as  auxiliary  direc- 
tions of  attack.  The  inside  channel  from  Bulks  Bay  enters  Charleston 
Harbor  at  the  point  of  Sullivan’s  Island,  three-fourths  of  a mile  from 
Fort  Moultrie.  It  has  of  course  a divide  between  each  two  inlets,  and 
these  divides,  beingn  early  or  quite  bare  at  low  water,  will  pass  boats  or 
vessels  drawing  4 or  5 feet  at  high  water.  As  the  high  water  occurs  on 
all  these  divides  at  the  same  time,  it  would  generally  be  necessary  for 
vessels  drawing  4 or  5 feet  to  use  several  tides  in  going  through.  More- 
over, the  channel  passes  occasionally  near  the  Banks,  or  narrow  islands, 
which  skirt  the  beach,  and  at  these  points  a few  field  pieces  would  make 
the  navigation  diflicult. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  we  could  not  safely  use  this 
inside  channel  without  first  taking  possession  of  the  Banks.  It  is  quite 
possible,  however,  that  at  the  moment  of  landing  on  the  beach  of  Sul- 
livan’s Island  a few  armed  barges,  having  entered  at  Breach  Inlet  or 
Dewees’  Inlet,  might  make  a useful  diversion  in  the  rear. 

LANDING  ON  SULLIVAN’S  ISLAND. 

The  island  generally  is  about  one-fourth  of  a mile  wide.  Along  the 
central  part,  about  miles  from  Fort  Moultrie  and  miles  from  Fort 
Sumter,  along  a reach  more  than  one-half  mile  long  at  high  water  and 
during  two  or  three  hours  after  high  water,  gunboats  of  10  feet  draught 
can  lie  or  maneuver  within  300  yards  of  the  beach.  Under  cover  of 
their  fire,  and  particularly  of  their  cross  fire,  good  infantry,  I think, 
could  land  and  eftect  a footing.  Once  in  possession  of  a strip  of  the 
island  extending  back  to  the  marsh,  they  could  lace  right  and  left,  and, 
with  the  continued  aid  of  the  gunboats,  first  take  possession  of  the 
eastern  end  of  the  island,  then  advance  upon  Fort  Moultrie  within 
range  of  its  guns,  and  commence  the  operations  of  a siege. 

But  the  preliminary  operation  in  this  case  is  not  without  its  difficul- 
ties and  its  doubts.  If  the  enemy  has  notice  of  the  attack  and  suspects 
the  point  of  attack ; if  he  has  strong  inclosed  batteries  at  that  point, 
with  large  bodies  of  infantry  behind  the  sand  hills  supporting  those 
batteries,  the  undertaking  would  seem  to  be  too  hazardous. 

There  is  another  mode  of  attack  which  ought  to  be  undertaken  at  the 
same  time.  The  success  of  either  will  be  sufficient.  I allude  to  an 
attack  upon  the  eastern  end  of  Sullivan’s  Island.  Small  craft,  drawing 
not  more  than  3 feet,  made  proof  against  musketrj^  and  field  artillery, 
armed  with  musketry  and  boat  howitzers,  can  be  brought  up  in  any 


CIIAI'.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


231 


number  from  Dewees^  Ilarbor,  only  0 or  7 miles  off,  and  make  an  attack 
which  it  would  be  very  hard  to  resist.  Once  landed  in  force,  aided  by 
the  gunboats  on  one  Hank  and  perhaps  by  the  same  small  craft  on  the 
other,  our  troops  could,  I am  contident,  without  serious  difficulty,  drive 
the  enemy  down  to  Fort  Moultrie,  whatever  batteries  he  may  ha  ve  along 
the  beach.  If  we  can  obtain  these  small  vessels  of  the  right  kind  and 
in  sufficient  number  I should  think  this  last  attack  the  most  promising 
of  the  two.  Preparations  for  the  other,  however,  should  by  no  means 
be  omitted.  There  is  in  common  use  in  North  Carolina  a small  craft 
called  a Hat,  drawing,  when  not  loaded,  about  15  inches,  carrying  from 
10  to  20  tons,  with  a center  board,  schooner-rigged,  strong,  easily  man- 
aged by  two  men,  fast  sailing,  open,  but  seaworthy,  as  I know  by  experi- 
ence, capable  of  carrying  the  timbers  or  bales  of  wet  cotton  necessary 
to  make  them  shot-proof.  They  would  answer  the  purpose  in  hand,  I 
think,  admirably. 

LANDING  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND. 

I should  recommend  here  the  same  preparation  for  a real  or  pretended 
attack  on  the  beach  and  a simultaneous  attack  by  small  craft  on  the 
west  end  of  Morris  Island.  Whether  it  w^ill  be  best  to  make  these 
attacks  on  Morris  Island  simultaneously  with  similar  attacks  on  Sulli- 
vaifs  Island  or  to  let  the  one  follow  the  other  at  the  interval  of  a day 
or  two,  I will  not  pretend  to  say.  It  must  depend  on  the  means  at 
hand.  Simultaneous  attacks  are  certainly  desirable. 

Preliminary  to  the  attack  by  small  craft  on  the  west  end  of  Morris 
Island  it  may  be  necessary  to  take  possession  of  Stono  Inlet  and  Folly 
Island.  Vessels  of  12  feet  draught  entering  at  Stono  Inlet  can  be  taken 
along  the  channel  immediately  behind  Folly  Island  to  the  divide,  2 miles 
from  Light-House  Inlet.  This  divide,  acf  ording  to  Hartman  Bache,  has 
1 foot  at  low  water ; 5 or  6 therefore  at  high  water.  There  are  several 
other  channels  from  Stono  to  Light-House  Inlet.  The  character  of  the 
country  is  such  as  to  make  it  improbable  that  the  enemy  should  make  a 
stand  around  Folly  Island.  Once  landed  on  Morris  Island,  our  troops 
would,  I think,  aided  by  the  gunboats,  easily  drive  the  enemy  down  that 
narrow  strip  of  land,  and  probably  capture  those  who  had  not  the  means 
of  immediate  escape. 

As  soon  as  possible  after  landing  on  the  two  islands  two  or  more 
iron -plated  vessels  should  take  a position  in  Eebellion  Koads. 

OPERATION  III — TO  PREVENT  RE-ENFORCEMENTS. 

The  extent  of  the  harbor  is  such  that  the  vessels  may  lie  at  anchor  or 
maneuver  miles  from  Fort  Sumter  and  Castle  Pinckney,  and  as  near 
Fort  Johnson  on  the  south  and  Haddrelfs  beacon  on  the  north  as  it  may 
be  safe  to  go.  These  vessels  could  make  it  difficult  for  anything  but 
small  boats  to  pass  from  the  city  to  the  forts,  and  at  the  proper  time,  by 
a reverse  fire,  they  could  greatly  assist  in  the  reduction  of  the  forts. 

OPERATIONS  AGAINST  FORT  MOULTRIE. 

This  is  an  irregular  open  barbette  work,  covering  about  2J  acres  of 
ground.  It  has  three  land  fronts  and  three  water  fronts.  The  steam- 
boat landing  at  the  point  of  the  island  and  the  road  therefrom  to  the 
fort  are  seen  and  commanded  by  a half  bastion  front  213  feet  long,  with 
nine  guns,  of  which  two  are  on  the  flank.  The  next  land  front  facing  the 
cove  north  ot  the  fort  is  a regular  bastion  405  feet  long,  with  one  gun  on 


232  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


eacli  face  and  two  on  each  flank  and  room  for  more.  The  next  front, 
directly  opposed  to  our  approaches,  is  a bastion  front  244  feet  long’,  with 
two  guns  on  each  flank,  one  on  one  face,  two  on  the  curtain,  and  room 
for  three  more. 

Xext  a water  front  121  feet  long,  with  five  guns. 

ISiext  a water  front  251  feet  long,  with  twelve  guns. 

Next  a water  front  173  feet  long,  with  nine  guns. 

The  guns  are  stated  in  accordance  wdtli  the  intended  armament  of  the 
fort.  The  guns  actually  furnished  by  the  United  States  before  the  fort 
was  seized  by  the  Confederates  ^were  as  follows : Four  24-pouuder 
howitzers;  ten  8 inch  columbiads;  five  8- inch  sea-coast  howitzers;  four- 
teen 32-pounders ; sixteen  24-pounders. 

The  fort  had  been  supplied  with  its  full  armament,  and  the  Confeder- 
ates have  probably  added  all  they  found  room  for.  In  1860-’61  Caprain 
(now  General)  Foster  made  some  repairs  and  additions,  which  are  thus 
described  by  him : 

A wet  ditch,  15  feet  wide  all  around  the  fort,  of  small  depth,  in  consequence  of  quick- 
sand, the  latter  readily  yielding  to  pressure,  is  a good  obstacle  in  itself.  A picket  ience 
all  around  the  fort,  bordering  the  ditch,  and  protected  from  tire  by  a small  glacis;  a 
bastiouette  for  musketry  at  the  northwest  angle  ; a temporary  machicoulis  gallery  at 
the  southeast  angle  ; two  caponieres  of  bricks  to  flank  the  three  water  fronts ; merlons 
on  the  whole  of  the  east  front. 

The  Confederates  have  added  merlons  on  the  water  fronts,  and  it  is 
probable  that  most  of*  the  guns  may  now  be  fired  from  embrasures.  The 
guns  are  all  in  barbette,  unless  some  caseinate  guns  (howitzers)  have 
been  jilaced  in  the  caponieres  added  by  Captain  Foster.  The  entrance 
‘is  through  the  middle  of  the  longest  bastion  front.  This  is  or  was  the 
sally-port  through  the  curtain  of  the  other  bastion  front.  Our  ap- 
Iiroaches  along  the  island  will  be  opposed  by  a very  short  bastion  front 
and  by  one  flank  of  the  other  bastion  front,  mounting  ten  guns  in  all. 
The  longest  front,  whicii  contains  the  main  entrance,  will  be  enfiladed. 

There  can  be  no  dilficulty  in  breaithing  the  work  and  dismounting  its 
guns,  provided  we  can  advance  along  the  narrow  strip  of  land  in  places 
not  more  than  250  yards  between  water  lines  and  cut  off  re-enforce- 
ments. If  the  enemy  can  carry  oft*  his  wounded,  renew  his  men  and 
means  at  will,  it  will  be  difficult  to  obtain  any  advantage  over  him. 
His  base  of  operations  is  close  at  hand,  and  he  can  build  batteries  in 
the  sand  as  well  as  we  can ; moreover,  he  has  every  motive  for  fighting 
at  this  point  desperately.  Hence  the  necessity,  already  urged,  of  isolat- 
ing the  place,  and  the  necessity  of  using  inside  some  gunboats  of  light 
draught  to  assist  others  of  heavier  draught  outside  and  the  land  forces 
in  drawing  the  enemy  into  the  fort*.  He  cannot  carry  on  a very  long 
contest  in  the  fort. 

I don’t  think  we  need  apprehend  any  very  serious  annoyance  from 
Fort  Sumter.  It  will  be  a mile  and  a quarter  from  the  nearest  part  of 
the  theater  of  operations.  A drawing  attached  hereto*  shows  the  situa- 
tion of  the  work,  its  profile,  magazines,  barracks,  officers’  quarters,  &c. 
I find  no  drawing  at  the  Engineer  Bureau  illustrating  the  recent  repairs 
^ and  additions  made  by  Captain  Foster.  The  two  brick  caponieres  on 
the  water  fronts  are  supposed  to  be  entered  from  the  terre-plein  above. 
The  masonry  scarp  stands  about  14  feet  above  high  water.  The  bottom 
of  the  ditch  is  probably  2 or  3 feet  below  high  water.  The  merlons 
added  by  the  Confederates  increase  still  more  the  proper  height  of  the 
scarp,  except  at  the  embrasures.  The  parapet  is  about  11  feet  thick. 
The  scarp  wall  is  made  of  bricks,  and  is  7 feet  thick  at  bottom  and  3^^ 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XV.] 


233 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

feet  at  top.  There  were  no  casemates  in  tlft  original  work,  but  little 
bomb-proofs.  What  bomb-proofs  the  Confederates  may  have  added  we 
do  not  know.  Tlie  scarp  is  probably  exposed  to  the  view  of  distant 
batteries]  but  ou  this  we  ought  not  to  count,  as  it  is  exceedingly  easy  to 
throw  up  a protecting  barrier  of  sand.  The  small  elevation  of  this  work 
— its  guns  are  only  15  feet  above  high  water — exposes  it  greatly  to  the 
action  of  vessels  afloat  at  the  moment  of  assault.  With  four  irou-i)lated 
meu-of-war  I am  inclined  to  think  the  work  could  be  carried  by  assault 
without  waiting  for  the  operations  of  a siege. 

OPERATIONS  AGAINST  FORT  SUMTER. 

This  is  a strong  casemated  work,  covering  about  3J  acres  of  ground, 
rising  from  an  artiticial  island  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  the  nearest 
land,  armed,  or  capable  of  being  armed,  with  53  barbette  guns,  in  a 
jdane  50  feet  above  low  water;  41  guns  in  casemates  27  feet  above  low 
water,  and  41  casemate  guns  15  leet  above  low  water.  There  are 
no  casemate  guns  on  the  gorge;  light  howitzers  might,  however,  be 
mounted  there.  The  wooden  floors  wdiicli  have  been  placed  in  the 
gorge  w-ere  not  intended  to  bear  heavy  guns.  Still  it  must  be  borne 
in  mind  that  the  Confederates  may  have  jiropped  up  some  of  these 
floors,  cut  embrasures,  and  mounted  cannon  of  large  caliber  in  some  of 
the  casemates  of  the  gorge.  The  guns  bearing  on  Cummings  Point 
are:  20  barbette  guns  at  an  angle  of  about  45^  with  the  parapets;  3 
barbette  guns  on  the  pan-coit'pe  nearly  direct;  4 casemate  guns  ou  the 
pan-coupe  nearly  direct;  27  in  all.  The  Confederates  niay,  however, 
add  to  the  casemate  guns  by  building  oblique  embrasures  in  the  scarp. 

The  guns  bearing  on  Port  Moultrie  are:  10  barbette  guns,  nearly 
direct;  2 barbette  guns,  slightly  oblique;  18  casemate  guns,  nearly 
direct;  4 casemate  guns,  oblique;  34  in  all.  The  approaches  to  Port 
Moultrie  from  the  east  are  seen  by  these  34  guns  belonging  to  the  right 
face;  and  Sullivaifs  Island,  northwest  of  Port  Moultrie,  is  exposed  to 
an  equal  number  of  guns  on  the  left  face — some  parts  of  it  to  nearly  all 
the  guns  of  both  faces.  Rebellion  Roads  are  exposed  to  30  guns  in 
the  left  face,  or  27  guns  in  the  left  flank,  or  all  together,  according  to 
the  situation.  I have  spoken  above  of  all  the  guns  that  can  be  mounted 
in  Port  Sumter.  The  guns  Actually  supplied  by  the  United  States  were, 
ten  42-pounders;  forty- one  .32-pounders;  three  10-inch  columbiads;  ten 
8-inch  columbiads;  eight  8 incli  sea-coast  howitzers ; six  24-pouuders;  78 
in  all,  leaving  57  wanting. 

A drawing  of  Port  Sumter,  in  con?:ection  with  the  chart  of  Charles- 
ton Harbor,  will  illustrate  the  strength  and  situation  of  the  wmrk.  The 
principal  question  is.  Can  a ])racticable  breach  be  made  in  Port  Sumter 
by  batteries  located  on  Cumkiiings  Point I believe  there  can  be.  Cap- 
tain Poster,  in  his  journal  of  the  bombardment  of  Port  Sumter  in  May 
last,  reports  as  follows  the  breaching  batteries  on  Morris  Island  or 
Cummings  Point: 

Breaching  battery  Ko.  1,  two  42-pounders ; one  12-pounder  rifle  gun  =3. 

Breaching  battery  No.  2,  iron-clad,  three  8-inch  columbiads =3;  0 in 
all. 

The  fire  commenced  at  daybreak  on  the  13th,  and  was  discontinued  at 
Cummings  Point  about  1 p.  m.  on  the  14th.  The  twm  8-iuch  columbiads 
and  the  rifle  gun  \vere  the  only  ones  that  w^ere  used  in  the  effort  to  make 
a breach.  The  latter  was  fired  with  great  accuracy.  All  three  missiles 
made  the  same  penetration — 11  inches  in  the  brick  masonry.  They  con- 


234  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

tinned  tiring  about  twentj^ hours,  and  knocked  otf  the  face  of  the  wall 
around  one  embrasure  of  the  pan-coupe  to  the  depth  of  22  inches.  In- 
stead of  one  12-])ounder  rifle  gun,  supi)ose  we  have  twenty  of  large  cali- 
ber, and  instead  of  two  8-inch  columbiads,  some  12, 10,  or  11  inch  guns, 
there  is  little  doubt  of  our  ability  to  make  a breach  of  any  desired  mag- 
nitude in  a week  or  ten  days.  If  we  cut  away  the  masonry  between 
three  or  four  of  the  lower  embrasures  to  the  depth  of  3 feet,  I believe 
the  scarp  opposite  and  above  these  cuts  will  fall  over  in  a body,  pressed 
as  it  always  is  by  the  thrust  of  the  communicating  arches.  If  we  cut 
away  the  o by  7 inch  pier  between  any  two  casemate  arches,  all  the  case- 
mate arches  on  that  front  of  the  work  will,  I think,  fall  down,  for  the 
])iers  are  far  from  being  abutment  piers.  Should  any  such  accident 
occur  to  the  right  flank — a matter  simply  of  time — I think  the  work 
could  not  much  longer  hold  out.  An  assault  would  hardly  be  necessary. 

Vessels  drawing  about  9 feet  can  be  taken  around  the  south  side  of 
Fort  Sumter  and  ji^aced  opposite  the  gorge,  150  feet  from  the  work, 
below  the  range  of  the  barbette  guns.  The  two  casemates  of  each  story, 
at  each  end  of  the  gorge,  are  occupied  as  powder  magazines. 

Fort  Sumter  can  be  taken  the  more  easily  if  Fort  Moultrie  is  taken 
first.  From  the  latter  place  and  its  vicinity  all  the  barbette  guns 
Avhich  bear  upon  Cummings  Point  can  be  enfiladed  or  taken  in  reverse. 
There  is  a platform  10  feet  in  width  around  Fort  Sumter,  about  5 feet 
below  the  lower  embrasures.  The  outer  slopes  of  this  i)latform  are 
composed  of  rough  granite,  a part  of  the  original  artificial  island. 
Landing  from  boats  on  this  platform  would  be  very  difficult. 

OPERATIONS  AGAINST  CASTLE  PINCKNEY. 

This  small  work  could  not  make  much  resistance  after  the  capture  of 
Moultrie  and  Sumter,  provided  we  have  the  two  iron-plated  vessels  con- 
sidered essential  to  success  in  the  general  attack.  These  vessels  may 
take  a })osition  north  of  the  work  at  the  distance  of  about  500  yards, 
where  only  two  guns  can  bear  upon  them,  unless  batteries  have  been  bnilt 
outside  of  the  fort.  Castle  Pinckney,  to  vessels  ai)proaching  Charles- 
ton by  the  main  channel,  presents  a semi  circle  168  feet  in  diameter, 
with  eight  casemate  and  ten  barbette  guns ; two  other  barbette  gnus 
look  north.  The  interior  crest  stands  about  25  feet  above  the  foot  of 
the  scarp  and  probablj^  about  35  feet  above  low  water.  The  exterior 
pavement  is  4 or  5 feet  below  the  embrasures,  and  nearly  on  the  level  of 
the  i)arade.  The  details  may  be  learned  from  the  drawing. 

Castle  Pinckney  was  supplied  by  the  United  States  with  the  following 
armament:  For  casemates, four  42-pounders,  four  24-pounders;  for  bar- 
bette, four  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzers,  ten  24-pounders  = 22 ; two  more, 
a[)parently,  than  can  be  mounted  in  the  work. 

ESTIMATE  OF  THE  MEANS  REQUIRED  FOR  THE  GENERAL  ATTACK 
UPON  CHARLESTON  HARBOR. 

Troops,  including  enough  to  hold  some  adjacent  islands,  15,000 ; trans- 
ports sufficient  to  carry  the  troops ; fleet  as  large  as  the  one  which  capt- 
ured the  works  at  Port  Poyal. 

Iron-plated  vessels  required,  2. 

Flats  or  small  craft  drawing  3 or  4 feet,  and  capable  of  carrying 
100  men  each,  i>roof  against  musketry  and  field  artillery,  armed  with 
boat  howitzers,  30. 


Chap.  XV. J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


235 


Siege  train. — Twenty  ritle  cannon  of  large  caliber,  each  with  1,000 
rouilds  of  animiinition,  twelve  10  or  11  inch  ^^nns,  twenty  mortars,  &c. 

D.  P.  WOOi)liUKY, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel.,  Aide-de-  Camp. 

[Indorsement.] 

February  18,  1802. — Prepared  for  General  J.  G.  Barnard,  cliief  en- 
gineer Array  of  the  Potomac,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royal,  8.  C.,  February  23,  1802. 
Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Army : 

General  : Yonrs  of  the  12th  instant  was  received  to-day  by  the 
Harriet  Lane.  We  are  all  very  ranch  elated  with  your  brilliant  victories 
in  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee,  and  hope  that  they  will  extend  far- 
ther South  and  strike  a stunning  blow  to  this  rebellion. 

We  have  now  two  batteries  on  Savannah  River  of  six  guns  each; 
one  on  Jones  Island  at  Venus  Point,  and  the  other  on  the  upper  end  of 
Bird  Island.  The  river  is  effectually  blocked,  but  never  were  batteries 
put  up  and  maintained  under  precisely  the  same  circurastanees  before. 
The  guns  were  hauled  by  hand  over  the  soft  marsh  of  Jones  Island 
with  the  greatest  labor  the  distance  of  a mile,  the  marsh  knee-deep  and 
covered  with  water  at  high  tide;  indeed,  both  batteries  are  actually  in 
the  river. 

We  have  taken  since  yesterday  morning  some  two  or  three  citizens 
of  Savannah  endeavoring  to  get  a mail  down  to  Pulaski  througli  a by- 
creek not  far  Irom  Tybee.  They  say  that  Savannah  could  very  easily 
have  been  taken  thirty  days  ago  had  we  gone  straight  ui)  the  river  at 
that  time,  which  fully  couffrms  my  opinion,  which  I endeavored  to  carry 
out,  but  failed  in  consequence  of  the  unwillingness  of  the  Navy  to  do 
it,  though  they  at  first  agreed  to. 

The  Navy  have  not  yet  been  ready  for  Fernandina,  but  if  the  weather 
will  suit  we  shall  probably  start  to-morrow  morning.  Whilst  this  expe- 
dition is  carried  out  our  siege  artillery  will  be  arriving  and  our  mortar 
and  columbiad  battery  erecting  on  Tybee,  when  it  is  hoped  that  I shall 
be  able  to  commence  oi)erations  on  Savannah. 

The  prisoners  from  Savannah  bring  word  that  the  news  of  the  fall  of 
Fort  Honelson  had  reached  Savannah ; that  the  victory  was  complete, 
and  5,000  xirisoners  taken.  We  hoiie  it  is  true  and  believe  that  it  is. 

Very  truly,  yours,  T.  W.  SHERIMAN, 

Brigadier- General.,  Commanding. 

Pulaski  is  reported  to  have  trom  six  to  ten  months’  provisions  for  its 
garrison,  about  500  men,  but  the  iirisoners  say  that  they  have  only  am- 
munition enough  for  two  days’  fighting. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Ojf  Tybee,  Ga.,  February  27,  1862. 
The  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington,  D.  C. : 

Sir  : It  was  my  intention  to  accompany  the  exxiedition  for  Fernan- 
dina, and  while  waiting  in  Warsaw  Sound  for  the  naval  force  to  join 
us  from  Hilton  Head  I received  the  imxiortant  information  that  Bruns- 


236  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Trick  and  the  forts  at  Saint  Simon’s  have  been  evacuated  since  the  15th 
instant.  This  news  was  brought  by  a refugee  from  Savannah,  and  is 
corroborated  by  the  Charleston  papers  of  the  18th  instant.  Our  threat 
upon  Savannah  has  therefore  already  reduced  the  strongest  hold  of  the 
enemy  south  of  us,  and  the  fall  of  the  city  would  undoubtedly  produce 
the  fall  of  all  forts  on  the  coast  between  here  and  Saint  Augustine, 
as  predicted  in  my  letter  of  the  14th  of  December  last.  But  as  this 
expedition,  planned  upwards  of  a month  ago,  in  order  to  economize 
and  make  the  most  of  a short  i)eriod  of  time,  in  which  nothing  else 
could  be  done  with  the  troops  engaged  in  it,  has  been  waiting  at  the 
expense  of  many  transports  lying  idle  and  some  sacrifice  of  life,  1 think 
it  should  proceed,  particularly  as  the  Navy  are  anxious  to  complete  it, 
notwithstanding  the  period  of  time  in  which  it  was  to  be  accomplished 
has  long  since  run  out.  But  as  the  enemy  are  discovered  to  be  concen- 
trating most  of  their  forces  on  Savannah,  and  guns  too  (as  upwards  of 
twenty  pieces  of  heavy  caliber  are  known  to  have  recently  been  brought 
from  Brunswick  and  planted  about  Savannah),  I consider  the  coast  now 
but  a cobweb,  to  be  penetrated  with  ease,  and  am  therefore  on  my  return 
to  Port  Eoyal,  to  continue  the  charge  of  affairs  in  that  quarter,  leaving 
the  expedition  with  Brigadier-General  Wrigbt.  This  division  of  force 
at  this  particular  juncture  may  be  regarded  as  a fault,  but  the  reason 
for  it  can  be  seen  from  what  I have  stated,  and,  besides,  Fernandina  and 
Brunswick  are  points  of  some  importance. 

The  Savannah  Eiver  is  closed  as  tight  as  a bottle  between  Savannah 
and  Pulaski,  and  we  are  pushing  preparations  at  Tybee  for  bombard- 
ment as  rapidly  as  the  weather  will  allow. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


Headquauters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Eoyal,  S.  0.,  February  28,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan  : 

General  : The  deserters  just  in  from  Savannah  say  there  are  about 
65,000  troops  in  and  about  the  city,  which  is  well  fortified  both  on  the 
land  and  river  sides.  They  are  moving  hc'aven  and  earth  for  a secure 
defense.  So  far  as  I can  ascertain  some  of  the  smaller  forts  on  the  coast 
are  being  stripped  of  artillery  with  which  to  protect  Savannah.  The 
abandonment  of  Brunswick  is  an  evidence  of  it. ' I hope  to  soon  get 
under  way  at  Tybee,  though  the  rough  stormy  weather  makes  it  very 
slow  in  getting  the  ordnance  landed.  We  must  get  entirely  ready  before 
we  open  The  Massachusetts  regiment  has  arrived,  and  we  hope  more 
will  follow  soon.  I rather  think  we  shall  have  to  take  Savannah  by  way 
of  Vernon  Eiv  er.  If  the  Navy  could  not  assist  us  last  month,  when  no 
guns  had  been  put  up  on  the  river  except  those  at  Fort  Jackson,  it  cer- 
tainly cannot  now,  when  the  enemy  have  completed  so  many  of  them. 

Our  siege  artillery  is  arriving.  The  news  I have  through  Savannah 
papers  (found  with  the  prisoners)  gives  the  most  cheering  and  welcome 
accounts  of  your  successes,  and,  general,  I most  sincerely  congratulate 
you  on  your  plans  being  carried  out  with  such  brilliant  successes.  My 
opinion  is  that  you  have  about  crushed  this  rebellion  already.  The 
Savannah  and  Charleston  papers  show  a deeply  saddened  spirit  among 
the  people,  though  yet  an  apparently  determined  one;  but  I know  the 
people  of  the  South  are  unable  to  stand  this  state  of  things  long.  They 


237 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

are  quick  to  figlit  when  occasion  offers,  hut  as  quick  to  fall  when  mis- 
fortune occurs. 

Yours,  very  truly,  T.  W.  SIJERMANT, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Ahsiract  from  return  of  the  Expeditionary  Corps,  commanded  hy  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  TV. 
Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  for  February,  18(52. 


Present. 

n 

0 

a 

St.ations. 

Odicers. 

Men. 

Pi 

o . 

'a 

Remarks. 

For  duty. 

Total. 

For  duty. 

Total. 

fcC 

o 

CD 

tij 

Beaufort,  S.  C 

121 

138 

2,  895 

3,  373 

3,  737 

The  2d  Brigade  and  Bockwell’s 
(Connecticut)  battery. 

Daiifuskie  Isl.and,  S.  C.. 

34 

37 

790 

852 

906 

Headquarters  1st  Biigade  and  48th 
(New  York. 

Edisto  Island,  S.  C 

21 

22 

538 

572 

613 

47 th  New  York. 

Fort  Wolles,  S.  C 

01 

65 

1,310 

1,  570 

1,705 

76th  Pennsylvania  and  3d  Rhode 
Island. 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C 

188 

201 

4,  657 

5,  034 

5,  568 

8th  Maine,  28th  Massachusetts, 
1st  Massachusetl.s  Cavalry,  3d 
Now  Hampshire,  1st  New  York 
Engineers,  and  55th  Pennsyl- 
vania. 

Otter  Island 

33 

33 

772 

856 

935 

45th  Pennsylvania. 

Savannah  ilivcr 

2 

2 

60 

63 

143 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E. 

Tvbee  Island,  Ga 

59 

66 

1,  316 

1,  546 

1,  655 

7th  Connecticut  and  46th  New 
York. 

W arsaw  Sound,  Ga 

129 

131 

3,  006 

3,  267 

3,  708 

Headquarters  3d  Brigade,  6th  Con- 
necticut, 9th  Maine,  4th 
New  Hampshire,  and  97th  Penn- 
sylvania. 

Division  headquarters  . . 

28 

28 

26 

26 

55 

Headquarters  staff,  &c. 

Total 

G7G 

723 

15,  370 

17, 159 

19,028 

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  EXPEDITIONARY  CORPS,  FEBRUARY  2S,  1862. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Yiele. 

8tli  Maine,  Col.  John  D.  Rust. 

3d  New  Hampshire,  Col.  E.  Q.  Fellows. 
4(5th  New  York,  Col.  Rudolph  Rosa. 

47th  New  York,  Col.  Henry  Moore. 

48th  New  York,  Col.  James  H.  Perry. 

55th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Richard  YVhite. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens. 

8th  Michigan,  Col.  Wm.  M.  Fenton. 

79th  New  York,  Col.  Addison  Farnsworth. 
50th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  B.  C.  Christ. 
100th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Daniel  Leasure. 


Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright. 

6th  Connecticut,  Col.  John  L.  Chattield. 
7th  Connecticut,  Col.  Alfred  H.  Terry. 

9th  Maine,  Col.  Rishworth  Rich. 

4th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Thomas  J. 
Whipple. 

OHh  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Henry  R.  Guss. 
Troops  not  brigaded. 

28th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Wm.  Montieth. 
1st  New  York  Engineers,  Col.  E.  W.  Serrell. 
45th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Thomas  Welsh. 
76th  Pennsylvauia,  Col.  John  M.  Power. 
3d  Rhode  Island,  Col.  NathauielW.  Brown. 
1st  Massachusetts  Cavaliy,  Col.  Robert 
Williams. 

Ist  Connecticut  Battery,  Capt.  A.  P.  Rock- 
well. 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E,  Capt.  John 
Hamilton. 


238  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Saint  Andrew^s  Sound,  Ga.,  March  2,  18G2. 

Col.  H.  E.  Cuss, 

Commanding  Ninety -seventh  Pennsylvania  Regiment : 

Colonel:  Intelligence,  deemed  reliable,  has  been  received  to  the 
effect  that  the  enemy  has  abandoned  Fernandina  and  its  vicinity, 
removing  the  guns  and  property  at  that  point.  It  has  therefore  been 
decided  that,  instead  of  proceeding  according  to  the  original  project, 
a portion  of  the  light-draught  gunboats,  with  a part  of  the  land  force, 
shall  proceed  at  once  by  the  inland  passage,  while  the  remainder  of  the 
fleet  will  go  outside.  Your  regiment,  or  rather  the  eight  companies  on 
board  the  Boston,  will  accompany  the  gunboats  by  the  inland  passage, 
and  the  transport  will  at  once  move  up  the  sound  to  join  them. 

On  your  arrival  at  Fernandina  you  will  co-operate  with  the  naval 
force  under  the  command  of  Capt.  P.  Drayton,  of  the  Pawnee,  by  land- 
ing your  troops,  taking  possessionof  the  town  and  of  the  railroad  and 
its  crossing  over  the  marsh  and  the  river. 

The  possession  of  this  road  in  a serviceable  condition  may  be  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  our  further  operations,  and  you  will  consequently 
use  every  exertion  to  prevent  its  destruction  by  the  enemy. 

Should  any  of  the  enemy  be  still  upon  Amelia  Island,  you  will  effect 
their  capture,  if  possible. 

Preserve  all  ])ublic  property  left  behind,  and  afford  every  protection 
to  private  property,  not  permitting  the  appropriation  of  the  smallest 
article  by  the  troops  of  your  command. 

Wishing  you  every  success,  I am,  very  respectfully, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


March  6,  1862. 

General  Sherman, 

Port  Royal : 

If  it  will  not  interfere  with  any  operation  of  greater  importance  that 
you  may  now  have  on  hand,  the  General-in-Chief  hopes  that  you  will 
be  able  to  arrange  with  Commodore  DuPont  for  the  prompt  occupa- 
tion of  Fernandina,  in  accordance  with  the  original  plan  of  the  expe- 
dition. It  is  supposed  that  this  operation  will  not  interfere  with  the 
reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski,  which  is  regarded  as  a matter  of  very  great 
importance. 

The  general  would  also  be  glad  to  have  your  views  in  regard  to  the 
best  disposition  to  be  made  of  your  troops  during  the  approaching 
unhealthy  season,  and  whether  any  peculiar  arrangements  should  be 
made  to  secure  their  health  during  the  summer  in  regard  to  barracks, 
diet,  &c. 

Will  General  Thomas  please  write  about  the  substance  of  the  above 
and  send  it  to  the  Kavy  Department  before  1 o’clock  to  day,  together 
with  the  private  letter  accompanying  it 
Very  truly, 

GFO.  B.  McClellan, 

Major-  General, 

* The  letter  based  upon  this,  and  acknowledged  by  Sherman  (p.  253)  March  26,  is 
not  found. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


239 


IlEADQUARTEES  TlIIRD  BRIGADE,  ExPED’Y  CORl’S, 

Fernandinctj  Fla.^  March  7,  1<S02. 

General  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  C.: 

General  : After  consultation  with  the  flag-officer,  it  lias  been  deter- 
mined to  send  an  expedition  to  the  Saint  John’s  lliver,  to  consist  of 
several  gunboats  and  a portion  of  the  land  force,  and  it  is  directed  to 
start  to-morrow  morning.  The  troops  will  consist  of  eight  comjianies  of 
the  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Kegiment,  under  the  command  of  Col.  T.  J. 
Whipple. 

From  all  that  can  be  gathered  in  the  way  of  information,  it  is  believed 
that  a portion,  at  any  rate,  of  the  guns  removed  from  this  place  previous 
to  our  arrival  have  been  taken  to  Jacksonville,  or  some.point  below  on 
the  river;  that  the  enemy  has  a battery  at  the  moutli  of  the  river, 
another  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  and  that  a third  has  been  commenced  at 
Dame’s  Point.  To  destroy  these  batteries,  take  possession  of  the  guns, 
and  capture  Jacksonville  are  the  objects  of  the  expedition. 

It  is  agreed  by  Flag-Officer  DuPont  and  myself  that  the  permanent 
occupation  of  Jacksonville  at  this  time  would  not  be  judicious,  nor  do  I 
think  it  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  your  instructions  of  the  27th 
ultimo.  It  has  therefore  been  determined  that,  while  it  may  be  desir- 
able to  laud  and  occupy  Jacksonville  or  other  points  for  a few  hours 
for  purposes  of  reconnaissance  or  other  necessary  service,  the  troops 
shall  be  Avithdrawn  and  return  with  the  gunboats  when  this  shall  have 
been  accomplished. 

The  McClellan,  which  did  not  reach  this  place  till  yesterday,  will  go 
bacK  to  Hilton  Head  to-morrow,  with  orders  to  report  to  you.  The 
marines,  at  the  request  of  the  flag-officer,  return  in  her.  The  Star  of 
the  South  will  also  ]n‘obably  start  for  Hilton  Head  to-morrow. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  seiwant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Fernandina,  Fla.,  March  7,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  J.  Whipple, 

Cammanding  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Regiment : 

Colonel  : After  having  embarked  the  eight  companies  of  your  regi- 
ment on  board  the  steamer  Boston,  in  pursuance  of  the  verbal  instruc- 
tions given  you  this  evening,  you  will  proceed  with  the  gunboat  expe- 
dition to  the  Saint  John’s  Kiver,  under  the  command  of  Commander  J. 
K.  Goldsborough,  and  co-operate  with  that  officer  in  the  objects  of  the 
expedition. 

It  is  understood  between, the  flag-officer  commanding  the  naval  forces 
and  myself  that  neither  Jacksonville  nor  any  point  upon  the  riA^er  below 
is  to  be  permanently  occupied  bj^  our  forces ; but  it  may  be  desirable  to 
land  at  one  or  more  of  these  points,  for  the  purpose  of  reconnaissance  or 
other  desirable  services,  and  occupy  them  for  a few  hours  only,  return- 
ing, of  course,  with  the  gunboats  to  this  place  when  this  shall  haA^e  been 
accomplished. 

You  will  place  yourself  in  official  relation  with  Captain  Goldsborough, 
commanding  the  naval  force,  who  is  now  off  the  Saint  John’s  entrance, 


240  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

on  your  arrival  there,  and  arrange  with  him  in  regard  to  the  operations 
in  which  the  services  of  your  command  may  be  required. 

Wishing  you  every  success,  I am,  very  respectfudy,  your  obedient 
servant,  , 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquaetees  Expeditionaey  Coeps, 

Port  Eoyalj  8.  0.,  March  8,  1862. 

To  the  Adjutant-Geneeal  IJ.  S.  Aemy, 

Washington,  B.  C.  : 

SiE:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  instruc- 
tions of  the  12th  ultimo. 

I hnd  it  impracticable  to  conform  to  those  instructions  with  that 
promptitude  which  may  perhaps  be  expected  without  incurring  a strong 
liability  to  produce  a misconception  on  the  part  of  the  blacks  as  to  what 
the  Government  intends  to  do  with  them.  There  is  much  danger  of 
producing  a panic  among  them  by  too  sudden  a movement.  Many  of 
them  surmise  that  they  will  ultimately  be  sent  to  Cuba  and  sold,  and 
to  permit  a stir  among  them  of  this  sort  would  be  attended  with  unfor- 
tunate results. 

I think,  however,  that  from  400  to  500  will  be  induced  to  accept  the 
offer  made  to  them,  viz,  to  accept  their  services  for  a limited  period, 
with  a promise  that  they  shall  return  to  their  homes  after  their  serv- 
ices are  performed;  and  as  soon  as  I hear  from  Edisto,  if  the  result  of 
the  inquiry  is  as  favorable  as  from  other  points,  they  shall  be  shipped 
by  the  first  convenience. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquaetees  Expeditionaey  Coeps, 

Fort  Royal,  8.  C.,  March  8,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Geoege  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Army : 

Geneeal  : Yours  of  February  14  was  received  on  the  3d  instant.  Pu- 
laski is  thoroughly  cut  off,  and  the  batteries  are  being  erected  on  Tybee 
as  rapidly  as  the  rough  weather  for  landing  the  ordnance  will  permit. 

Agreeably  to  your  instruction  no  further  preparations  will  be  made 
for  the  attack  of  Savannah. 

Before  the  expedition  sailed  for  Fernandina  I ascertained  that  Bruns- 
wick and  its  dependencies  had  been  evacuated  for  the  re-enforcement  in 
men  and  guns  of  Savannah,  and  though  I have  not  yet  received  any 
positive  information  from  Fernandina,  there  is  but  little  doubt  but  it 
was  occupied  without  the  firing  of  a gun. 

From  information  we  have  gathered  since  I wrote  you  on  the  subject 
of  Charleston,  I have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  that  city  and  its 
defenses  can  be  carried  with  much  more  ease  than  I anticipated  in  that 
letter.  Our  occupation  of  Edisto  Island  and  some  reconnaissances  made 
by  the  Navy  convince  me  that  Charleston  can  be  beleaguered  in  a very 


Ohap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


241 


ba])py  manner  without  liaviii"  to  carry  the  forts  near  the  moutli  of  the 
Stono,  and  indeed  by  turning*  tliem.  Gunboats  can  ascend  the  iTorth 
Edisto  and  Wadmalaw  Kivers,  and  possibly  into  tlie  8tono  itself,  which 
would  bring  them  within  5 miles  of  the  city.  There  is  a good  road  all 
the  way  from  North  Edisto  River  to  Charleston,  and  so  situated  tha  t a 
land  force  can  co-operate  with  the  gunboats  and  be  at  hand  to  assist 
removing  any  oljstructions  found  in  the  river  or  reducing  any  works 
that  may  be  found  in  approaching  the  city.  To  ascertain  precisely 
where  these  obstructions  and  works  are  situated  will  require  a recon- 
naissance in  force  preliminary  to  any  grand  movement.  It  is  much 
more  practicable  a route  than  the  one  to  Savannah.  The  route  proposed 
will  in  a great  measure  turn  all  the  defenses  of  the  enemy  on  James 
Island  and  effectually  cut  off  all  approaches  to  the  city  by  land  from 
that  quarter.  The  demonstration,  if  successful,  will  i)roduce  the  evacu- 
ation of  Charleston,  or,  should  it  not,  the  city  can  .be  shelled  at  leisure 
from  the  right  bank  of  the  Ashley.  The  forts  in  the  harbor  would  prob- 
ably fall  of  themselves,  but,  if  not,  Sumter  can  be  shelled  and  possibly 
reached  from  James  and  Morris  Islands.  To  make  matters  still  more 
sure,  a demonstration  and  indeed  a real  attack  on  Point  Pleasant  from 
Bull’s  Bay  would  probably  produce  the  fall  of  Moultrie.  Indeed  I think 
Moultrie  could  be  easily  carried  by  a coup  de  main,  if  thought  necessary. 

I will  endeavor  to  give  this  subject  a very  early  attention  and  i)romptly 
inform  you  of  all  I can  gather.  In  the  mean  while,  general,  iffease  fur- 
nish me  with  your  general  idea  of  what  harbors  South  should  be  garri- 
soned. I have  no  doubt  but  all  down  to  Augustine  will  be  at  once  at 
our  disposal  (including  Saint  John’s  River).  Eernandina  and  Bruns- 
wick are  harbors  of  imi)ortance,  but  are  Augustine,  Jacksonville,  Darien, 
&c.,  sufficiently  so  to  absorb  our  forces  ?• 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Fernandina,  Fla.,  March  8,  1862. 

General  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Hilton  Head : 

General:  By  the  steamer  McClellan,  which  left  for  Hilton  Head 
this  morning,  I informed  you  of  the  expedition  fitted  out  for  the  Saint 
John’s  River.  It  started  about  11.30  a.  m.  to-day. 

No  very  reliable  information  in  regard  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  rebel 
force  which  left  this  place  has  yet  been  jirocured,  though  am  induced 
to  believe  that  a part,  perhaps  the  whole,  have  stopped  at  Baldwin,  the 
junction  of  Florida  and  Cedar  Keys  and  the  Jacksonville  and  Tallahas- 
see Railroads,  47  miles  from  this  place.  The  enemy,  in  his  retreat, 
burned  the  bridges  of  the  railroad,  making  the  api)roach  from  this  isl- 
and to  the  main  quite  difficulty  and  I have  not  therefore  considered  it 
judicious,  or  indeed  important  as  yet,  to  send  any  reconnaissance  in  that 
direction,  as  I am  not  in  condition  to  move  in  force  to  any  distance 
inland. 

Bearing  in  mind  your  instructions  to  return  as  soon  as  practicable  to 
Hilton  Head  any  portion  of  the  force  not  indispensable  for  the  defense 
of  this  place,  I have  given  much  consideration  to  the  question  of  the 
minimum  garrison  which  would  render  the  position  secure,  and  have 
concluded  that  two  regiments  ought  to  be  ample,  provided  a naval  force 
16  R R voi.  VI 


242  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


of  two  vessels  remains  in  the  harbor.  After  a short  time  this  force 
might,  I believe,  be  still  reduced,  but  for  the  present  I cannot  think  it 
advisable. 

I shall  therefore,  unless  instructed  to  the  contrary,  send  one  regiment 
back  to  Hilton  Head  as  soon  as  the  Saint  John’s  expedition  returns, 
and  other  projects,  if  determined  upon,  shall  be  accomplished,  remain- 
ing here  myself  till  I hear  from  you  that  my  services  are  needed  else- 
where. 

The  people  still  remaining  generally  express  their  gratitude  for  the 
unexpected  good  treatment  they  experience  at  our  hands  and  for  the 
protection  extended  to  their  property,  and  profess  a desire  to  have 
friends  return  to  their  homes. 

Perhaps  a liberal  course  toward  these  people  may  have  a happy  effect 
in  the  State  at  large,  in  proving  to  the  inhabitants  that  we  do  not  come 
amongst  them  with  the  designs  against  their  persons  and  property 
which  their  leaders  and  their  public  journals  have  so  falsely  charged 
against  us. 

In  pursuing  this  course  I shall  be  careful  to  omit  no  precaution  neces- 
sary to  the  full  security  of  the  command  against  any  acts  of  the  people 
by  which  intelligence  can  be  conveyed  to  the  enemy  to  our  injury. 

I desire  to  be  distinctly  understood  that,  while  I propose  to  remain 
here  in  command  till  I receive  your  orders,  I shall  be  much  disappointed 
if  I am  kept  here  while  active  operations  are  being  prosecuted  else- 
where. Forty-eight  hours  will  suffice  to  bring  nre  to  Hilton  Head,  or 
any  intermediate  point,  after  your  orders  are  issued. 

I inclose  a copy  of  a report  from  Lieutenant  Tardy  * in  regard  to  the 
condition  of  Fort  Clinch,  which  agrees  perfectly  with  the  results  of  my 
own  hasty  examination  of  the*work.  I will  call  upon  him  for  estimates 
for  its  improvement  to  the  extent  he  suggests.  The  batteries  on  the 
seaward  side  of  the  fort,  containing  places  for  ten  guns,  need  not  be 
occupied  by  us. 

I alsp  send  a copy  of  the  report  of  a reconnaissance  made  by  Captain 
Sears*  of  the  enemy’s  defenses  on  the  southern  end  of  Cumberland  Isl- 
and. I have  not  had  time  to  give  them  a personal  examination. 

I propose  sending  back  one  section  of  Captain  Eansom’s  battery,  per- 
haps both. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  March  9,  1862. 
To  the  Adjutant-General  TJ.  S.  Army, 

Washington,  J),  G, : 

Sir;  From  the  reports  of  Brigadier- General  Wright,  copies  of  which 
I herewith  inclose,!  you  will  perceive  that  Amelia  Island  has  been  occu- 
pied by  our  forces  without  resistance. 

It  is  my  desire  to  carry  out  the  views  of  the  Government  as  to  the 
occupation  of  this  coast  in  the  most  judicious  manner. 

With  the  force  now  at  my  disposal,  and  without  any  plan  of  opera- 
tions into  the  interior,  I propose  to  occupy  only  some  of  the  most  im- 
portant harbor  outlets,  to  the  end  only,  at  this  time,  of  preventing  the 

* Not  found.  tSee  report  of  March  5,  p.  96,  and  letter  of  March  7,  p.  239. 


Chap.  XV.l 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


243 


running  of  the  blockade.  Saint  Simon’s,  Fernandina,  the  mouth  of  the 
Saint  John’s,  and  possibly  Saint  Augustine,  would,  I think,  be  sufficient. 
Other  places  of  some  little  importance  could  be  blockaded  by  the  FTavy. 

The  occupation  of  the  towns  on  the  main,  such  as  Jacksonville,  Saint 
Mary’s,  Darien,  Brunswick,  would  be  injudicious  with  our  present  force, 
unless  we  are  sure  of  being  supported  by  a strong  party  of  Unionists, 
and  it  is  important  to  first  ascertain  whether  such  a party  exists  to  much 
extent.  The  desertion  of  Fernandina  and  Saint  Mary’s  does  not  look 
very  favorable. 

I shall  endeavor  to  rally  the  Union  men  to  the  support  of  their  flag. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T*.  W.  SHEBMAN, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Third  Briuade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Fernandina^  Fla.,  March  9,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  J.  Whipple, 

Commanding  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Regiment : 

Colonel  : Flag-Officer  DuPont  proceeds  to-day  to  the  Saint  John’s 
Eiver,  and,  after  the  contemplated  operations  in  that  vicinity  shall  have 
been  finished,  will  probably  continue  down  the  coast  with  the  naval 
force  to  Saint  Augustine,  in  which  case  you  will  still  remain  with  the 
Navy  and  co-operate  with  it. 

Should  Saint  Augustine  be  taken  possession  of,  and  it  should  be  con- 
sidered by  the  flag-officer  important  to  occupy  it,  you  are  authorized  to 
leave,  say,  two  companies  in  Fort  Marion  as  a garrison,  with  at  least 
ten  days’  provisions,  a trusty  captain  being  placed  in  command.  The 
remainder  of  your  force  will  then  return  to  its  place  in  the  Boston. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army,  A.  G.  O., 

Washington,  March  10,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding,  &c..  Port  Royal,  S.  C. : 

General  : I am  instructed  to  inform  you  that,  in  consequence  of 
information  just  received  that  the  enemy  is  abandoning  his  position  at 
Gentreville  and  towards  Manassas,  a forward  movement  of  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac  has  been  ordered  this  day,  to  seize  ut)on  any  advantage 
that  may  offer. 

I am,  sir,  &c.,  L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


BDeadquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 

Fernandina,  Fla.,  March  10, 1862. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : The  inhabitants  left  behind  in  the  evacuation  of  this  place 
by  the  rebels  are  mainly  of  the  poorer  classes  of  whites  and  free  blacks, 
with  a few  slaves,  many  of  whom  represent  themselves  as  destitute  of 


244  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 


the  means  of  living,  and  generally  as  without  money,  except  the  worth- 
less paper  in  circulation  before  our  occupation.  Thus  far  it  has  not 
been  necessary  to  assist  them  to  any  considerable  extent,  but  it  proba- 
bly soon  will  be,  unless  some  means  can  be  devised  to  aid  them  in  pro- 
curing their  subsistence. 

The  army  departments  here  need  little,  if  any,  hired  labor,  and  there 
is  no  private  business  carried  on  to  afford  them  employment.  The 
question  therefore  presents  itself,  what  is  fo  be  done  with  these  peo- 
ple, who  cannot  be  permitted  to  starve  if  they  are  ready  to  earn  their 
subsistence,  and  only  ask  employment  to  take  care  of  themselves  ! " In- 
structions in  regard  to  the  course  to  be  pursued  in  this  matter  are 
respectfully  requested. 

The  contraband  question  also  presents  itself,  and  will  soon  require  to 
be  decided  by  the  military  authority,  as  regards  their  support.  Some 
of  these  people  were  left  behind,  and  others  are  presenting  themselves 
daily,  coming  in  from  different  directions.  At  Saint  Mary’s,  where  I 
was  to-day  on  a reconnaissance  in  company  with  Captain  Drayton,  com- 
manding the  naval  forces  here,  there  are  a great  many  negroes  still 
remaining,  some  of  whom  have  already  followed  us  to  Fernandina.  As 
before  remarked,  we  do  not  need  their  services  at  present,  and  I cannot 
conceive  we  shall,  unless  it  be  in  building  up  Fort  Clinch.  At  this  work 
most  of  the  men  might  be  emi^loyed  if  there  was  any  fund  for  the  pay- 
nient  for  their  services,  but  unless  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  can 
supply  the  money  there  is  none  available  for  the  purpose.  In  tliis  mat- 
ter, too,  I would  request  instructions.  The  suggestion  just  made  for  the 
employment  of  the  contrabands  might  be  extended  to  the  free  blacks 
and  to  the  whites.  None  other  presents  itself  to  me  in  regard  to  either 
of  the  classes  thrown  upon  our  hands. 

The  Ben  DeFord  arrived  this  morning,  bringing  quartermasters’  and 
commissary  stores.  She  will  be  discharged  and  sent  back  without  delay. 

The  five  days’ ^supply  on  hand,  with  that  now  received,  will  provide 
[)rovisions  for  the  present  force  for  the  next  forty  days,  not  including, 
however,  what  it  may  be  necessary  to  issue  to  citizens  and  contrabands 
to  keep  them  from  starvation.  ^ 

I have  directed  that  the  Boston  be  sent  back  to  Hilton  Head  to 
report  to  the  chief  quartermaster.  This  will  leave  here,  in  the  way  of 
transports,  the  Empire  City,  the  Belvidere,  and  the  George’s  Creek,  all 
of  which  will  be  needed  for  the  return  to  Hilton  Head  of  the  force 
which  I have  proposed  soon  to  send  back. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Exped’y  Corps, 
Fernandina^  Fla..,  Mareh  13,  1862. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- G ene ral : 

Captain  : I have  to  report,  in  regard  to  the  slaves  found  here  and 
those  who  have  since  come  in,  tliat  I have  not  attempted  to  interfere 
with  the  rights  of  the  owner  so  long  as  he  remained  within  our  lines 
and  conducted  himself  in  a quiet  and  orderly  manner,  but  tliat  I have 
refused  permission  to  remove  any  slave  from  "the  limits  of  the  command 
on  any  iilea  whatever. 

I have  conceived  that  the  xiroperty  of  citizens  in  sfnes  should  be 


COKKESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


Chap.  XV.] 


245 


protected  to  the  extent  referred  to,  and  shall  continue  the  same  policy 
in  regard  to  them  unless  I receive  instructions  to  the  contrary. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  G.  WIIIGHT, 
Brigadier- General , Comynanding. 

[Indorsement.] 


Approved,  by  order  of  Brigadier-General  Sherman: 

L.  H.  PELOUZE, 
Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


March  15, 1862. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

■Hiltoyi  Head,  8.  C.,  March  13,  1862. 

General  Egbert  L.  Yiele, 

Commanding  Forces,  Hanfuslde  Island,  8.  G.  : 

General:  The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  inform  you  that 
he  is  forced  to  the  conclusion,  on  his  late  inspection  of  the  works  in 
Savannah  Eiver,  that  not  all  the  measures  are  taken  to  avoid  disagree- 
able things  that  should  be.  Of  the  two  light-draught  steamers,  the 
Petitt  lays  at  Yenus  Point,  and,  if  he  understood  you,  does  not  move 
from  there,  and  the  Mayflower  does  very  little  at  best. 

It  appears  to  him  that  these  two  boats  should  move  rapidly  about 
from  place  to  place  j for  instance,  the  Petitt  should  be  active  enough  to 
cover  your  rear  from  any  assaults  by  way  of  New  Eiver,  and  at  the 
same  time  be  prepared  to  assist  in  the  Savannah  Eiver  in  case  of  high 
tides  or  other  emergencies.  By  taking  advantage  of  the  tides,  a great 
deal  might  be  done  by  the?e  two  steamers.  They  should  be  so  handled 
as  to  be  seen  by  the  enemy  at  unexpected  points  and  at  unexpected 
times. 

He  does  not  think  that,  considering  the  amount  of  force  at  your  dis- 
posal and  the  time  occupied,  the  Yenus  Point  battery  is  in  that  advanced 
state  that  it  should  bOc  As  to  the  10-inch  columbiad,  it  should  have 
been  up  ten  days  ago.  It  was  sent  from  here  a month  ago. 

The  Bird  Island  battery  seems  to  be  everything  that  is  desired,  and 
great  credit  is  due  to  Major  Beard  and  his  officers  and  men  for  their 
energy  and  industry. 

I am  also  directed  to  communicate  that  the  New  Hampshire  Battal- 
ion, under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jackson,  was  sent  to  you  with  three  days’ 
provisions,  for  a iiarticular  purpose.  That  purpose  should  have  been 
accomplished,  if  accomplished  at  all,  in  three  days,  and  that  he  is  dis- 
satisfied with  the  delay  that  has  attended  all  its  movements. 

I am  further  directed  to  remind  you  of  the  necessity  of  the  chief  of 
artillery  and  your  engineer  officer  joining  him  the  moment  they  can  be 
spared. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[L.  H.  PELOUZE,] 

Cajgtaiyi,  Fifteenth  Infantry,  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  General, 


AYillard’s  Hotel, 
^Vashington,  J>.  C.,  Alarch  14,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

8ecretary  of  ^¥ar : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  note  of  this 
morning,  ordering  me  to  report  without  delay  upon  the  military  opera- 


246  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

tions  that  have  been  executed  or  are  in  progress,  or  in  contemplation, 
against  Savannah  and  Fort  Pulaski,  to  include  everything  that  in  my 
judgment  ^‘the  Department  should  know,  or  that  would  be  useful  to  the 
Government  or  the  forces  there,  and  generally  as  to  the  means  proposed 
or  wanted  for  a speedy  and  successful  result.” 

In  obedience  to  this  order,  I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  state  that, 
apparently  with  a view  to  forming  a basis  of  operations,  a considerable 
area  has  been  fortified  at  Hilton  Head  by  means  of  a line  of  earthworks,  a 
block-house,  beach  batteries,  flooding  the  marshes,  &c.,  and  the  construc- 
tion of  piers,  one  of  great  length  and  to  deep  water  (21  feet  low  tide). 

This  area  is  sufficient  to  encamp  from  25,000  to  30,000  men,  crowded ; 
is  now  defended  by  the  guns  of  Fort  Welles,  two  guns  in  the  beach 
battery  on  our  right,  and  twenty -two  guns  in  the  works  in  the  advance. 
The  guns  are  not  up  in  the  beach  battery  on  our  left. 

From  this  point  detachments  have  been  sent  forward. 

Early  in  January  last,  obstructions  placed  by  the  rebels  in  Walks  Cut, 
consisting  of  piles  and  an  old  ship,  were  taken  away  by  our  forces. 
Subsequently  a battery  of  six  guns  was  built  by  us  on  Jones  Island, 
at  Yenus  Point,  in  the  Savannah  Eiver,  and  recently  another  on  Bird 
Island,  still  nearer  to  Savannah,  which  by  this  time  mounts  three  or 
four  guns. 

At  Tybee  Island  mortars  are  being  landed  and  mortar  beds  and  plat- 
forms are  being  erected.  A battery  of  three  guns  was  placed  on  Goat^s 
Point,  but  it  was  understood  when  I left  that  it  was  to  be  abandoned, 
and  a sap  worked  up  from  near  the  Martello  Tower  (which  has  been  re- 
paired), and  the  mortars  placed  in  position  against  Pulaski  as  far  up 
the  beach  as  possible.  Thirteen  mortars  had  been  landed  up  to  8th 
instant,  two  of  them  13-inch. 

I learned  from  an  officer  of  the  i^^avy,  on  the  way  to  New  York,  that  an 
old  hulk  had  just  been  placed  by  our  forces  in  Lazaretto  Creek,  about 
one  and  a quarter  miles  from  Fort  Pulaski. 

Fort  Pulaski  is  said  by  a rebel  deserter  to  contain  427  men,  nine 
months’  provisions,  and  six  months’  water. 

The  old  rebel  battery  at  the  point  of  Great  Warsaw  Island  is  in  our 
possession. 

The  Skidaway  battery  opposite  Homing  marsh,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Wilmington  Eiver,  had  not  been  reduced  up  to  the  8th  instant.  It  is 
said  to  be  very  strong. 

The  rebels  are  also  camped  near  Bonaventura,  and  between  there  and 
Fort  Jackson,  on  the  Thunderbolt  road.  Eumor  had  it  that  about  30,000 
to  35,000  rebels  were  in  and  about  Savannah,  but  of  the  truth  of  these 
' suppositions  I have  my  doubts. 

A large  siege  train  is  being  put  together  at  Hilton  Head,  but  pro- 
gresses very  slowly ; eight  or  nine  guns  were  ready  last  Saturday.  I 
was  informed  the  ammunition  was  not  yet  prepared. 

As  to  what  is  contemplated  against  Savannah  I am  entirely  ignorant. 
Against  Fort  Pulaski,  I know  that  orders  have  been  given  to  prepare  to 
reduce  it. 

It  was  for  several  weeks  supposed  that  a passage  for  gunboats  existed 
from  Port  Eoyal  Sound  into  the  Savannah  Eiver  above  Fort  Pulaski 
when  the  obstructions  in  Wall’s  Cut  were  removed,  but  it  is  now  found 
otherwise,  at  least  for  a draught  of  morathan  7 feet  of  water  at  high 
tide,  except  within  range  of  the  guns  of  (he  fort. 

A reconnaissance  has  been  made  up  the  north  side  of  the  Savannah 
Eiver  from  Jones  Island  to  above  the  Union  Causeway,  about  a mile 
and  a quarter  from  the  City  of  Savannah,  by  which  it  has  been  ascer- 


€hap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  247 

tained  that  if  troops  could  be  landed  above  Elba  Island  they  could 
march  to  a point  directly  opposite  the  city. 

In  reply  to  that  part  of  your  order  requiring  my  judgment  of  the 
^means  wanted  “ to  produce  a successful  and  speedy  result,”  I have  the 
honor  to  state : 

1st.  That  in  my  opinion  the  most  essential  requisite  is  an  intelligent, 
vigorous,  energetic  general,  in  whom  the  Army  would  have  entire  confi- 
dence, who  would  counsel  with  his  principal  officers,  and  act  promptly 
upon  any  decision  he  might  form,  and  who,  having  orders,  would  con- 
centrate his  efforts  on  some  particular  object  and  accomplish  it. 

2d.  That  there  should  be  harmonious  action  between  the  land  and 
naval  forces. 

3d.  The  forces  should  either  be  greatly  augmented  or  concentrated, 
instead  of  being  scattered  up  and  down  the  coast  from  North  Edisto  to 
Fernandina,  a distance  of  130  or  140  miles. 

4th.  That  fire  should  not  be  opened  upon  Pulaski  until  at  least  all  the 
mortars  now  landed  on  Tybee  are  in  position,  and  then  that  the  Navy 
would  co-operate  as  well  as  they  may,  while,  by  having  four  or  five  re- 
liefs of  men  at  the  mortars,  shell  should  be  poured  into  the  fort  day  and 
night  incessantly,  without  allowing  any  time  for  the  rebels  to  eat,  drink, 
or  sleep  in  security  until  they  surrendered.  This  will  require  of  the 
land  forces  1,400  or  1,500  men. 

5th.  That  there  should  be  two  more  ordnance  officers  sent  there*  im- 
mediately, as  there  is  now  only  one  thoroughly  efficient  officer  of  that 
corps  on  the  ground. 

6th.  That  rafts  of  light  pine  and  palmetto  should  be  made  to  trans- 
port the  siege  train  on  the  creeks  and  up  the  Savannah  Eiver,  and  that 
while  this  is  being  done  the  Navy  should  engage  the  batteries  at  Skid- 
away,  and,  if  possible,  silence  and  capture  them,  the  siege  of  Pulaski 
being  at  the  same  time  continued. 

7th.  Kafts  and  boats  can  be  taken  into  the  Savannah  Eiver  above 
Jones  Island,  and  might  with  proper  management  be  forced  up  the  river 
to  Saint  Augustine  Creek,  where  there  is  firm  ground.  The  siege  train 
can  be  carried  in  the  same  way,  and  opposition  at  landing  met  at  the 
point  of  the  bayonet.  One  hundred  additional  ship  boats  would  greatly 
facilitate  such  a movement.  Having  reached  the  firm  ground  anywhere 
near  the  Thunderbolt  road,  either  through  the  Savannah  or  Tybee 
Eivers,  the  way  is  open  to  the  city  in  the  rear  of  Fort  Jackson. 

It  might  be  well,  if  forces  could  be  spared,  to  destroy  the  railroad 
bridge  at  Ooosawhatchie,  to  cut  off  supplies  from  Charleston,  but  this  is 
not  worth  much,  as  other  channels  are  open  by  the  Augusta  and  Savan- 
nah and  South  Carolina  Eailroads.  The  only  materials  required,  in  my 
judgment,  are  a few  more  boats  and  one  or  two  more  light-draught 
steamers. 

Sufficient  intelligence  and  energy  to  use  what  is  now  in  that  army 
can  produce  whatever  else  may  be  required. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWAED  W.  SEEEELL, 
Colonel^  Volunteer  Engineers. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Boyal^  8.  (7.,  March  15,  1862. 

Major-General  McClellan, 

Gommander-in’ Chiefs  U,  8.  Army : 

General:  From  information  just  received  from  our  forces  at  North 
Edisto  itis  probable  that  gunboats,  except  such  very  small  ones  as  would 


248  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

be  of  little  use,  cannot  get  into  the  Stono  Kiver  by  the  way  of  the  Wad- 
malaw,  as  there  will  be  an  obstruction  found  at  Kew  Cut,  from  the  fact 
that  even  at  high  water  this  cut  has  not  over  5 feet  of  water.  There  is 
a battery  of  six  pieces  at  Church  Flats  and  vessels  sunk  in  the  river 
at  that  point.  Quite  a large  force  is  also  at  this  point,  and  somewhere 
near  the  junction  of  the  Wadmalaw  and  Stono  Fivers  is  another  battery . 
The  rebels  are  evidently  pretty  strong  in  defenses  at  this  point  and 
along  the  whole  line  of  the  Stono.  This  district  is  too  far  off  to  get  very 
specific  information,  and  what  we  have  thus  far  gathered  is  from  prison- 
ers and  short  reconnaissances  made  by  the  Army  and  Favy.  The  rebel 
force  is  too  strong  in  that  vicinity  to  risk  the  small  force  we  have  up 
there  very  far  from  the  Edisto.  When  the  gunboats  return  from  the 
south  it  is  contemplated  by  Commodore  DuPont  to  make  a reconnais- 
sance in  that  direction,  and,  if  our  affairs  justify  it,  I propose  sending  a 
force  with  him. 

From  last  accounts  from  Fernandina  the  gunboats  had  not  yet  got 
into  the  Saint  John’s.  I hope  to  send  a small  force,  say  one  or  two  regi- 
ments, and  i^robably  a section  of  light  artillery,  across  from  Picolata  to 
Saint  Augustine,  and  take  the  place  in  reverse.  For  this  purpose  all 
the  troops  sent  down  with  General  Wright  are  left  there,  one  regiment, 
General  Wright  informs  me,  being  with  the  gunboats  off  the  mouth  of 
the  Saint  John’s. 

I am  very  anxious  to  raise  our  flag  over  Fort  Marion  and  Saint  Au- 
gustine Barracks,  and,  if  the  ]!!^avy  are  not  too  long  in  sounding  out 
the  channel,  expect  to  do  it  without  much  resistance. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMA]^, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

P.  S. — I send  the  Atlantic  back  to  hurry  on  the  ordnance  stores  for 
Tybee. 


General  Orders,  ) War  Department,  A.  G.  O., 

No.  26.  1 Washington^  March  15,  1862. 

The  States  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  with  the  expedi- 
tion and  forces  now  under  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman,  will  constitute  a 
military  department,  to  be  called  the  Department  of  the  South,  to  be 
commanded  by  Major-General  Hunter. 

By  order  of  the  Secretarv  of  War: 

L.  THOMAS, 

A djutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royal.,  S.  C.,  March  16,  1862. 
The  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  after  Brigadier-General  Wright 
had  taken  possession  of  Amelia  Island  I directed  him  to  send  one  or 
two  regiments,  as  circumstances  would  require,  to  Picolata,  on  the  Saint 
John’s  River,  and  march  upon  the  rear  of  Fort  Marion  and  Saint  Au- 
gustine. 

I have  just  learned  (unofficially)  from  private  sources  that  General 
Wright  is  in  quiet  possession  of  Jacksonville;  that  some  of  the  gun- 
boats are  in  Saint  Augustine  Harbor,  and  that  Fort  Marion  has  sur- 


Chai>.  XV.J  correspondence,  ETC. UNION.  249 

rendered  to  the  Whether  any  of  General  Wright’s  force  are  yet 

there  I have  not  heard. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAX, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Z7.  S.  Steamer  Caliawba^  Fernandina,  Fla.,  March  21,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright, 

Comdg.  Third  Brigade.,  ExpeWy  Corps,  Fernandina,  Fla.: 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  commanding  general  to  communi- 
cate to  you  that  you  are  authorized  to  concentrate  any  of  the  troops  of 
the  three  posts.  Saint  Augustine,  Fernandina,  and  Jacksonville,  on  any 
emergency  that  may  arise  that  will  not  admit  of  time  to  communicate 
with  these  headquarters.  Any  such  change  will  be  at  once  reported. 

I am  further  directed  to  instruct  that  all  public  property  which  may 
fall  into  your  bauds  from  the  enemy  at  the  posts  referred  to  be  inven- 
toried and  reported  according  to  the  regulations. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[L.  H.  PELOUZE,] 

Captain,  Fifteenth  Infantry,  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  General, 


Treasury  Department,  March  22,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : Mr.  Pierce,  special  agent  of  this  Department  at  Port  Royal, 
reports  that  the  plantations  have  been  deprived  so  generally  of  horses 
and  mules  that  their  cultivation  is  greatly  hindered  and  in  "some  cases 
almost  entirely  prevented.  As  these  animals  have  been  taken  for  the 
use  of  the  Army,  it  seems  but  just  that  they  should  be  restored  through 
the  agency  of  the  War  Department.  If  you  concur  with  me,  will  you 
be  good  enough  to  give  an  order  for  sending  90  mules  and  10  horses  to 
Port  Royal  immediately,  to  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  special 
agent 

I suggest  the  expediency  of  an  order  directing  the  commanders  to 
respect  private  property  on  plantations,  so  as  to  prevent  the  recurrence 
of  such  evils  as  those  referred  to. 

Yours,  truly, 

S.  P.  CHASE, 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 


War  Department, 
Washington,  D.  C.,  March  25,  1862. 

Hon.  Salmon  P.  Chase, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury  : 

Sir  : The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of 
your  communication  of  the  22d  instant,  requesting  him  to  give  an  order 
for  sending  horses  and  mules  to  Port  Royal  to  replace  those  which  have 
been  taken  from  the  plantations  in  the  neighborhood  for  the  use  of  the 
Army. 

He  does  not  think  that  he  has  any  authority  to  furnish  horses  and 


250  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

mules  for  the  purposes  mentioned,  but  would  suggest  whether  the  Treas- 
ury Department  could  not  furnish  them  properly  out  of  the  proceeds  of 
the  cotton  received  from  Port  Eoyal. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps,  , 

Fort  Eoyal,  S.  (7.,  March  25,  1862. 

To  the  Adjutant*  General  TJ.  S.  Army, 

Washington,  D.  G.: 

Sir:  Since  my  letter  of  the  9th  instant,  on  learning  that  General 
Wright,  in  conformity  to  my  previous  instructions,  had  detached  a reg- 
iment from  Fernandina  to  accompany  the  gunboats  to  the  Saint  John^s 
Biver,  and  hearing  in  the  mean  time  of  the  happy  political  sentiments 
prevailing  at  Saint  Augustine,  I sent  him  a dispatch,  urgently  recom- 
mending him  to  land  that  force  at  Picolata,  and  with  it,  and  as  much 
additional  force  as  he  might  think  it  necessary  to  take,  to  march  upon 
the  rear  of  that  city  and  take  possession  of  Fort  Marion  and  Saint 
Augustine  Barracks. 

It  has  since  appeared,  however,  that  whilst  this  force  was  entering 
the  Saint  John’s  and  occupying  Jacksonville  a few  gunboats  were  sent 
around  to  the  front  of  Saint  Augustine  with  one  company  of  General 
Wright’s  command,  and  that  on  the  appearance  of  this  force  Saint 
Augustine  struck  the  rebel  flag  and  gave  up  the  place  to  Commodore 
DuPont. 

As  the  force  sent  from  Fernandina  was  landed  at  Jacksonville,  con- 
trary to  the  tenor  of  my  instructions  to  General  Wright,  I felt  so  anx- 
ious about  how  far  such  a measure  would  commit  me  to  any  operation 
by  land  for  which  I might  not  be  prepared,  that  I proceeded  thither,  to 
obtain  a thorough  understanding  of  the  matter. 

After  thoroughly  understanding  the  political  situation  of  affairs  there, 
and  the  reign  of  terror  to  which  the  Union  men  are  still  subjected,  I not 
only  confirmed  General  Wright’s  acts,  but  have  increased  the  force  at 
Jacksonville  one  regiment.  The  best  information  I can  give  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  situation  of  affairs  in  East  Florida  is  the  forwarding  here- 
with of  a copy  of  the  proceedings  of  a town  meeting  held  in  Jackson- 
ville on  the  20th  instant  and  a copy  of  my  proclamation  to  the  people  of 
East  Florida  on  the  same  date.  I have  the  sanguine  hope  that  Florida 
will  soon  be  regenerated.  The  force  I have  in  Florida  is  three  compa- 
nies of  infantry  at  Fort  Marion  and  Saint  Augustine  Barracks  (the 
Navy  have  some  marines  there  also),  sixteen  companies  of  infantry  at 
Jacksonville,  one  company  of  infantry  in  charge  of  a battery  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Saint  John’s,  one  regiment  of  infantry  and  two  sections 
of  light  artillery  at  Fernandina. 

The  force  at  Jacksonville  was  made  sufficiently  strong  to  resist  any 
force  of  the  enemy  now  occupying  the  railroad  to  Tallahassee  that  might 
be  brought  against  it.  It  is  probable  that  the  artillery  at  Fernandina, 
or  a portion  of  it,  will  be  sent  there  also.  Besides,  there  are  three  gun- 
boats in  the  Saint  John’s  Biver  and  I believe  one  or  two  in  Saint  Au- 
gustine Harbor. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEBMAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


251 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.^ — UNION. 

[Inclosures.] 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Jacksonville,  Fla.,  March  20,  1862. 

To  the  People  of  Fast  Florida: 

The  troops  of  the  United  States  have  come  amongst  you  to  protect 
loyal  citizens  and  their  property  from  further  molestation  by  the  creat- 
ures of  a rebel  and  usurped  authority,  and  to  enable  you  to  resuscitate 
a Government  which  they  have  ruthlessly  endeavored  to  destroy. 

All  loyal  people  who  return  to  or  remain  at  their  homes  in  the  quiet 
l)ursuit  of  their  lawful  avocations  shall  be  protected  in  all  their  rights 
within  the  meaning  and  spirit  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States. 
The  sole  desire  and  intention  of  the  Government  is  to  maintain  the  integ- 
rity of  the  Constitution  and  the  laws  and  reclaim  States  which  have 
revolted  from  their  national  allegiance  to  their  former  prosperous  and 
happy  condition. 

There  is  great  satisfaction  in  the  fact,  now  become  patent  to  all,  that 
a large  portion  of  you^  still  cling  in  your  fiearts  to  that  mother  who 
first  liberated  you  from  the  thraldom  of  a despotic  government ; who 
next  rescued  you  from  the  deathly  grasp  of  the  wily  savage  at  a fright- 
ful cost  of  life  and  treasure,  and  who  alterwards  elevated  you  from  the 
condition  of  territorial  dependence  to  that  of  a proud  and  independent 
State. 

I earnestly  recommend  that  in  every  city,  town,  and  precinct  you 
assemble  in  your  primary  and  sovereign  capacity;  that  you  there  throw 
oft  that  sham  government  which  has  been  forced  upon  you ; swear  true 
fidelity  and  allegiance  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  and 
organize  your  government  and  elect  your  officers  in  the  good  old  way  of 
the  past.  When  this  is  done,  then  will  you  see  the  return  of  prosperous 
and  happy  days,  in  the  enjoyment  of  that  trade  and  industry  to  which 
your  extensive  coast  is  so  well  adapted,  and  in  the  immunity  from  that 
want  and  suffering  to  which  you  have  been  so  wickedly  subjected  by  the 
traitorous  acts  of  a few  ambitious  and  unprincipled  men ; then  will  you 
enjoy  the  fruits  of  your  honest  labor,  the  sweets  of  happy  homes,  and 
the  consolation  of  living  under  those  wise  and  salutary  laws  that  are 
due  only  to  an  industrious  and  law-abiding  people. 

T.  W.  SHERMAK, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

At  a meeting  of  the  loyal  citizens  of  the  “ United  States  of  America,” 
held  at  Jacksonville,  East  Florida,  March  20,  A.  D.  1862,  at  10.30  a.  m., 
C.  L.  Robinson,  chairman ; O.  L.  Keene,  secretary;  Col.  John  S.  Sannius, 
S.  F.  Halliday,  Paran  Moody,  John  W.  Price,  and  Philip  Fraser,  esqs., 
were  appointed  a committee  to  draught  resolutions  to  lay  before  said 
meeting.  The  following  is  a true  copy  of  said  resolutions,  which  were 
received  and  adopted  unanimously : 

We,  the  people  of  the  city  of  Jacksonville  and  its  vicinity,  in  the 
county  of  Duval,  and  the  State  of  Florida,  embraced  within  the  territory 
and  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  of  America,  do  hereby  set  forth 
our  declaration  of  rights  and  our  solemn  protest  against  the  abrogation 
of  the  same  by  any  pretended  State  or  other  authority. 

First.  We  hold  that  government  is  a contract,  in  which  protection  is 
the  price  of  allegiance ; that  when  protection  is  denied,  through  weak- 
ness or  design,  allegiance  is  no  longer  due. 

Second.  We  hold  that  an  established  form  of  government  cannot  be 
changed  or  abrogated  except  by  the  will  of  the  people,  intelligently  and 
willingly  expressed  and  fairly  ratified. 


252  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV.. 

Third.  We  hold  that  no  State  of  the  United  States  has  any  legal  or 
constitutional  right  to  separate  itself  from  the  government  and  jurisdic- 
tion of  the  United  States. 

Fourth.  We  hold  that  the  act  of  the  Convention  of  the  State  of  Florida 
commonly  known  as  the  ordinance  of  secession,  is  void,  being  in  direct 
conflict  with  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  in  never  having  been 
submitted  to  the  people  for  ratification. 

Fifth.  We  hold  that  the  State  of  Florida  is  an  integral  part  of  the 
United  States,  subject  to  the  constitutional  jurisdiction  of  the  same,  and 
Ave  have  reason  to  believe  that  thousands  of  her  citizens  would  hail  with 
joy  the  restoration  of  the  Government,  bringing  deliverance  from  the 
terrors  of  unrestrained  popular  and  military  despotism.  We  solemnly 
l^rotest  against  all  the  acts  and  ordinances  of  the  Convention  of  the  State 
of  Florida,  Avhich  were  designed  to  deprive  us  of  our  rights  as  citizens 
of  the  United  States.  We  protest  against  the  despotism  fostered  by  the 
State  and  other  authorities  claiming  jurisdiction  over  us,  which  has 
denied  us  the  rights  most  dear  to  freemen — ^freedom  of  speech  and  a free 
press.  We  protest  against  the  exactions  which  have  been  imposed  upon 
us — forced  contributions  of  money,  property,  and  labor ; enlistments  for 
military  service  procured  by  threats  and  misrepresentations.  We  pro- 
test against  the  tyranny  which  demands  of  us  as  a measure  of  revolu- 
tionary iiolicy  abandonment  of  our  homes  and  property  and  exposure  of 
our  wives  and  children  to  sickness,  destitution,  gaunt  famine,  innumer- 
able and  untold  miseries  and  sorrows.  We  protest  against  that  mad 
and  barbarous  policy  which  has  punished  us  for  remaining  in  our  own 
homes  by  sending  a brutal  and  unrestrained  soldiery  to  pillage  and  burn 
our  property,  threaten  and  destroy  our  lives.  We  protest  against  the 
denunciation  of  the  goveriior,  who  threatens  to  hang  us  because  we  do 
not  tamely  submit  to  such  indignities  and  “ lick  the  hand  just  raised  to 
shed  our  blood.”  From  such  a despotism  and  from  such  dangers  and 
indignities  we  have  been  released  by  the  restoration  of  the  Government 
of  the  United  States,  with  the  benign  principles  of  the  Constitution. 
The  reign  of  terror  is  past.  Law  and  order  prevails  in  our  midst. 

It  belongs  now  to  the  citizens  of  the  State  who  hold  to  their  allegiance 
to  the  United  States  to  raise  up  a State  government  according  to  those 
provisions  of  the  State  which  are  not  in  conflict  with  or  repugnant  to 
the  provisions  of  the  United  States  : 

Be  it  therefore  resolved^  That  we  adopt  the  foregoing  protest  and  dec- 
laration of  rights,  and  recommend  that  a convention  of  all  loyal  citizens 
be  called  forthwith,  tor  the  purpose  of  organizing  a State  government 
of  the  State  of  Florida. 

Be  it  further  resolved^  That  the  chief  of  the  military  department  of  the 
United  States  be  requested  to  retain  at  this  place  a sufficient  force  to 
maintain  order  and  protect  the  people  in  their  persons  and  property. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

PHILIP  FKASER, 

Chairman. 

A true  copy  of  the  resolutions  as  passed  at  said  meeting  and  adopted 
as  their  own  act. 

C.  L.  POBINSOX, 

Chairman. 

O.  L.  KEENE, 

Secretary. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  253 

Headquarters, 

Jacksonville^  Fla.,  March  25,  18G2. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding,  that  I left  Fernandina  yesterday  morning  with  the 
Mnety-seventh  Kegiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  in  the  Cosmopolitan, 
and  arrived  here  and  landed  the  troops  last  evening.  Having  struck 
upon  the  Saint  John’s  Bar,  we  were  obliged  to  cast  off  the  schooner  in 
tow,  laden  with  camx)  and  garrison  equipage  and  stores : and,  as  the  tide 
was  rapidly  falling  and  the  wind  high,  we  were  forced  to  leave  her  at 
anchor.  The  troops  consequently  had  to  be  quartered  in  vacant  build- 
ings on  shore,  instead  of  going  into  camp,  as  I had  designed. 

Last  night,  or  rather  this  morning,  at  about  3 o’clock,  a party  of  the 
enemy,  numbering  some  50  perhaps,  made  an  attack  upon  one  of  our 
picket  stations,  and,  out  of  the  7 men  composing  it,  killed  1 ; severely, 
and  it  is  feared  mortally,  wounded  another,  and  cai)tured  3 more.  The 
remaining  two  escaped.  So  far  as  I can  learn  from  the  reports  and  an 
investigation  of  the  case,  the  picket  was  guilty  of  gross  carelessness 
and  suffered  itself  to  be  completely  surprised. 

Yesterday  morning  it  seems  that  two  members  of  another  picket 
station  went  out  beyond  the  lines,  and  have  no  doubt  been  captured. 
Indeed,  it  is  so  reported  by  a deserter  from  tiie  enemy  who  has  since 
come  in.  These  occurrences  will  no  doubt  have  the  effect  to  make  the 
guards  more  watchful,  by  proving  to  them  the  [consequences]  to  them- 
selves of  any  neglect  of  vigilance  in  an  enemy’s  country. 

I have  to-day  looked  carefully  over  the  ground  in  advance  of  the 
town,  and  find  it  much  more  difficult  to  defend  and  to  picket  than  I had 
imagined  from  the  map.  Two  companies  will  be  necessary  for  a proper 
])icket  guard;  and  this  daily  detail,  with  the  number  necessary  for 
camp  and  provost  guards,  will  bear  heavily  on  the  command.  Some 
re-enforcement  would  be  desirable  if  any  troops  can  be  spared. 

Considerable  fatigue  work  will  be  necessary  also  in  cutting  down 
the  scrub  and  timber  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  which  now  afford 
cover  to  parties  approaching  the  pickets.  This  labor  will  be  undertaken 
the  moment  the  vessel  referred  to  as  having  camp  and  garrison  equi- 
page, &c.,  arrives. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Royal,  S.  €.,  March  26,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C.  : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  6th  instant  * was  not  received  until  the 
21st  instant,  and  then  through  the  hands  of  Flag-Officer  DuPont. 

I had  already  been  directed  by  Major-General  McClellan  to  abstain 
from  my  preparations  for  the  siege  of  Savannah  and  confine  myself  to 
Fernandina  and  the  siege  of  Fort  Pulaski.  Your  letter  of  the  6th  rec- 
ommends me  to  reduce  Fort  Pulaski  in  preference  to  attempting  Savan- 
nah. In  my  letter  of  the  14th  December  last  the  Department  will 
perceive  that  my  plan  was  to  carry  on  both  at  once.  The  essential 

* See  McClellan  to  Sherman,  March  6,  p.  238. 


254  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

features  of  that  plan  I had  not  departed  from,  and  have  been  very 
desirous  of  carrying  out,  particularly  after  the  opportunity  we  discov- 
ered for  taking  Savannah  by  a coup  de  main  failed  for  want  of  co-opera- 
tion of  the  Navy,  the  particulars  of  which  the  Department  has  already 
been  apprised  of. 

I humbly  bow  to  the  decisions  of  my  superiors  in  Washington,  but 
still,  general,  from  the  point  here  to  view  the  subject,  I cannot  but  regret  ’ 
that  my  plan  could  not  have  been  carried  out.  I had  every  confidence 
in  it,  and  believe  it  would  have  been  executed  with  not  so  much  sacri- 
fice as  the  general  seemed  to  imagine. 

However,  the  preparations  for  the  bombardment  of  Pulaski  are  being 
made  as  fast  as  the  material  arrives.  The  mortar  and  columbiad  bat- 
teries are  all  constructed,  mortars  mounted,  and  all  the  shot  and  shell 
yet  arrived  in  position.  We  are  still  waiting  for  the  columbiad  carriages 
and  a considerable  portion  of  the  shot  and  shell.  The  work  is  of  such  a 
character,  you  are  well  aware,  that  we  must  be  in  a state  of  perfect 
preparation  before  opening  fire. 

It  is  hoped  that  we  shall  be  permitted  to  get  through  this  job  early 
enough  in  the  season  to  afibrd  a pretty  large  force  in  the  direction  of 
Charleston,  a nucleus  from  which,  in  the  shape  of  two  regiments,  I have 
already  forwarded  on  the  North  Edisto  Eiver. 

The  batteries  on  the  mud  flats  of  the  Savannah  Eiver  work  like  a 
charm,  and,  what  is  remarkable,  our  men  there  are  in  perfect  health. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


On  Board  the  Adelaide, 

En  route  to  Fortress  Monroe,  Baltimore,  March  27,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington,  D.  G.: 

Sir  ; I have  to  state  that  my  continued  reflection  convinces  me  that 
for  efficient  action  it  is  indispensable  that  more  troops  should  be  sent 
immediately  to  South  Carolina.  I know  as  well  now  as  I can  possibly 
know  when  I shall  have  reached  there  that  from  20,000  to  25,000  addi- 
tional troops  should  be  sent. 

If  you  could  send  me  General  Sedgwick’s  division,  which  I suppose  to 
be  now  with  our  rear  corps  d?armee,  I should  be  very  glad ; and,  even 
with  these  alone,  would  almost  guarantee  to  have  our  flag  waving  over 
Fort  Sumter  by  the  anniversary  of  its  capture. 

I have  the  honor  most  respectfully  and  earnestly  to  solicit  your  early 
attention  to  this  request,  and  that  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  advise 
me  of  your  decision  by  telegraph,  addressed  to  Fort  Monroe. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  HUNTEE, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Port  Boyal,  S.  G.,  March  27, 1862. 

To  Hon.  Secretary  of  War, 

' Washington,  D.  G. : 

Sir  : I have  just  received  the  President’s  War  Order,  No.  3,  which 
directs  reports  to  be  made  direct  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


255 


My  recent  letters  to  the  Adjutant-General  will  show  the  general  status 
of  afiairs  in  this  expedition.  We  hold  the  whole  coast  from  North  Edisto, 
S.  C.,  to  Saint  Augustine,  Fla.  Eapid  preparations  are  being  made  for 
the  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  and  the  Savannah  Kiver  is  occupied 
with  a sufficient  force  to  cut  off  all  communications  and  supplies  from 
Savannah. 

The  attack  of  Savannah,  for  which  we  have  been  making  preparations, 
has  been  given  up,  by  direction  of  Major-General  McClellan. 

The  fire  will  be  opened  on  Pulaski  as  soon  as  all  the  material  has 
arrived  from  the  North. 

I have  left  Brigadier-General  Wright,  with  three  regiments  and  two 
sections  of  light  artillery,  in  the  occupation  of  Fernandina,  Jacksonville, 
and  Saint  Augustine,  with  the  hope  and  expectation  that  by  judicious 
management  East  Florida  will  soon  be  regenerated. 

No  operations  can  be  made  on  the  main  of  South  Carolina  and  Geor- 
gia for  the  want  of  proper  means  of  transportation — viz,  light-draught 
steamers,  boats,  and  wagons — which  have  all  failed  to  reach  here,  not- 
withstanding early  and  repeated  requisitions  for  them.  Now,  indeed, 
that  our  forces  have  become  so  much  scattered  in  the  occupation  of  so 
extensive  a coast,  more  troops  will  be  required  for  any  extensive  inland 
operations. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


' Headquarters, 

Jacksonville,  Fla,,  March  27,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  Louis  Bell, 

Saint  Augustine : 

Colonel  : I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  this  evening  of  your 
• two  letters  of  the  26th  and  27th  instant,  respectively ; also  yours  of  the 
23d,  forwarded  by  the  dispatch  schooner  Azalea.* 

I much  regret  that  at  present  I do  not  see  how  any  of  the  force  at  this 
post  or  at  Fernandina  can  be  spared  to  re  enforce  your  command.  Here 
our  force  is  not  too  great  for  our  own  security  against  the  force  the  enemy 
could  readily  bring  if  he  were  disposed  to  attack  us,  unprovided  as  we 
are  with  defenses  of  any  kind  and  with  a long  line,  which  we  must  picket 
for  our  own  safety.  Neither  is  the  force  at  Fernandina  too  large,  seeing 
that  the  fort  at  that  point  is  of  little  moment. 

I look  upon  your  position  as  the  most  secure  by  far  of  either  of  the 
three  posts,  even  with  your  present  small  force,  in  view  of  the  defensi- 
ble condition  of  Fort  Marion,  now  that  you  have  so  successfully  estab- 
lished the  heavy  ordnance  on  the  work. 

It  is  no  doubt  true  that  you  cannot  with  your  present  strength  suc- 
cessfully defend  the  town  from  any  attemiit  in  force  against  it  j and  I 
should  therefore  advise  that  you  confine  your  undertakings  mainly  to 
the  fort  and  its  surroundings,  leaving  the  defense  of  the  place,  to  some 
extent  at  least,  to  the  inhabitants.  Give  the  people  to  understand  that 
they  are  to  help  themselves,  and  that  you  will  then  aid  them.  This,  at 
any  time,  is  all  they  could  demand.  In  their  present  attitude,  judging 
from  your  views  as  to  their  want  of  loyalty,  it  is  more  than  they  have  a 
right  to  expect. 


None  of  these  found. 


256  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

Desirous,  however,  of  strengthening  you  as  soon  as  possible,  I shall 
send  to  General  Sherman  a copy  of  your  letter  of  the  26th  instant,  and 
ask  that  more  troops  be  furnished,  if  they  liave  them  to  spare. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters, 
Jaclisonville,  Fla.^  March  28,  1862. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  nothing  of  importance  has 
occurred  at  this  place  since  the  date  of  my  last  letter. 

Last  night  the  pickets  fired  upon  a party  approaching  them  in  what 
they  conceived  to  be  a suspicious  manner,  and  of  the  two  in  advance 
killed  one  and  wounded' the  other.  They  proved,  upon  examination,  to 
be  a party  of  negroes,  who  had  escaped  from  their  masters  at  Lake  City. 

Information  in  regard  to  the  positions  and  strength  of  the  rebel  forces 
is  somewhat  indefinite.  From  the  best  I can  gather  there  are  still  several 
companies — six  or  seven  perhaps — in  the  neighborhood  of  McGist^s 
Creek,  about  12  miles  from  here,  and  an  additional  force  at  Baldwin  and 
at  Sanderson,  still  farther  off  on  the  railroad.  The  last  are  of  Colonel 
Hopkins’  regiment,  the  Fourth  Florida ; those  at  McGist’s  Creek  are  of 
the  Third  Florida  Eegiment,  commanded  by  Colonel  Dilworth.  An  attack 
upon  a portion  of  this  force  may  be  expedient,  but  at  this  moment  I have 
not  the  information  to  warrant  the  movement. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Bell,  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Eegiment,  com- 
mander at  Saint  Augustine,  applies  pressingly  for  re-enforcements,  as 
the  marines  sent  by  the  flag-officer  to  that  post  have  been  withdrawn.  I 
have  replied  in  effect  that  the  condition  of  affairs  here  and  at  Fernan- 
dina  does  not  permit  me  to  increase  his  garrison  from  my  command,  and 
that  while  he  should  afford  such  protection  as  is  in  his  power  to  per- 
sons and  property  in  town,  he  should  not  by  so  doing  compromise  the 
safety  of  his  command.  I have  further  advised  him  that  Fort  Marion, 
with  the  armament  he  has  put  in  place,  will  enable  him  to  resist  any 
attack  likely  to  be  brought  against  him,  and  that  he  should  therefore 
direct  his  attention  mainly  to  that  point. 

He  represents,  as  will  be  seen  by  his  letter,  that  the  loyalty  of  the 
people  generally  is  doubtful,  thus  affording  an  additional  reason  for 
not  exposing  his  force  unnecessarily  to  protect  a,  people  who  are  not 
disposed  to  take  active  steps  for  their  own  defense.  I think,  however, 
with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bell,  that  two  additional  companies  to  his  gar- 
rison would  be  desirable,  it*  they  can  be  spared.  With  my  present  force 
I cannot  spare  them. 

I would  also  suggest  that  the  two  sections  of  the  light  battery  at 
Fernandina,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Eansom,  would  be  of  more 
service  here  than  where  they  are.  With  that  additional  force  T could 
operate  against  the  enemy  with  much  more  prospect  of  success.  I do 
not  feel  authorized,  under  existing  orders,  to  bring  them  here  for  such  a 
purpose  without  the  sanction  of  the  general  commanding. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding, 


Chap.  XV.J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


257 


Headquarters, 
JacIcsonvillCy  Fla.,  March  28,  18G2. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze: 

Captain:  From  intelligence  received  this  evening  from  a deserter  I 
learn  that  the  enemy  has  an  attack  upon  this  place  in  contemplation  so 
soon  as  his  force,  now  somewhat  scattered,  can  be  concentrated. 

The  force  he  is  reported  to  have  at  command  for  such  an  enterprise 
is  such  as  to  make  an  addition  to  our  strengtli  here  very  desirable,  and 
I have  therefore  decided  to  bring  here  the  two  sections  of  Hamilton’s 
battery,  now  at  Fernandina.  The  Cosmopolitan  will  leave  here  for  the 
purpose  to-morrow  morning.  The  enemy  is  represented  to  have  along 
the  line  of  the  railroad,  or  soon  expected  upon  it,  (1)  the  Third  Florida 
Kegiment  \ (2)  the  Fourth  Florida  Eegiment ; (3)  a regiment  of  cavalry ; 
(4)  a company  with  six  or  seven  pieces  of  artillery. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Port  Eoyal,  S.  C.,  March  31,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South: 

General  : On  being  relieved  from  this  command  it  is  proper  that  I 
should  report  the  condition  of  affairs  here  at  the  present  time. 

We  have  been  for  some  time  making  preparation  for  the  reduction  of 
Fort  Pulaski,  and  are  now  only  waiting  to  open  our  fire  for  the  material 
brought  in  the  Atlantic  to  be  got  out  and  landed  at  Tybee.  The  arma- 
ment set  up  for  the  operations  consists  of  twelve  13-inch  sea- coast  mor- 
tars, four  10-inch  siege  mo^rtars,  five  10-inch  columbiads,  three  8-inch 
columbiads,  and  five  large  rifled  guns.  In  the  mean  time,  and  since  the 
llth  of  February  last,  all  communication  has  been  cut  off  from  Savan- 
nah by  batteries  erected  on  the  marshes  of  Jones  and  Bird  Islands.  I 
have  no  doubt  but  the  place  will  fall  in  a short  time. 

Extensive  preparations  have  also  been  made  for  the  taking  of  Savan- 
nah, but  I have  been  directed  by  the  General-in-Chief  to  suspend  all 
operations  for  the  capture  of  that  city. 

A plan  that  was  laid  by  me  to  take  the  city  by  a coup  de  main  with  a 
combined  land  and  navah  force  about  the  20th  January  last  failed  for 
want  of  the  promised  co-operation  on  the  part  of  the  Navy.  Since  that 
time  the  defenses  constructed  are  of  such  a nature  as  to  render  it  im- 
possible to  take  it  but  by  a siege  entirely  by  land. 

Preparations  are  making  also  on  Port  Eoyal  Island  for  the  occupa- 
tion of  the  country  up  to  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Eailroad,  which 
we  expected  to  accomplish  in  about  a week  or  ten  days  hence. 

After  the  fall  of  Pulaski,  and  a proper  occupation  of  all  important 
places  on  the  coast  in  our  possession,  it  was  my  calculation  to  have  900 
men  disposable  for  any  operation  upwards  from  North  Edisto. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEEMAN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps. 


General  Orders,  ( Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  1.  ) Fort  Royal,  S.  C.,  March  31,  1862. 

I.  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  having  arrived  at  this  post,  hereby  as- 
sumes, in  accordance  with  the  order  of  the  War  Department,  the  com- 
17  R R VOL  VI 


258  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

maud  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  consisting  of  the  States  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

If.  For  the  convenience  of  military  operations  and  the  administration 
of  department  affairs  this  department  is  divided  into  three  districts,  to 
be  constituted  as  follows ; 

1st.  The  first,  to  be  called  the  Northern  District,  will  comprise  the 
States  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  all  that  part  of  Florida  north 
and  east  of  a line  extending  from  Cape  Canaveral  northwest  to  the  Gulf 
coast,  just  north  of  Cedar  Keys,  and  its  dependencies,  and  thence  north 
to  the  Georgia  line.  The  headquarters  of  tliis  district  will  be  at  Port 
Poyal,  S.  G.,  and  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham  (who  will  relieve  Brigadier- 
General  Sherman)  is  appointed  to  command  this  district  and  the  troops 
therein,  which  troops  will  constitute  a division,  to  be  called  the  First 
Division  of  the  Department  of  the  South.  General  Benham  will  receive 
from  General  Sherman  all  charts,  maps,  plans,  reports,  moneys,  &c., 
with  all  official  records,  returns,  &c.,  appertaining  to  the  expeditionary 
command  in  this  district. 

2d.  The  second,  to  be  called  the  Southern  District,  will  comprise  all  of 
Florida  and  the  islands  adjacent  south  of  the  said  line  from  Cape  Ca- 
naveral, extending  northwest  to  the  Gulf  coast,  just  north  of  Cedar 
Keys.  The  headquarters  of  this  district  and  the  troops  will  remain,  as 
at  present,  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan. 

3d.  The  third,  to  be  called  the  Western  District,  will  comprise  that 
part  of  Florida  west  of  the  line  before  described  as  running  north  from 
Cedar  Keys  to  the  Georgia  line.  The  headquarters  of  this  district  will 
remain  at  Fort  Pickens,  as  at  present,  with  Brig.  Gen.  L.  G.  Arnold 
commanding. 

* ^ * # # * * 

IV.  The  staff  of  the  major-general  commajiding  the  department  will 
consist  of  the  following-named  officers  : 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  assistant  adjutant-general  j Lieut.  E.W.  Smith, 
acting  assistant  adjutant-general;  Col.  J.  W.  Shaffer,  chief  quartermas- 
ter ; Capt.  J.  W.  Turner,  chief  commissary  of  subsistence. 

Alaj.  B.  M.  Hough,  Maj.  Edward  Wright,  Capt.  E.  W.  Thompson, 
Capt.  W.  E.  Dole,  Lieut.  S.  W.  Stockton,  Lieut.  Charles  E.  Hay,  Lieut.  A. 
M.  Kinzie,  Lieut.  A.  O.  Doolittle,  aides-de-camp. 

D.  HUNTEE, 

Major- General  J Commanding, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  2.  1 Fort  Royal,  8.  (7.,  March  31,  1862. 

In  relieving  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman  from  duty  in  this  department, 
pursuant  to  orders  of  the  War  Department,  dated  A.  G.  O.,  Washing- 
ton, March  15, 1862,  the  major-general  commanding  desires  to  express 
to  Brigadier-General  Sherman  his  full  appreciation  of  the  amount  and 
importance  of  the  services  rendered  by  .the  expedition  under  General 
Sherman’s  command,  and  his  thanks  for  the  full,  reliable,  and  valuable 
information  as  to  the  condition  of  the  troops,  defenses,  &c.,  in  this  por- 
tion of  the  Department  of  the  South,  which  General  Sherman  has  fur- 
nished. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

istant  Adjutant-  General, 


Chap.  XY.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  259 

Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

^ Hilton  Head,  8,  C.,  April  1,  18G2. 

Brigadier-General  Viele  : 

My  Dear  Generae  : I inclose  you  a copy  of  Major-General  Hunter’s 
order  assigning  me  to  the  late  command  of  General  Sherman. 

I regret  much  that  different  delays  prevented  my  meeting  you  in  per- 
son yesterday,  and  I missed  communicating  with  your  boat  by  suppos- 
ing it  was  to  have  been  off  Stoddard’s  place,  for  which  we  were  running, 
when  we  saw  it  where  the  pilot  feared  to  go  with  our  boat. 

My  principal  desire  was  to  consult  you  with  reference  to  your  means 
and  opportunities  of  erecting  mortar  batteries  at  least,  to  take  in  reverse 
the  south  and  southeast  faces  of  Fort  Pulaski  and  perhaps  the  north- 
east face,  for  by  this  means  your  forces  can  the  more  efficiently  aid  in 
the  reduction  of  that  work.  I would  be  glad  to  have  this  subject  receive 
your  utmost  attention.  Now  it  occurs  to  me  as  possible  to  erect  such  a 
battery  at  the  lower  point  of  Long  Island,  with  possibly  one  for  direct 
fire  on  the  faces  next  you,  and  I should  wish  a reconnaissance  made 
there  at  once  with  this  object. 

General  Gillmore  has  a project  for  preparing  a large  scow  (such  as 
could' be  brought  to  you  through  Wall’s  Gut)  for  the  basis  of  a battery, 
and  floating  it  to  the  required  position,  then  to  complete  it  as  a 
land  battery.  It  is  very  possible ^hat  this  may  be  the  best  expedient  for 
yourself.  I shall,  however,  be  happy  to  receive  from  you  any  sugges- 
tious  or  plans  that  may  accomplish  best  the  object  to  be  attained — the 
most  efficient  aid  from  your  force  in  the  reduction  of  this  stronghold. 

I have  in  view,  unless  other  circumstances  or  probabilities  of  what  I 
am  not  now  fully  advised  should  prevent  it,  the  restoration  to  you  of  a 
part,  at  least,  of  the  excellent  troops  of  your  brigade. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Expeditionary  Corps,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  C.,  April  1,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces,  Tyhee  Island,  Ga. : 

My  Dear  General  : Upon  reflecting  upon  your  proposition  to  pre- 
pare a scow  as  the  basis  of  another  battery  above  the  mouth  of  Laza- 
retto Creek,  and,  looking  upon  your  sketch  map,  I would  suggest  if  it 
would  not  be  best  to  take  it  up  that  creek  and  prepare  the  battery  there, 
as  it  appears  that  it  might  be  at  nearly  the  end  of  the  first  angle  to  the 
north  and  on  the  prolongation  of  the  gorge  wall  of  the  fort.  This 
last  line  I would  by  all  means  select  as  the  line  of  fire,  if  the  battery  can 
be  placed  as  well  or  nearly  as  well  in  that  position,  as  it  cuts  off  the 
cover  the  gorge  might  afford,  gives  more  complete  reverse  fire  on  the 
north  face,  and  nearly  as  well  a sufficient  reverse  fire  on  the  northeast 
face.  If  you  can  as  securely,  and  with  as  much  concealment,  which 
would  appear  to  me  doubtful,  place  this  battery  on  the  south  channel, 
which,  however,  appears  but  a short  distance  nearer,  say  200  yards,  it 
will  perhaps  be  best. 

I would  like  the  sketch  of  your  i)roposed  arrangement,  with  the  guns, 
&c.,  of  the  scow,  as  I would  desire,  if  found  feasible,  that  General  Viele,  if 
no  better  means  ofiers,  should  prepare  one  or  two  batteries  of  the  same 


260  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

kind  to  take  the  faces  next  you  or  reverse.  Please  have  every  means 
continued  to  cut  off  communication  and  another  field  piece  sent  up  to 
the  upper  batteries. 

I expect  we  shall  re-enforce  you  before  the  actual  commencement  of 
the  fire,  but  rest  assured  that,  even  if  a senior  should  necessarily  be  sent 
with  such  troops  (General  Wright),  General  Hunter  and  myself  will 
see  (as  he  said  to  me)  the  fullest  justice  done  to  your  labors  and  efforts. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  8,  April  2,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele, 

Commanding  IT.  8.  Forces,  Haufuslcie  Island,  8.  C. : 

General  : The  general  commanding  the  district  (Benham)  has  learned 
from  General  Sherman  that  there  is  at  Turtle  Island,  nearly  opposite 
and  above  Bloody  Point,  a small  dry  ridge,  upon  which  there  is  a proba- 
bility that  a mortar  battery  could  be  placed  to  act  effectively  against 
Fort  Pulaski  at  a distance  probably  oinot  more  than  2 miles,  and  which 
would  of  course  take  in  reverse  the  faces  exposed  to  the  direct  fire  from 
Tybee. 

All  those  large  mortars  are  already  landed  at  Tybee  for  service  there, 
but  there  are  at  this  place  two  of  10-inch  and  two  of  the  8-inch  colum- 
biads,  which  it  is  believed  can  be  effectively  used  as  mortars  for  the 
purpose  indicated,  and  that  those  guns,  with  such  other  materials  as  you 
may  require,  can  be  sent  to  you  at  Daufuskie  Island — for  the  latter  part 
of  the  distance  at  night,  if  necessary. 

Will  you  please  to  give  your  early  attention  to  this  matter,  reporting 
as  early  as  possible  your  opinion  of  its  feasibility,  and,  if  favorable,  what 
material  you  will  require,  as  it  is  now  of  the  utmost  importance  to  our 
plans  that  this  work,  if  undertaken,  should  be  completed  at  the  earliest 
possible  moment ; your  estimate  of  which  time  you  will  please  report  in 
your  reply. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  ELY, 

Aeting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

« 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  G.,  April  3, 1S62, 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele, 

Commanding  IT.  8.  Forces,  Haufuslcie  Island,  8.  C.  : 

Dear  General  : I shall  hope  to  have  your  report  about  the  feasi- 
bility of  ^a  columbiad  battery  this  morning. 

The  capture  of  17  of  Gillmore’s  men  will,  I fear,  inform  the  rebels  of 
our  preparations,  and  we  may  be  obliged  to  open  fire  from  Tybee  pre- 
maturely or  earlier  than  we  would  wish. 

Please  take  every  precaution  to  seal  the  communication  between  the 
fort  and  city  hermetically,  if  possible ; even  passing  your  men  over  at 
night  to  the  south  side  of  south  channel,  if  you  have  the  means. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 

Brigadier-  General, 


Chap.  XV.] 


261 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

Headquarters  XJ.  S.  Forces, 

Savannah  Eiver,  April  3,  18G2. 

General  H.  W.  Benham, 

Commanding  First  Division  Department  of  the  South  : 

Dear  General:  Your  dispatcli  is  just  received,  and  as  I have  also 
just  received  the  reports  of  the  two  officers  whom  I requested  to  make 
reconnaissances,  I hasten  to  forward  them,  merely  adding  my  own  rapid 
eonclusions  that  two  flat-boats,  properly  arranged,  one  with  two  mortars 
and  another  with  two  rifled  guns  and  one  8-inch  howitzer,  can  be  made 
very  effective  at  the  lower  end  of  Long  Island.  I agree  with  Lieutenant 
Wilson  in  regard  to  Turtle  Beach,  more  especially  as  the  time  that  it 
would  require  to  place  columbiads  in  position  (a  week  or  ten  days  at 
least)  would  render  our  efforts  at  that  point  inoperative  under  the  cir- 
cumstances. 

If  you  will  let  me  know  your  views  by  the  courier  in  the  morning 
I will  at  once  arrange  to  put  them  into  immediate  execution. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EGBERT  L.  YIELE, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


[Inclosures,  j 

Battery  Hamilton,  Ga., 

April  2,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Yiele, 

Commanding^  Savannah  River : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  as  directed  by  you,  I this 
day  and  night  made  a reconnaissance  of  Long  Island,  and  I sketch  the 
result  on  t&  next  page. 

The  lower  end  of  the  island  is  detached  at  high  tide.  • But,  as  I have 
viewed  it,  I cannot  make  the  form  of  detachment  and  the  maps  agree. 
I sketch  it  as  it  looks  to  me.  This  afternoon,  after  examining  the  McQueen 
side  of  Long  Island,  I passed  around  its  head  and  went  to  a point 
marked  B,  being  in  sight  of  Pulaski  all  the  time.  At  this  point,  I was 
honored  with  a very  wild  shot.  I then  returned,  and  to-night  proceeded 
ns  far  as  the  point  marked  A. 

A is  the  best  point  for  a battery,  but  guns  cannot  be  landed  there 
unobserved.  At  B guns  can  be  landed  in  the  night  without  attracting 
notice.  A clump  of  tall  cane,  covering  an  area  600  feet  in  length  and 
about  150  feet  in  width,  would  cover  work.  The  ground  is  sufficiently 
firm,  and  sand  can  be  procured  from  the  shore  of  the  island  300  or  400 
feet  from  the  spot.  But  any  battery  placed  anywhere  on  the  lower  end 
of  Long  Island  except  at  A must  necessarily  be  small,  the  ground  capa- 
ble of  sustaining  a battery  being  a strip  parallel  with  the  river  and  not 
over  30  yards  wide  at  any  point.  This  would  be  the  maximum  battery 
face  procurable.  At  A both  shore  and  soil  are  favorable,  if  observation 
could  be  avoided  in  landing  guns.  I do  not  think,  however,  that  it 
would  be  possible  to  erect  a battery  anywhere  below  the  point  marked 
B,  owing  to  the  fact  that  there  is  scarce  any  growth  of  either  weed, 
brush,  or  cane  below  that  point.  I should  judge  B to  be  about  1 J to  IJ 
miles  from  the  fort.  i 

Y ery  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  T.  BEARD, 

. Major ^ Commanding, 


262  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Turtle  Island,  Ga.,  April  3,  18G2. 

Capt.  J.  H.  Liebenau, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.j  First  Brigade,  TI.  8.  Forces  of  the  South : 

Captain  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  this  date,  requesting  a report  of 
my  reconnaissance  of  Turtle  Island,  with  a view  to  its  occupation  by  a 
battery  to  aid  in  the  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski,  I have  the  honor  to 
report  as  follows : 

I have  twice  visited  and  carefully  examined  that  side  of  the  island 
lying  next  to  the  fort,  and^m  convinced  that  it  is  possible  to  erect  bat- 
teries thereon,  taking  advantage  of  high  tides  for  landing  guns  and 
material.  But  the  labor  would  be  exceedingly  heavy,  and  the  difficul- 
ties to  be  overcome  in  transporting  the  guns  from  the  landing  place 
over  the  marsh,  a distance  of  about  500  yards,  would  be  greater  than 
any  yet  encountered  in  erecting  batteries  on  the  Savannah. 

Considering  the  fact  that  the  nearest  point  of  fast  land  in  Turtle 
Island  is  miles  from  Fort  Pulaski,  the  battery,  although  mounting 
the  heaviest  guns,  would  necessarily  be  inefficient.  The  inclosed  sketch, 
taken  from  the  Coast  Survey  charts,  shows  the  topography  of  the  island. 

The  only  point  at  which  guns  can  be  landed  and  removed  to  ground 
hard  enough  to  support  them  is  near  the  mouth  of  Wright  Eiver,  marked 
A.  From  there  to  the  head  of  the  woods,  the  nearest  point  to  the  fort 
and  the  only  one  where  cover  can  be  obtained,  is  about  500  yards.  The 
ground  is  comparatively  hard,  and  by  the  use  of  corduroy  road  would 
allow  the  passage  of  the  heaviest  guns. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieutenant,  Topographical  Engineers. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  €.,  April  3,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Commanding  TJ.  8.  South  Atlantic  Squadron  : 

Sir:  By  reports  received  this  morning  from  Tybee  Island  we  learn 
that  some  17  of  our  men  and  a field  piece,  in  a plantation  canoe,  have 
just  been  captured  by  the  enemy  at  or  near  Wilmington  Island,  as  we 
fear,  through  some  mismanagement  of  the  lieutenant  in  command. 

Acting  Brigadier-General  Gillmore  at  once  applied  to  the  command- 
ing officer  of  the  gunboat  near  to  aid  him  in  protecting  the  Augustine 
Creek  Channel,  which  he  has  kindly  consented  to  do,  by  sending  a boat 
there  for  the  present,  awaiting,  however,  your  further  orders  or  sanetion 
in  the  matter. 

As  it  will  now  be  of  the  utmost  importance  to  cut  off  the  communica- 
tion of  Fort  Pulaski  with  the  city,  it  being  rumored  and  learned  that 
$12,000  has  been  offered  there  for  bringing  off  the  garrison,  and,  as  I 
immediately  after  my  visit  to  Tybee  directed  every  precaution  possible 
to  be  taken  on  our  part,  I will  trust  that  you  may  be  able  to  aid  ns  in 
this  matter,  and  would  respectfully  request  that  you  would  sanction  the 
movement  of  your  commanding  officer  there,  and  aid  us  in  this  effort  by 
such  further  means  as  are  in  your  power  from  this  place ; for,  with  the 
information  which  we  fear  the  enemy  may  obtain  from  our  men  (if  pris- 
oners, as  we  expect),  we  may  find  it  expedient  to  open  our  batteries  some- 
what prematurely  or  before  we  had  intended. 

I would  mention  that  the  Boston  is  now  coaling,  and  as  soon  as  she 


Chap.  XV.] 


263 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

returns  I propose  to  send  her  to  Edisto,  with  a battery  of  artillery,  and  if 
you  have  been  able  to  obtain  a proper  pilot,  which  my  own  inquiries  have 
not  enabled  me  to  possess  as  yet,  I should  be  happy  to  meet  your  wishes 
in  having  him  accompany  her,  and  tow  the  Dale  out  from  Otter  Island. 
Will  you  please  let  me  know  immediately  if  you  have  a pilot? 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENIIAM, 

Brigadier- Genera  L 


Headquarters  Depart]ment  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  April  3,  18G2. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

ISecretary  of  War ; 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  arrival  here  on  the  30th  ultimo. 
I address  you  by  the  first  opportunity  since  my  arrival. 

I find  about  17,000  troops  scattered  along  the  coast  from  Saint  Augus- 
tine, Ela.,  to  North  Edisto  Inlet,  South  Carolina,  distributed  as  follows : 


At  Saint  Augustine,  Fla 200 

At  J acksonville,  FJ  a 1 , 400 

At  mouth  of  Saint  John’s  Riv^er,  Fla 70 

At  Fernandina,  Fia ♦ 900 

At  Tybee  Island,  Ga 2, 200 

At  Daufuskie  Island,  S.  C 1, 600 

At  Bird  Island,  S.  C 300 

At  Jones  Island,  S.  C 300 

At  Hilton  Head,  S.  C 4, 500 

At  Bay  Point,  S.  C 80 

At  Beaufort,  S.  C 3, 600 

At  Ott  er  Island,  S.  C 450 

At  North  Edisto  River,  S.  C 1, 400 


17, 000 

It  is  my  opinion  that  this  force  is  entirely  too  much  scattered  and  is 
subject  to  be  cut  off  in  detail. 

I shall  order  an  abandonment  of  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  and  the  re-enforce- 
ment of  Forts  Marion  and  Clinch.  From  later  accounts  I may  add  the 
Union  feeling  in  Florida  is  not  so  strong  as  we  were  first  induced  to 
believe. 

The  batteries  for  opening  on  Fort  Pulaski  have  been  retarded  by  the 
non-arrival  of  the  necessary  guns,  ammunition,  &c.  But  Captain  Gill- 
more,  who  deserves  great  credit  for  his  untiring  and  scientific  exertions, 
is  now  nearly  ready,  and  by  the  next  steamer  I hope  to  be  able  to  announce 
to  you  the  fall  of  Pulaski.  We  then  shall  be  able  to  hold  the  Savannah 
Eiver  with  a small  force  and  to  concentrate  on  Charleston. 

General  Sherman  made  a requisition  in  December  for  five  steamers 
drawing  not  more  than  6 feet  each.  He  informs  me  that  they  were 
purchased  for  him  and  sent  from  New  York,  but  put  into  Hatteras  in  a 
storm,  and  are  there  detained  by  General  Burnside.  We  are  still  very 
much  in  want  of  these  light-draught  boats,  and,  as  we  have  but  three 
wagons  to  a regiment,  they  are  absolutely  essential. 

On  my  leaving  Washington  you  had  the  kindness  to  promise  me  what- 
ever force  I might  ask.  We  shall  do  all  that  men  can  do  with  the  small, 
force  we  have ; but  it  distresses  me  to  be  in  such  a beautiful  situation 
for  striking  strong  blows  without  the  arms  to  strike.  I beg  that  you 
will  send  us  at  once  as  many  men  as  you  think  we  can  use  to  advantage, 
as  all  the- officers  in  command  report  the  re-enforcement  of  the  enemy  on 
their  respective  fronts. 


264  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

1 most  earnestly  request  that  50,000  muskets,  with  all  the  necessary 
accouterments,  and  200  rounds  for  each  piece,  may  be  sent  to  me  at 
once,  with  authority  to  arm  such  loyal  men  as  1 can  find  in  the  country, 
whenever,  in  my  opinion,  they  can  be  used  advantageously  against  the 
enemy. 

It  is  important  that  I should  be  able  to  know  and  distinguish  these 
men  at  once,  and  for  this  purpose  I respectfully  request  that  50,000 
pairs  of  scarlet  pantaloons  may  be  sent  me ; and  this  is  all  the  clothing 
I shall  require  for  these  people. 

I believe  the  rebel  regiments  as  they  retreat  from  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  come  directly  to  their  respective  States,  and  that  in  this  way 
the  force  opposed  to  us  here  is  becoming  considerably  augmented. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  3.  ) Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  April  3,  1862. 

The  following-named  officers  are  hereby  announced  as  additional  mem- 
bers of  theistaff  of  the  major-general  commanding  Department  of  the 
South,  and  will  report  accordingly : 

Surg.  George  E.  Cooper  (Medical  Department,  U.  S.  Army),  medical 
diiiector;  Capt.  Louis  H.  Pelouze  (Fifteenth  Infantry,  U.  S.  Army),  act- 
ing inspector-general ; First  Lieut.  Francis  J.  Shunk  (Ordnance  Depart- 
ment, U.  S.  Army),  chief  of  ordnance;  First  Lieut.  James  H.  Wilson, 
(Topographical  Engineers,  U.  S.  Army),  chief  topographical  engineer; 
First  Lieut.  E.  J.  Keenan  (Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Volunteers),  chief 
signal  officer. 

Bv  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter.: 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 
Hilton  Head,  8.  C.,  April  4,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Yiele, 

Commanding  TI,  8.  Forces,  Daufuslde  Island,  8.  C.: 

General  : Your  letters  reporting  your  reconnaissance  were  received 
late  in  the  night,  and  the  conclusion  I come  to  is  that  the  point  you 
have  marked  B on  Long  Island  should  be  selected  for  a battery ; the 
ridge  has  width  enough  by  your  description  for  all  the  guns.  I pro- 
pose four  in  all  that  we  have  available,  for  which  30  yards  will  suffice, 
as  little  traverse  is  required ; and,  if  more  were  needed  and  were  avail- 
able, I can  see  no  objection  to  placing  a second  battery  in  rear  of  the 
first,  the  latter  to  be  vacated  by  the  men  at  the  actual  time  of  firing 
the  rear  battery.  I would  hope  it  might  be  possible  to  prepare  a 
battery  of  four  guns  in  less  time  than  eight  or  ten  days.  I think  it 
will  be  best  to  make  your  arrangements  for  the  construction  of  such 
a battery — not  for  direct  fire,  of  course,  at  that  distance — and,  besides, 
we  cannot  conveniently  arrange  pintle  centers,  &c.  This  you  will  recol- 
lect is  for  two  10-inch  and  two  8-inch  columbiads,  and,  if  I can  pro- 
cure a proper  scow,  I will  also  arrange  for  a battery  for  rifled  pieces  for 
direct  fire. 


Chap.  XV.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  265 

I will  communicate  with  you  again  by  this  afternoon’s  courier  or  in 
the  morning. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obediant  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Savannah  River,  April  4,  18G2. 

General  H.  W.  Benham, 

Commanding  First  Division,  Department  of  the  South: 
General:  In  my  communication  of  yesterday  I referred  to  the  time 
it  would  take  to  put  guns  on  Turtle  Island,  which,  on  account  of  the 
peculiar  topography  of  that  island,  would  be  attended  with  delay  and 
difficulty.  But  the  guns  on  Long  Island  can  be  put  in  position  at  once. 
I have  one  8-inch  and  one  10  inch  mortar  which  I can  use.  The  rebels 
were  busy  all  night  last  night  moving  troops  towards  Wilmington 
Island.  They  have  evidently  something  on  the  tapis. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EGBERT  L.  VIELE, 

X Commanding  General. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  April  5,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Commanding  South  Atlantic  BlocJcading  Squadron, 

Port  Royal  Harbor,  S.  C.  : 

Co]MMODORE:  I trust  your  dispatches  for  Warsaw  have  arrived  in 
time  to  go  by  my  courier,  whom  I have  sent  to  recall,  if  possible,  if  not, 
I will  have  them  at  Tybee  this  afternoon,  and  if  my  engineers  can  con- 
trive a means  of  obstructing  Wilmington  River,  I will  have  it  done, 
though  I much  fear  now  the  force  of  the  enemy,  believed  to  have  been 
increased  lately  in  that  vicinity,  may  render  this  more  difficult  than  at 
a previous  day,  if  not  impossible  even. 

The  reports  from  General  Viele  from  Daufuskie  last  night  lead  us  to 
fear  that  the  rebels  are  concentrating  troops  near  Wilmington  Island, 
probably  for  an  effort  to  relieve  or  re-enforce  the  garrison  of  Fort 
Pulaski,  as  it  appears  impossible  for  a land  force  to  act  efficiently  in 
those  marshes,  and  we  have  scarcely  any  means  for  effective  action  by 
water.  General  Hunter  and  myself  were  last  evening  most  earnest  in 
wishing  that  you  had  the  means  of  increasing  your  own  power  to  an 
important  extent  just  now  on  the  Wilmington  Narrows  and  on  the 
Tybee  River. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  April  8,  1862. 

Col.  Enoch  Q.  Fellows, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Forces,  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. : 

Colonel:  The  general  commanding  desires  that  you  would  take 
every  opportunity  that  offers,  either  by  negroes  who  come  from  the 


266  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

rebels,  by  scouts,  or  other  means,  of  acquiring  and  transmitting  to  him 
all  information,  with  sketch,  plans,  and  descriptions,  when  practicable, 
of  the  best  routes  of  approaching  Charleston  or  James  Island,  either  by 
land  or  water.  If  the  rebels  come  down  in  force  to  occupy  or  remain  at 
Jehossee  Island,  and  you  feel  sure  that  you  have  strength  enough,  with 
the  aid  from  Otter  Island,  to  make  a dash  at  them  and  to  rout  them 
from  there,  you  are  authorized  to  do  this ; or,  on  learning  from  you  that 
more  force  would  be  requisite,  he  would,  if  siich  force  were  available 
from  this  vicinity,  either  send  or  take  it  to  you  for  this  purpose. 

It  does  not  appear  desirable  to  occupy  the  island  farther  inland,  than 
Edisto,  except  such  small  portions  of  adjacent  shores  as  may  be  neces- 
sary for  the  security  of  our  pickets  on  that  island,  and  the  main  body  of 
your  troops  will  habitually  be  kept  in  such  position  that  they  can  easily 
be  concentrated  for  resistance  to  an  attack.  An  especial  vigilance  is 
urged  upon  you  at  this  time,  when  other  important  efforts  are  being- 
made  here,  as  there  may  be  attempts  at  diversion  in  your  direction,  and 
a full  security  for  your  forces  would  be  preferable  to  attacks  upon  the 
enemy,  if  they  even  appear  to  be  open  to  it,  at  this  juncture. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  ELY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- GeneraL 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  April  8,  1862. 
Flag-Officer  Samuel  E.  DuPont, 

Commanding  South  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron^ 

On  Board  U.  S,  S.  Wahash  : 

Commodore:  I contemplate  opening  the  attack  on  Fort  Pulaski  by 
sunrise  to-morrow  morning,  and  have  to  ask  of  you  all  the  co-operation 
and  assistance  in  your  power.  A few  days’  further  delay  would  place 
our  batteries  on  Tybee  Island  in  a perfect  condition  perhaps,  but  I am 
satisfied  that  such  delay  would  be  of  more  service  to  the  enemy  than  to 
ourselves. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  commodore,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

North  Edisto,  S.  C.,  April  9,  1862. 

Lieut.  A.  B.  Ely, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  Hdqrs.  Northern  Hist,  Dept,  of  the  South: 

I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication 
of  the  8th  instant.  I will  make  every  endeavor,  through  spies,  intelli- 
gent contrabands,  &c.,  to  get  the  required  information  as  regards  the 
best  approaches  to  Charleston,  and  will  forward  immediately  to  the 
commanding  general  whatever  information  I may  get. 

I visited  the  outposts  of  my  command  yesterday  and  find  everything 
in  an  admirable  condition  j the  pickets  are  well  posted,  and  the  whole 
force,  consisting  of  two  regiments  of  infantry  and  four  pieces  of  artillery, 
can  be  quickly  concentrated  at  any  point.  • I do  not  think  the  rebels 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  2G7 

are  in  large  force  on  Jeliossee  Island  j their  pickets  are  stationed  and 
can  be  seen  at  Watt’s  Cut. 

I do  not  think  it  advisable  to  make  any  advance  on  Jehossee  Island 
at  present  with  the  force  I have,  as  it  could  only  be  held  with  the  assist- 
ance of  a gunboat. 

A field  officer  of  the  day  was  seen  visiting  the  rebel  pickets  on  the 
7th  instant,  which  indicates  that  there  is  more  than  one  regiment  in  the 
vicinity.  I am  making  every  efibrt  to  ascertain  the  strength  of  the 
enemy^s  forces  in  that  vicinity,  and  will  report  when  I get  the  desired 
information. 

I shall  make  a reconnaissance  on  the  Pocahontas  soon  towards  White 
Point  and  on  the  Dawho  Eiver.  I would  request,  if  it  can  be  conveni- 
ently spared,  a gunboat  drawing  not  over  7 feet  of  water.  The  slooji- 
of-war  Dale  has  not  yet  arrived  at  this  port.  The  Pocahontas  draws  toe 
much  water  to  run  in  the  ^outh  Edisto  Eiver.  The  contrabands  will  be 
forwarded  immediately  by  the  Mayflower. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  Q.  FELLOWS, 

Colonel  Third  N’eto  Hampshire  Infantry, 


corresi>ois-ide:n^ce,  etc. 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  130.  ) Hichmond,  August  21,  1861. 

#**##** 

Xll.  The  undermentioned  brigadier-generals  of  the  Provisional  Army 
of  the  Confederate  States  are  assigned  to  duty  as  follows,  viz : 

* # * # * * # 

2d.  Brig.  Gen.  Eoswell  S.  Eipley  will  assume  command  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina  and  the  coast  defenses  of  that  State. 

#***#*# 

5th.  Brig.  Gen.  John  B.  Grayson  will  proceed  to  Florida,  and  assume 
command  of  the  Department  of  Middle  and  Eastern  Florida,  and  the 
coast  defenses  of  the  same. 

* * * * * . # * 

By  command  of  the  Secretarv  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
x)^ssistant  Adjutant- General, 


Charleston,  August  31,  1861. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General: 

Two  transports  with  troops  off  bar  yesterday  j to-day  off  Bull  Island>^ 
Probably  enemy  from  Hatteras,  after  destroying  batteries.  Have  re-en- 
forced Stono  heavily.  Have  ordered  Orr’s  regiment  to  Summerville  to 
reserve.  Have  called  on  governor  for  another,  besides  holding  Charles- 
ton volunteers  in  readiness  to  move  until  our  batteries  are  in  order. 
Must,  have  force  to  prevent  enemy’s  landing,  if  possible.  Hope,  if  unin- 
terrupted, to  dispense  with  extra  force  in  fifteen  days.  If  from  one  to 
four  officers,  having  knowledge  of  ordnance  or  artillery  duty,  can  be 
sent  here,  will  assist  greatly. 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General, 


268  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Headquarters  South  Carolina, 

September  1,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : Colonel  Gregg  has  two  companies  here,  and  desires  that  they 
may  be  received  for  the  war  into  his  regiment.  As  the  law  only  ad- 
mits of  ten  companies  to  a regiment,  I refer  the  matter  to  you,  and 
request  an  immediate  decision,  as  I desire  orders  extended  to  these  two 
companies.  If  agreeable  to  you  I should  most  cordially  assign  these 
companies  to  his  regiment,  as  he  is  a colonel  of  great  experience  and 
of  the  most  distinguished  standing.  If  there  is  any  officer  to  whom 
twelve  companies  could  be  intrusted,  then  I should  urge  most  respect- 
fully the  permission  for  Colonel  Gregg.  I shall  not  be  able  to  arm  them, 
as  we  have  not  a single  arm  to  spare  out  of  this  State,  and  I am  now 
remodeling  the  old  arms  picked  up  in  the  country,  so  as  to  try  and  be 
able  to  get  arms  for  the  forty-two  companies  now  in  camp  under  your 
requisition.  You  recollect  you  directed  them  to  be  formed  into  regi- 
ments and  to  elect  their  field  officers.  One  of  these  regiments  has  done 
so,  and  the  others  will  in  a few  days. 

The  President  has  telegraphed  me  to  retain  Colonel  Orr’s  regiment 
for  our  coast  defense.  The  exposed  coast  of  North  Carolina  wifi  now 
be  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  and  it  endangers  our  whole  defenses. 

Under  these  circumstances  I would  respectfully  urge  that  Colonel 
Gregg’s  regiment  be  ordered  to  our  coast,  for  the  season  is  just  approach- 
ing when  an  invasion  may  be  anticipated,  particularly  after  our  recent 
disasters  on  the  defenseless  coast  of  North  Carolina.  If  you  were  to 
order  Colonel  Gregg’s  regiment  into  this  State  I presume  his  commis- 
sion given  by  the  President  would  be  of  older  date  than  any  volunteer 
regiment  in  the  State,  and,  if  so,  it  would  make  him  the  ranking  colonel, 
and  his  experience  would  thus  give  confidence  to  the  country. 

I shall  also  place  Colonel  Hunovant  and  his  regiment,  recently  organ- 
ized under  your  requisition  for  the  3,000,  under  orders  for  our  sea-coast. 
I can  arm  and  equip  his  regiment.  Colonel  Orr’s  I have  already  armed 
and  equipped,  and  I will  go  on  to  arm  the  others  as  fast  as  I can,  and 
if  you  inform  me  immediately  that  Colonel  Gregg’s  regiment  will  be 
stationed  in  South  Carolina,  I will  try  and  arm  these  two  companies  now 
here  for  his  regiment,  if  you  decide  to  receive  them.  Please  inform  me 
by  telegram.  With  Orr’s,  Dunovant’s,  and  Gregg’s  regiments  I would 
feel  safe,  as  I have  a stationary  force  organized  in  the  city  of  Charleston 
of  3,000  well  armed  and  trained  men,  ready  to  act,  besides  Colonel  Hey- 
ward’s State  regiment,  now  in  actual  service  on  the  Beaufort  coast  and 
at  the  batteries  recently  erected. 

I have  also  Colonel  Manigault’s  State  regiment  on  the  coast  of  George- 
town, above  Charleston,  and  in  the  batteries.  I have  ordered  another 
State  regiment  of  well-trained  men,  under  Colonel  Hagood,  into  the 
forts  at  Cole’s  Island,  on  the  Stono,  25  miles  from  Charleston.  These 
three  colonels  are  thorough  military  men  and  of  the  highest  standing 
and  military  education.  I have  also  six  companies  of  infantry  (regulars) 
on  Sullivan’s  Island,  aud  four  of  the  battalion  of  regular  artillery  in 
Fort  Sumter  and  Fort  Moultrie.  I have  ordered  five  months’  supplies 
into  the  former,  to  stand  a siege,  if  necessary,  and  am  raising  two  new 
artillery  companies  to  put  into  it,  but  in  the  mean  time  will  order  other 
companies  into  it  for  the  present.  Besides  Colonel  Hagood’s  regiment, 
now  in  the  forts  on  Stono,  I have  there  three  regular  companies  of  in- 
fantry and  the  battalion  of  regular  dragoons,  mustered  in  as  infantry, 
under  Major  Lucas,  so  that  1 have  in  the  forts  and  islands  around 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  26^ 

Oliarleston  about  X,800  men,  all  well  drilled,  and  a reserve  in  the  city  of 
about  3,000.  This,  with  the  State  regiments  under  Colonels  Ueyward 
and  Manigault,  constitute  about  7,500  men,  and  the  additional  regi- 
ments of  Colonels  Orr,  Dunovant,  and  Gregg  would  make  good  10,000 
men.  With  this  force,  and  ten  cavalry  comiianies  1 have  on  the  coast 
and  the  reserves  of  about  3,000  men  at  the  two  camiis  of  instruction,  I 
think  I could  feel  safe  for  the  present.  I am  thus  particular  in  details 
that  you  may  understand  our  position  and  let  the  President  know  it. 
All  I beg  is  an  answer  as  soon  as  possible,  so  that  I may  act  as  soon  as 
possible. 

I also  earnestly  beg,  if  possible,  that  you  will  order  me,  if  you  have  it 
at  Norfolk,  40,000  pounds  of  cannon  powder.  I loaned  the  governor  of 
North  Carolina  25,000  pounds,  and  also  the  governor  of  Florida,  for 
Fernandina  and  Saint  Augustine,  5,000  pounds,  besides  what  I sent  to 
Memphis,  Tenn.  If  1 could  be  sure  of  getting  40,000  pounds  as  a reserve 
for  Charleston,  I would  immediately  order  a full  supply  of  cannon  pow- 
der for  about  100  guns  I have  now  on  our  coast  below  Charleston.  As 
it  is,  I fear  to  drain  Charleston  entirely.  I bought  for  the  State  last 
December  and  January  about  300,000  pounds  from  Hazard^s  Mills,  in 
Connecticut,  but  I have  distributed  all  of  it  but  about  40,000  pounds^ 
and  used  a great  deal  in  our  batteries  in  the  harbor  of  Charleston. 
Please  let  me  know  immediately  as  to  this  point. 

I DOW  desire  to  get  from  you  permission  to  raise  for  the  war  an- 
other regiment  of  rifles,  and  I think,  if  you  give  me  the  power,  I can 
get  it  up  with  men  who  will  arm  themselves  from  our  private  rifles  and* 
arms  in  their  own  hands.  I think  I could  make  a choice  regiment,  and 
with  little  or  no  expense  as  to  arms,  and  selected  from  men  who  would 
incur  the  necessary  expenses,  and,  if  you  will  give  me  the  power  to  do 
so,  and  for  me  to  appoint  the  field  officers,  and  even  the  company  officers, 
I could  select  men  who  were  graduates  of  our  State  military  institutions 
and  of  West  Point,  and  I could  select  officers  who  are  now  in  our  regu- 
lar State  forces,  and  in  the  first  volunteer  regiments  now  in  Virginia, 
to  put  in  position.  I would  do  so,  because  our  regular  forces  and  our 
forces  in  Virginia  are  only  for  one  year,  and  most  of  their  terms  will 
expire  in  January  and  February  next,  and  I desire  to  secure,  in  ad- 
vance, the  services  of  their  officers  ‘‘  for  the  war,”  as  many  of  them  have 
been  in  the  late  United  States  Army,  and  all  of  our  regular  forces  have 
military  education.  I know  them,  and  could  make  selections  of  officers 
for  companies  that  would  advance  the  public  service  greatly. 

Please  let  me  know  on  this  point  as  soon  as  you  can,  and  I will  then 
proceed,  in  a quiet  way,  to  raise  a rifle  regiment  for  the  war,  with  offi- 
cers all  selected  with  an  eye  single  to  secure  military  education  and 
qualifications.  1 would  also  desire  to  raise  two  full  companies  of  cav- 
alry, to  be  attached  to  it,  of  men  who  would  arm  themselves. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Hdqrs.  Provisional  Forces,  Dept,  of  S.  C:, 

Charleston^  September  1, 18G1. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  authority  may  be  given 
me  to  provide  the  force  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  batteries  now 
beiDg  finished  at  different  points  of  the  coast.  For  this  I think  the  fol- 
lowing will  be  necessary. 

1st.  Authority  to  muster  into  service  for  the  war,  for  special  duty  on 
the  coast,  a force  not  exceeding  1,500  men. 


270  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

2d.  Autbority  to  establish  a recruiting  service  for  the  enlisted  troops 
Slow  on  duty,  viz,  the  regiment  of  South  Carolina  infantry  and  the 
battalion  of  South  Carolina  artillery,  that  the  former  may  be  recruited 
and  filled  up  to  ten  full  companies,  and  the  latter  increased  to  a regi- 
ment, with  its  proper  complement  of  field  officers.  This  will,  of  course, 
require  the  co-operation  of  the  governor  of  the  State. 

3d.  Authority  to  procure,  as  speedily  as  may  be,  such  means  of  trans- 
jiort,  armed  if  necessary,  as  will  insure  a speedy  communication  and 
transport,  by  the  inland  routes,  between  the  different  points  of  the  coast, 
as  well  as  such  facilities  for  guard  service  as  may  be  necessary. 

4th.  To  enable  these  things  to  be  done  as  speedily  as  possible,  and  to 
lirovide  such  material  as  may  be  required  by  the  chief  engineer  in  charge 
of  the  coast  defenses  and  by  the  ordnance  officer  on  duty  here,  that  means 
to  the  following  amounts  may  be  placed  to  the  credit  of  the  following 
officers,  subject  to  draft  for  no  other  purpose  than  the  defenses  of  the 
coast,  unless  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War:  To  the  chief  engineer. 
Major  Trapier,  $50,000;  ordnance  officer.  Captain  Childs,  $25,000;  quar- 
termaster, Captain  Lee,  $100,000;  total,  $175,000. 

The  reasons  for  the  above  are  as  follows : For  the  first,  that  many  men 
will  be  willing  to  muster  into  service  for  a particular  locality  who  would 
not  engage  to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  the  State  or  the  coasts  adjacent. 
It  would  also  be  bad  policy  to  take  too  many  men  from  the  vicinity  of 
these  plantations,  drawn  from  localities  thickly  settled  with  black  popu- 
lation. 

• For  the  second,  is  the  manifest  importance  of  keeping  up  the  strength 
of  the  small  force  enlisted  in  the  department,  being  more  reliable  for  the 
continued  service  of  guarding  the  forts  and  batteries  than  men  of  a dif- 
ferent class. 

For  the  third,  that  our  only  means  of  communication  are  by  the  inland 
routes,  which  are  tortuous  and  shallow,  and  only  available  for  certain 
classes  of  vessels.  If  we  have  these  vessels  and  speedy  communication 
the  inland  navigation  is  a great  element  of  strength,  but  without  it  it 
is  one  of  weakness,  enabling  the  enemy,  by  means  of  his  barges,  to  over- 
power weak  batteries,  cut  the  communication,  and  lay  waste  whole  sec- 
tions of  country  containing  valuable  property.  The  guard  service  is 
required  to  enable  us  to  watch  the  enemy’s  fleet,  to  assist  vessels  which 
may  be  endeavoring  to  run  the  blockade,  and  give  timely  notice  of  an 
attack  in  force.  It  is  within  my  knowledge  that  one  or  two  vessels  at 
least  have  been  warned  off  the  harbor  or  captured  which  might  have 
successfully  run  the  blockade  had  there  been  a guard  steamer  to  succor 
them.  The  brig  West  Indian,  which  ran  the  blockade  this  morning  with 
1,500  bags  of  coffee,  came  very  near  being  lost  by  the  wind  failing  when 
within  2 miles  of  the  range  of  the  forts  and  batteries.  Had  the  calm 
lasted  half  an  hour,  chased  as  she  was  by  the  steam  frigate  and  sloop  of 
war  now  blockading  here,  she  must  have  been  captured  by  the  boats  of 
the  squadron.  A steam  guard  boat  would  have  secured  her  from  any 
hazard. 

The  reason  for  the  fourth  is,  that  while  the  War  Department  at  Eich- 
mond  is  occupied  with  business  of  such  gigantic  importance  as  it  now  has 
in  hand,  many  requisitions  of  vital  importance  lay  by  for  their  turn  for 
consideration  and  action.  Meantime  master  workmen  and  mechanics, 
many  of  them  having  their  capital  exhausted  or  in  accounts  against  the 
Government,  are  in  the  present  state  of  the  money  market  often 
unable  to  pay  their  workmen,  and  delay  ensues  in  important  business. 
Funds  provided  for  general  service  in  the  Quartermaster’s  Department 
•often  are  expended  by  requisition  from  abroad.  Of  the  three  requisi- 


Chat.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  271 

tious  which  have  been  made  by  the  staff  officers,  attended  to  by  my 
order,  and  which  I have  the"  honor  to  inclose,  that  most  readily  dis- 
pensed with  is  that  of  the  Ordnance  Department.  Most  of  the  material 
can  be  provided  for  by  the  guard  service,  but  for  various  articles  it 
would  be  well  to  have  a fund  tor  special  purposes  of  coast  defenses. 

The  estimate  for  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  will  be  wanted  espe- 
cially to  carry  out  the  purposes  mentioned  in  the  third  paragraph. 

I have  to  request  that  the  inclosed  special  requisitions  be  submitted 
with  this  communication  for  such  action  as  may  be  deemed  most  proper 
by  the  Department. 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

11.  S.  IIIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General. 

[Indorsement.] 

September  5,  1861. 

The  original  letter  of  General  Eipley,  of  which  this  is  a copy,  has  not 
yet  been  received  at  this  office.  The  subject  is,  however,  of  such  impor- 
tance as  to  require  immediate  action,  and  hence  this  paper  is  respectfully 
submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters,  S.  C.,  Sejytemher  2,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Dear  Sir  : In  my  letter  of  yesterday  I urged  you  to  send  back  Col- 
onel Gregg’s  regiment  to  this  State  for  the  coast.  Upon  further  reflec- 
tion I withdraw  any  request  of  the  kind,  and  leave  it  entirely  to  your 
own  judgment  as  to  the  whole  matter.  You  know  the  general  plans 
and  our  resources,  and  I do  not.  I desire,  therefore,  now  to  leave  the 
matter  as  to  the  disposition  of  Colonel  Gregg’s  regiment  entirely  to  your 
own  judgment,  and  hereby  withdraw  any  request  of  mine  on  that  point. 
If  you  will  immediately  authorize  me  I can  raise  many  more  companies 
for  the  war,  and  put  them  at  the  two  camps  of  instruction,  and  perhaps 
it  would  be  better  for  the  President  to  appoint  all  field  officers,  or,  if  he 
will  leave  the  appointments  to  me,  I will  make  them  from  graduates  of 
West  Point  or  our  own  military  academies,  or  from  officers  who  have 
shown  merit  in  the  regiments  now  in  Virginia  whose  terms  of  service 
will  begin  to  expire  in  January  and  February  next.  I could  also  take 
officers  from  the  regular  forces  now  in  this  State  whose  terms  will  exjiire 
about  February  next,  and  thus  save  all  our  best  officers  by  their  appoint- 
ment in  forces  for  and  during  the  war.  If  I can  have  discretion  of  this 
kind,  I can  then  at  these  camps  increase  our  forces  greatly  for  the  war, 
and  as  our  twelve-months’  volunteers  return  from  Virginia,  I can  catch 
nearly  all  of  them  immediately  and  save  the  best  of  their  officers. 
Please  give  me  an  early  answer  on  this  point.  The  four  regiments  at 
the  camiis  at  present  are  electing,  as  you  have,  in  yours  of  the  15th  of 
July  last,  directed  that  they  should  do. 

But  all  to  be  received  after  this,  I desire  field  officers  to  be  appointed 
either  by  the  President  or  named  by  me  and  confirmed  by  the  Presi- 
dent or  in  any  way  the  President  thinks  proper. 

I have  four  very  fine  cavalry  companies  in  camp,  and  would  be  glad 
if  you  would  allow  me  to  name  a major  to  command  them. 

I desire  you  to  give  permission  for  me  to  raise  two  full  regiments  of 


272  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

cavalry  besides,  for  and  during  the  war,  and  if  you  can  give  me  any 
assurance  as  to  pistols  and  bolsters,  I think  that  I can  do  it.  Let  the 
President  appoint  their  field  officers,  and  let  them  elect  their  company 
officers,  and  when  the  number  is  full  order  them  to  the  camp  for  Con- 
federate service.  If  it  is  not  your  policy  to  raise  two  more  regiments, 
then  perhaps  you  might  allow  one. 

The  present  four  companies  are  by  express  telegraph  from  President 
Davis.  I have  three  regiments  and  four  companies  of  cavalry  at  one 
camp,  ancLif  you  will  permit  I will  appoint  a very  scientific  officer.  Major 
Stevens,  the  head  of  our  military  academy,  to  command  them,  and  take 
charge  of  the  camp  for  temporary  purposes.  Perhaps  I could  get  Col. 
Thomas  P.  Drayton,  who  is  a graduate  of  West  Point,  and  a perfect  and 
high-bred  gentleman. 

Very  respectful!  v, 

P.  W.  PICKENS. 

P.  S. — I most  respectfully  urge  you  will  receive  no  more  troops  for 
any  period  except  fdr  and  during  the  war,  and  let  it  be  known. 


Columbia,  September  2,  1861. 

Hon.  Mr.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Will  you  allow  me  eight  more  companies  for  the  war  and  formation  of 
another  regiment — the  President  to  appoint,  as  he  desires — Colonel 
Drayton  to  command  % Please  let  me  know. 

P.  W.  PICKENS. 


Headquarters  MilUtary  District, 

Savannah^  September  3,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond^  Ya. : 

Sir  : I beg  to  call  your  attention  to  the  pressing  necessity  for  addi- 
tional troops  on  this  coast  at  the  earliest  possible  moment.  I have 
received  and  mustered  into  service  enough  to  replace  the  two  regiments 
suddenly  ordered  to  Virginia  (Semmes’  and  Williams’  regiments),  and 
these  are  but  enough  to  man  the  batteries  on  the  coast,  leaving  us  no 
protection  on  the  main-land  in  case  of  trouble.  Nearly  all  the  compa- 
nies I have  at  this  moment  are  entirely  raw  and  undisciplined. 

The  large  calls  upon  the  State  of  Georgia  have  taken  away  nearly 
every  trained  company  and  all  the  arms,  except  such  as  may  be  found 
in  private  hands.  I am  now  endeavoring  to  organize  all  such  as  can 
furnish  their  own  arms  and  muster  them  into  service.  In  this  way  only 
can  I secure  a force  that  will  give  any  protection  to  this  coast.  May  I 
ask  the  favor  of  you  to  say  at  once,  by  telegraph,  that  I may  continue 
to  organize  new  regiments  and  battalions  on  and  near  this  coast  ? I 
wish  to  quiet  the  apprehensions  of  the  people,  by  assuring  them  that  I 
have  full  authority  to  organize  and  muster  in  until  we  have  a sufficient 
force. 

If  the  Department  is  willing  to  make  appointments  of  colonels  of  these 
regiments,  I recommend  that  Duncan  L.  Clinch  (son  of  the  late  General 
Clinch)  be  forthwith  appointed  colonel,  with  authority  to  raise  a regi- 


Chap.  XY.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  273 

ment  for  this  coast.  In  any  event  please  send  me  the  telegraijliic  dis- 
patch which  I have  above  requested. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  R.  LAWTON, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  South  Carolina, 

\Columbia^  Septeinber  4,  18G1. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War.,  Richmond.,  Ya. : 

Sir:  In  reply  to  yotir  communication  of  the  9th  of  August  last  to  the 
governor  of  South  Carolina,  in  relation  to  the  First  Regiment  of  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Glover,  I have  the  honor  to 
state  that  in  consideration  of  the  large  number  of  State  troops  already 
in  Virginia,  and  the  recent  requisitions  of  your  Department  for  five 
additional  regiments  (which  regiments  are  now  nearly  ready  to  take  uj) 
the  line  of  march),  and,in  view  of  the  anticipated  invasion  on  our  coast 
this  coming  winter,  as  evidenced  by  the  Northern  press  and  the  Hat- 
teras  aftiiir,  the  State  authorities  deem  it  inexpedient  to  permit  the 
First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (State  troops)  to  leave  the 
State  for  their  unexpired  term  of  service.  The  regiment  is  now  guard- 
ing an  exposed  portion  of  our  coast.  His  excellency  the  governor  and 
the  State  authorities  feel  assured  that  ;^'Ou  will  not  accept  the  services 
of  any  independent  troops  without  they  present  the  consent  of  the 
governor. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  GIST, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of  South  Carolina, 


Headquarters  Military  District, 

Savannah,  September  4,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : In  addition  to  what  I said  in  my  letter  of  yesterday  in  reference 
to  the  urgent  necessity  for  a large  addition  to  the  military  force  on  this 
coast  and  a recommendation  that  Duncan  L.  Clinch,  esq.,  be  authorized 
to  raise  a regiment  for  local  defense,  I take  leave  respectfully  to  suggest 
that  the  elections  for  field  officers  of  regiments  within  my  observation 
have  proved  very  disastrous  to  discipline  and  efficiency.  If  consistent 
with  the  views  of  the  War  Department  I would  be  truly  pleased  to  see 
all  such  appointments  here  made  by  the  President,  and  I will  suggest 
names,  if  desired. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  R.  LAWTON, 
Brigadier-  General,  Comm anding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  September  6,  1861. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley, 

Commanding  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

Sir:  A copy  of  your  letter  of  September  1 to  Adjutant-General 
Cooper  has  been  submitted  to  this  Department.  In  view  of  its  impor- 
tance I take  the  earliest  opportunity  to  reifiy. 

18  R R — VOL  VI 


274  COASTS  OF  S.  C J GA  , AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CiiAr.  XV. 

The  authority  for  which  you  ask,  ^^to  muster  into  service  for  the  war, 
for  special  duty  ou  the  coast,  a force  not  exceeding  1,500  men,”  is  granted, 
but  at  tlie  same  time  I take  occasion  to  say  that,  as  Governor  Pickens  is 
already  organizing  a force  for  home  defense,  it  will  be  proper  for  you,  so 
far  as  practicable,  to  act  in  concert  with  liim,  to  avoid  both  unpleasant 
complications  and  unnecessary  expenses. 

2d.  The  authority  asked  for  “to  establish  a recruiting  service  for  the 
enlisted  troops  now  on  duty,”  &c.,  as  proposed,  is  also  granted. 

3d.  With  regard  to  the  proposal  “to  provide  means  of  transport, 
armed,  if  necessaiy,”  &c.,  this  Department  must  be,  to  a great  extent, 
guided  by  your  own  view  of  the  actual  necessity  of  your  position.  The 
Department  is,  therefore,  unwilling  to  refuse  any  means  of  defense 
which  you  recommend  as  necessary,  and  such  armed  transports  as  you 
propose  will  be  allowed  within  the  limits  of  as  reasonable  expenditure 
as  may  be  rendered  necessary.  All  requisitions  made  in  consequence 
of  this  expenditure  within  the  limit  of  necessary  defense  will  be  granted 
promptly,  and  the  difficulties  which  you  suggest  as  likely  to  arise  in  the 
execution  of  these  plans,  and  in  view  of  which  you  ask  a departure  from 
the  usual  rule,  may,  it  is  hoped,  be  without  necessity  of  such  departure, 
easily  and  satisfactorily  obviated,  without  the  necessity  of  such  arrange- 
ments as  you  propose. 

The  requisitions  inclosed  by  you  have  been  sent  to  the  proper  bureaus, 
and  will  doubtless  receive  prompt  attention. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  P.  WALKEE, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Savannah,  September  8,  1801. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker: 

There  is  much  alarm  here  about  the  coast.  Stronger  force  and  vigor- 
ous action  absolutely  necessary.  Will  you  increase  the  force  and  quicken 
the  energy,  or  will  you  furnish  funds  to  support  troops  and  approbate 
prompt  State  action  for  that  purpose?  1 wish  to  avoid  all  conflict  of 
authority,  but  iDrompt  action  is  indispensable.  Please  answer  immedi- 
atelv. 

JOSEPH  E.  BEOWN. 


Eichmond,  September  9,  18G1. 

Governor  Brown, 

Savannah^  Ga. : 

In  a letter  to  General  Lawton  I have  ordered  him  to  increase  his 
force  as  he  may  deem  necessary.  All  legitimate  expenditures  for  this 
Ijurpose  within  the  line  of  his  approval  will  be  paid  by  the  Government. 

L.  P.  WALKEE, 


Eichmond,  September  9,  18G1. 

General  A.  E.  Lawton, 

Savannah^  Ga. : 

You  are  authorized  to  organize  such  military  force  as  is  in  your 
opinion  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  coast  of  Georgia. 

JOHK  TYLEE,  Jr., 

Acting  Chief  of  Bureau  of  War. 


Chap.  XV.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  275 

War  DEPART3IENT,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  September  10,  1861, 

His  Excellency  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  South  Carolina: 

Sir  : It  affords  me  very  great  pleasure-  to  acknowledge  your  very 
interesting  communication  to  this  Department  of  the  1st  and  2d  of  the 
present  month,  and  to  congratulate  you  upon  the  evidence  thej^  furnish 
of  the  ceaseless  energies  put  forth  by  the  governor  of  South  Carolina 
during  your  administration.  Where  such  faithful  manifestations  of 
])ublic  concern  exist,  guided  and  controlled  by  such  admirable  wisdom 
and  policy,  it  is  profoundly  to  be  regretted  that  this  Department  is  so 
circumscribed  by  law  as  not  always  to  have  it  in  its  power  to  second 
your  suggestions.  Under  the  law  a regiment  is  limited  to  ten  com- 
panies, and  therefore  your  proposition  to  incori>orate  two  additional 
companies  into  Colonel  Gregg’s  regiment,  although  based  on  sound 
reasoning  and  solid  facts,  cannot  be  granted.  Colonel  Gregg  has  been 
informed  more  at  large  of  the  manner  in  which  the  action  of  this 
Department  is  circumscribed  in  the  premises,  and  will  doubtless  com- 
municate with  you  on  the  subject.  ISTor  does  there  exist  any  authority 
by  which  I can  authorize  you  to  appoint  company  officers.  They  are 
invariably  elected,  according  to  the  laws  regulating  the  militia  of  the 
States  respectively,  and  this  is  the  case  where  vacancies  occur  after 
troops  have  been  received  and  mustered  into  the  Confederate  service. 
To  enable  the  Government  even  to  appoint  field  officers  troops  must 
come  to  it  direct,  without  State  intervention,  under  the  amended  acts 
of  Congress  passed  at  the  second  session.  Then  they  must  come  solely 
by  companies,  and  be  mustered  into  the  service  as  such.  Thus  your 
excellency  will  perceive  how  utterly  impossible  it  is  for  this  Depart- 
ment to  entertAn  your  proposition  in  these  respects.  IS’either  can  I 
gratify  you  by  accepting  the  two  unarmed  cavalry  regiments  you 
generously  ofter.  The  service  does  not  absolutely  require  them,  and 
our  present  resources  do  not  admit  of  their  acceptance.  But  the  two 
cavalry  companies  to  which  you  allude  will  be  received,  if  armed  and 
equipped  5 and  where  there  is  necessarily  so  much  negation  of  your 
wishes,  I am  happy  to  say  that  the  rifle  regiment  you  propose  to  raise 
for  the  war  and  to  arm  will  be  taken  into  service. 

This  Department,  through  an  anxious  desire  to  oblige  you,  will  also 
receive  ten  companies,  to  be  offered  by  companies,  and  to  be  organized 
by  its  authority  into  a regiment,  thus  reserving  to  itself  the  right  to 
appoint  the  field  officers;  but  if  your  excellency  can  possibly  arm  these 
companies,  it  is  sincerely  hoped  you  will  arm  them,  though  it  be  only 
with  the  flint  musket,  country  rifle,  or  heavy  shot-gun. 

The  cannon  powder  that  you  ask  for  cannot  be  spared  by  the 
Ordnance  Office  unless  there  be  an  absolute  existing  necessity  for  it, 
under  the  pressure  of  demand  in  other  quarters,  where  it  is  indis- 
pensable. It  is  preferred  that  your  excellency  will  retain  your  patience 
upon  the  subject  for  the  present. 

I entirely  concur  with  your  excellency  in  the  policy  of  not  accepting 
any  more  troops  except  for  the  war,  and  have  endeavored  ever  since 
the  Congress  invested  this  Department  with  the  discretionary  power  of 
thus  receiving  military  tenders  to  limit  its  favor  by  this  policy ; but  as 
our  arms  have  not  been  abundant,  it  has  been  and  still  is  a matter  of 
pure  necessity  to  accept  tenders  coming  to  us  armed  for  a less  period. 


276  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  KV. 

With  renewed  congratulations  upon  the  martial  force  of  your  State 
and  considerations  ot  high  personal  regard,  I remain,  your  excellency's 
obedient  servant, 

L.  P.  WALKER,  . 
Secretary  of  War, 


Hdqrs.  Mil.  Dept.  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

Fernandinaj  September  13,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War,  G.  S.,  Richmond: 

Sir  : The  whole  population  of  Florida  may  well  unite  with  me,  as  they 
do,  in  deploring  the  condition  of  the  State.  I have  been  in  the  State  nine 
days  and  have  been  at  this  place  for  five  days.  I have  pulled  down 
much  of  the  battery  and  magazine,  and  when  completed  (I  hope  in  two 
weeks)  the  harbor  will  be  guarded  and  protected.  An  alarm  existed  a 
few  days  since,  and  the  governor  promptly  called  out  a large  force  of 
volunteers,  and  a strong  resistance  could  have  been  made,  but  without 
aid  from  Fort  Clinch  and  the  battery  it  would  have  been  useless  to  ex- 
pect it.  As  sure  as  the  sun  rises,  unless  cannon,  powder,  &c.,  be  sent 
to  Florida  in  the  next  thirty  days,  she  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
NTorth.  Nothing  human  can  prevent  it.  There  are  not  4,000  pounds  of 
powder  at  every  post  combined.  The  batteries  are  incorrectly  put  up  and 
not  finished.  The  enemy  can  land  where  they  please.  Guns  and  chassis 
are  lying  on  the  beach,  though  that  I have  remedied.  There  is  not  an 
officer  to  put  up  the  guns  or  an  officer  to  superintend  their  instruction 
when  put  up.  There  is  not  an  officer  to  receive  the  supplies  when  they 
arrive.  I have  no  assistant  adjutant  general,  nor  an  assistant  commissary, 
nor  an  assistant  quartermaster,  nor  an  aide-de-camp.  Mr.  Wood,  if  ap- 
pointed a lieutenant,  was  applied  for  as  aide,  Mr.  I’Anson  as  assistant 
quartermaster.  Captain  Gott  was  applied  for,  and  received  orders,  which 
were  revoked ) I applied  for  no  one  else,  as  I knew  no  one  to  apply  for.  I 
applied  to  General  Cooper  for  Lieutenant  Thomas,  adjutant  of  Colonel 
Ward’s  regiment  Florida  volunteers,  who  was  dissatisfied  with  his  posi- 
tion. Colonel  Ward,  Lieutenant  Thomas  informs  me,  will  object  to  the 
transfer.  I trust,  Mr.  Secretary,  that  you  will  take  this  communication 
under  your  immediate  notice,  and  have  the  ordnance  stores  and  the 
various  officers  sent  at  once.  I send  a list  of  guns  and  ammunition 
wanted  forthwith.  Florida  will  become  a Yankee  province  unless  meas- 
ures for  her  relief  are  promptly  made.  I leave  to-morrow  for  Tallahas- 
see, and  shall,  with  all  dispatch,  visit  Saint  Mark’s,  Apalachicola,  Cedar 
Keys,  and  Tampa.  I will  communicate  my  movements  from  time  to  time. 
I send  a copy  of  my  requisition  for  ordnance  j also  a circular  found,  with 
many  others,  posted  about  this  city. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  B.  GRAYSON, 

Brigadier- General^  G.  A.,  Gomdg.  Middle  and  East  Florida, 


[Inclosures.] 

Requisition  for  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  required  to  be  filled  at  the 
earliest  moment  for  the  Military  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida^ 
and  to  be  consigned  to  Gapt,  William  Hickman,  assistant  quartermaster, 
Fernandina,  East  Florida : 

14  32-pounder  cannon  j six  to  be  rifled,  if  possible. 

4 42-pounders,  if  possible,  and  rifled,  with  chassis.  The  chassis  for 
the  32-pounders  are  promised  from  Charleston. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  277 

23.000  pounds  of  cannon  powder  for  29  cannon. 

12.000  musket  cartridges ; few  or  none  on  band. 

300  shells  for  three  12-pounder  howitzers  at  Saint  Augustine.  The 
fixtures  for  the  32-i)ounders  are  promised  from  Charleston. 

12  12-pounders,  with  chassis  and  fixtures  complete ; the  32-i)ound- 
ers  to  be  the  army  pattern. 

JOHN  B.  GEATSON, 

Brigadier-General,  0.  A.,  Comdg,  Middle  and  Bast  Florida. 

Taelarassee,  Fla.,  S^tember  14, 1861. 

Notice. 

AU  loyal  citizens  of  tlie  United  States  are  hereby  notified  that  the  Fed- 
eral troops  wiU  take  possession  of  the  island  of  Amelia  in  a few  days, 
and  if  they  desire  to  escape  the  vengeance  of  an  outraged  Government 
they  must  assemble  on  the  south  end  of  the  island.  All  those  found  at 
that  point,  except  the  military,  will  be  regarded  as  good  citizens  of  the 
United  States. 

Assemble  on  the  right. 


Fort  Pulaski,  September  15, 1861. 

Capt.  E.  M.  CuYLER, 

Chief  of  Ordnance,  Military  District  of  Savannah : 

Captain:  I am  in  receipt  of  yours  of  the  14th.  In  compliance  with 
your  request  I inclose  herewith  a statement  of  the  companies  stationed 
at  this  post,  with  number  of  men,  number  and  description  of  arms,  and 
amount  of  ammunition,  as  given  me  by  the  captains  of  companies.* 
Seven  thousand  of  the  8,000  cartridges  sent  here,  subject  to  the  order 
of  Colonel  Mercer,  have  been  sent  to  Tybee.  Out  of  the  1,000  left  the 
guard  are  being  supplied. 

The  4,000  cartridges  in  the  ordnance  store-room,  to  which  you  refer, 
were  made  by  the  Irish  Jasper  Greens,  and  are  ball,  without  buck-shot. 
They  will  answer,  perhaps,  for  the  Washington  Volunteers,  but  Captain 
McMahon  prefers  the  cartridges  with  buck-shot.  There  are  no  .caps 
with  them. 

We  have  not  made  any  fuses  yet,  having  no  fuse  die  that  we  can  use. 
As  soon  as  we  can  obtain  fuse  dies  we  will  commence  making  fuses.  We 
can  easily  work  three  or  four  dies  if  we  have  them.  We  have  ours  made 
at  the  Central  Eailroad  w’orkshops,  which  is  imperfect.  I send  it  up  by 
this  boat.  K you  will  send  it  to  Mr.  Burns,  at  the  Central  Eailroad,  I 
have  no  doubt  but  that  he  will  have  the  mistake  corrected.  If  you  will 
examine  it  you  will  see  around  that  some  of  the  forms  for  the  fuses  are 
very  irregular;  the  taper  does  not  extend  to  the  small  end,  and  if  it  did 
it  would  make  the  fuse  too  large  at  that  end. 

We  want  about  a dozen  small  copper  funnels  (perhaps  tin  would 
answer)  for  filling  shells ; there  are  but  two  here.  We  also  want  a few 
fuse  reamers. 

Will  you  permit  me  to  suggest  the  propriety  of  holding  a survey  upon 
the  carriages  of  the  barbette  guns  ? I very  much  fear  that  they  are  not 
calculated  to  withstand  the  shock  of  repeated  firing.  Would  it  not  be 
well  to  attend  to  this  at  once,  and,  if  it  is  decided  that  the  pine  is  not 


* Not  foand. 


278  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  ICuap.  XV. 

suitable,  have  oak  procured  aud  carriages  made  without  delay  ? I am 
informed  that  seasoned  oak  enough  to  replace  all  the  barbette  carriages 
can  be  had  at  Darien. 

Permit  me  also  to  bring  to  your  notice  the  small  supply  of  cannon 
powder  now  in  our  magazines,  it  being  but  about  45,000  pounds.  The 
Navy  holds  an  order  on  the  fort  for  1,700  or  1,800,  which,  if  delivered, 
will  reduce  the  quantity  of  shot  made. 

Why  cannot  Captain  Echols  and  yourself  visit  the  fort  some  day  this 
week  and  assist  us  with  your  advice  f 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  S.  CLAGHORN, 
Captain,  Commanding  Post 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A.,  Engineer  Bureait, 

Richmond,  Ya.,  Septe^nher  21,  1861. 

Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : The  x>i'oject  of  auxiliary  coast  defense  herewith,  as  submitted  by 
Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales,  though  not  thought  to  be  everywhere  applicable, 
is  believed  to  be  of  great  value  under  special  circumstances.  In  the 
example  assumed  at  Edisto  Island,  where  the  movable  batteries  rest  on 
defensive  works  and  are  themselves  scarcely  exposed  to  surprise  and 
capture,  a rifled  24-pounder,  with  two  small  guns,  rallying  and  reconnoi- 
tering  from  each  of  the  fixed  batteries,  would  jirove  invaluable.  A lighter 
gun  than  the  24-iiounder,  and  quite  as  efficient,  might  be  devised  for  such 
service,  but  this  is  probably  the  best  now  available.  Colonel  Gonzales^ 
proposed  arrangements  for  re-enforcing  certain  exposed  and  threatened 
maritime  posts  seem  to  be  judicious  and  to  merit  attention. 

Very  respectfully, 

D.  LEADBETTER, 

Major,  Engineers. 

(Indorsement.  ] 

September  23,  1861. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

[Inclosure.] 

Richmond,  Ya.,  September  14,  1861. 
His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  C.  8.  A. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  place  before  you  the  outline  of  a system  of 
coast  defense  which,  if  adopted,  will,  I believe,  very  much  increase  the 
security  of  our  Atlantic  and  Gulf  States,  and  render  a lesser  force  than 
otherwise  would  be  required  sufficient  for  the  protection  of  our  coast.  I 
have  not  been  bold  to  submit  it  to  you  for  adoption  without  having  first 
liad  it  before  scientific  officers  of  our  Army  and  other  gentlemen  of  mili- 
tary experience,  who  have  highly  commended  it  for  practicability  and 
efficiency.  As  acting  inspector-general  on  Morris  Island,  and  since  up 
to  this  day  as  inspector  of  the  troops  and  defenses  on  the  coast  of  South 
Carolina  by  Governor  Pickens,  I have  probably  had  opportunities  for 
studying  our  coast  and  the  way  of  protecting  it  not  enjoyed  by  others. 
Taking  the  coast  of  South  Carolina  as  a representation,  with  but  few 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


279 


exceptions,  of  our  Southern  coast,  and  taking  the  island  of  Edisto  as  a 
representation  of  the  nature  of  its  seaboard,  we  have  as  roughly  marked 
in  the  sketch  on  opposite  page : 


ATLAm-IC  OCEAN. 


Charlesimr  <P  fS'auaimalcr  J^cdLtroady, 

We  have  one  of  our  most  valuable  agricultural  regions,  with  a popu- 
lation of  about  5,000  negroes  and  one  hundred  and  odd  voters,  with  one 
sand  open  work  (A)  on  North  Edisto  entrance,  mounting  six  guns,  and 
another  (B)  on  South  Edisto  entrance,  mounting  two  guns.  On  this 
island,  as  on  the  whole  of  our  coast,  there  is  a hard  practicable  sand 
beach,  and  immediately  behind  it  a line  of  sand  hills,  forming  almost  a 
continuous  fort  of  nature’s  own  making.  The  shallowness  of  the  water 
opposite  the  coast,  extending  for  several  miles,  would  prevent  any  but 
the  lightest  vessels  trom  approaching  it.  Hence  the  enemy’s  large  steam 
frigates,  except  through  their  tenders  and  barges,  can  inflict  no  injury 
upon  us.  By  means  of  these  barges,  however,  a force  can  be  landed,  if 
unresisted,  anywhere  upon  the  beach,  and  the  works  at  the  inlets  taken 
in  the  rear.  Through  these  inlets  the  batteries  can  be  engaged  by  third- 
class  steamers  and  by  gunboats.  Supposing  the  armament  at  these 
inlets  to  be  so  increased  (which  should  be  done)  as  to  prevent  ingress 
of  ships,  and  consequently  of  heavy  artillery  (for  the  latter  cannot  be 
landed  in  boats  upon  the  beach),  in  the  absence  of  an  overwhelming 
land  force  lining  the  whole  extent  of  our  coast  we  should  have  upon  the 


280  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

latter  artillery  of  the  greatest  range,  in  order  that  it  may  engage  small 
steamers  lying  off,  sink  approaching  barges,  and  should  the  latter  effect 
a landing  with  howitzers  and  men,  crush  them  by  the  superiority  of 
their  metal  and  the  advantages  of  range,  and  at  the  same  time  so  x>ort- 
able  that  it  can  easily  be  used  upon  the  coast,  and  even  in  emergencies 
upon  the  sandy  roads  on  the  island  or  the  main-land.  In  the  riffed  24- 
Xmunder  on  seige  carriage  we  have  the  gun  required. 

Exi^erii  nee  has  shown  that  a rifled  24-pounder,  not  banded,  can  throw 
an  elongated  percussion  shell,  the  most  formidable  to  ships,  much  over 
3 miles.  The  conditions  necessary  for  the  safety  to  the  gun  are,  that  the 
shell  do  not  weigh  more  than  one  and  a half  the  weight  of  the  round 
solid  shot  of  the  same  caliber,  and  that  the  charge  for  the  24-pounder  do 
not  exceed  five  pounds.  This  24-pounder  rifled  cannon,  outranging  the 
largest  Dahlgren  guns  of  the  enemy’s  fleet,  and,  if  provided  with  good 
shells,  far  more  formidable  than  the  former,  can,  on  siege  carriages,  be 
drawn  with  the  greatest  ease  up  and  down  the  beach  at  half  and  at  low 
tide  by  6 horses.  I will  assign,  however,  10  horses  to  each  gun  and  10 
to  each  ammunition  wagon,  and  I would  permanently  attach  to  each  gun 
and  ammunition  wagon,  for  protection  and  support,  for  assistance  in 
drawing  them  at  high  water  or  on  heavy  roads  on  extraordinary  occa- 
sions, and  for  co-operation  in  action  against  infantry,  a body  of  cavalry, 
at  the  rate  of  10  mounted  men  to  each  gun  and  ammunition  wagon.  For 
such  guns,  stationed  on  the  coast,  no  more  carriages  and  no  forges,  &c., 
would  be  required  to  be  moved  with  the  guns,  for  the  reason  that  this 
artillery  has  for  its  object  to  link  the  batteries  at  the  inlets,  to  close  and 
watch  the  space  which  intervenes  between  them,  and  to  prevent  their 
being  taken  in  reverse.  At  night  they  are  expected  to  unite  in  some 
central  post  upon  the  coast,  or  to  fall  back  upon  the  forts  which  consti- 
tute their  base.  These  forts  they  would  flank  against  a land  attack,  and 
rercnforce  materially  in  a contest  against  ships.  For  this  purpose,  at  each 
fort  or  battery  there  should  be  constructed  a suitable  work,  with  magazine 
and  stored  ammunition,  ready  to  receive  these  guns  whenever  recalled. 
Thus,  if  there  were  stationed  three  24-pounder  rifled  cannon  on  siege 
carriages  on  the  natural  fortress  of  sand  hills  (a  most  important  feature 
of  our  coast)  back  of  the  beach  on  Edisto  Island,  at  the  points  marked  0, 
D,  and  E,  they  would  cross  their  fire  against  barges  or  land  forces,  and 
would  even  advantageously  engage,  when  united,  any  small  steamers 
that  might  contrive  to  approach  sufficiently  near  to  protect  the  enemy’s 
landing. 

To  carry  out  beyond  peradventure  the  operation  of  moving  behind  the 
sand  hills,  where  the  road  is  heavy,  to  move  at  high  water  in  great 
emergencies  along  the  beach,  to  cross  with  the  sea-coast  flying  artillery 
a belt  of  country  in  order  to  intercept  the  enemy  or  to  take  a strategic 
position,  a strong  rope,  with  ten  straps  permanently  affixed  to  it  along 
its  length,  is  to  be  connected  to  the  chain  the  draught  horses  are  pulling 
by.  Each  of  these  straps  is  hooked  on  temporarily  to  the  breast-band 
of  the  saddle  of  each  cavalry  soldier  assigned  to  each  gun  and  ammuni- 
tion wagon,  and  thus  20  horses  will  be  the  draught  to  each  gun  in  any 
difficult  traveling.  In  an  emergency,  to  place  the  guns  in  position  at 
the  shortest  notice  and  in  the  most  difficult  localities,  the  horses  and 
horsemen  belonging  to  the  ammunition  wagon  can  be  attached  tempora- 
rily to  the  gun,  and  thus  40  horses  are  at  once  available  to  extricate  it 
even  from  a morass.  This  duty  performed  they  can  return,  and  still 
more  easily  remove  the  ammunition  wagon.  In  case  of  an  attempt  of 
the  enemy  to  land,  the  infantry  at  the  two  forts,  A and  B,  could,  unseen 
behind  the  hills,  come  to  the  support  of  cavalry  and  artillery.  I would 


Chap.  XV,] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


281 


arm  the  cavalry  with  sabers  and  double-barreled  guns.  Behind  sand 
hills,  in  defense  of  a battery  from  an  enemy  landing  on  thebeacli,  where 
the  space  to  be  traversed  by  him  is  very  short  and  open,  I would  prefer 
the  double-barreled  gun  to  any  other  arm,  especially  as  in  landing  from 
the  boats  the  enemy  must  be  crowded.  Two  volleys  of  large  buck-shot 
and  the  saber,  even  on  foot,  would  do  quick  work.  Our  men  are  all  used  to 
the  double-barreled  gun,  and  they  would  lire  it  promptly  and  conlideutly. 
Besides,  that  weapon  can  now  be  furnished  to  the  troops  when  rilles  could 
not  be  had.  Moreover,  if  the  enemy  is  in  motion,  or  the  horsemen,  or 
if  both,  he  is  far  more  likely  to  be  hit  at  short  ranges  with  the  double- 
barreled  gun  than  with  a rifle.  To  the  uses  of  a sup])ort  as  infantry 
the  cavalry  could  add  the  services  peculiar  to  itself  of  charging  a disor- 
ganized or  surprised  enemy,  vedette  and  patrol  duty,  and  the  transmis- 
sion of  intelligence  and  of  dispatches.  On  the  shells  for  these  guns  1 
would  have  two  fuses — the  percussion  at  the  apex,  to  be  used  against 
ships,  and  the  Bormann  fuse  on  the  side,  to  be  punched  when  fired  upon 
infantry,  barges,  or  at  shari)shooters  on  the  tops  of  ships  while  in  close 
action. 

Nothing  that  the  enemy  can  bring  can  neutralize  this  system.  The 
inlets  being  closed,  he  can  land  no  heavy  artilh  ry.  These  guns  would 
help  to  close  the  inlets,  and  would  prevent  even  the  landing  of  small 
guns.  These,  if  landed,  would  be  crushed  by  our  artillery,  and  so  would 
their  small  ships,  if  after  passing  the  inlets  they  should  venture  into  the 
narrow  and  tortuous  creeks  beyond.  In  connection  with  these  guns 
nothing  prevents  the  use  of  howitzers.  The  former  would  always  re- 
main guns  of  position,  superior  in  range  and  accurac^^  to  the  Dahlgren, 
as  well  as  in  destructiveness  to  ships. 

To  fully  complete  this  system,  however,  in  addition  to  the  above 
means  of  defense  permanently  and  immediately  upon  the  coast,  I 
would  have  at  each  State  center  of  operations — at  Charleston,  for  in- 
stance, for  the  defense  of  South  Carolina — a central  battery  of  sea-coast 
flying  artillery  of  twelve  rifled  24-pounders,  organized  on  the  same  prin- 
ciple as  those  hereinbefore  mentioned,  with  forges,  sling-carts,  extra  am- 
munition-wagons, &c.,  superadded,  as  they  would  have  to  dart  off  much 
farther  than  the  former  from  their  magazines.  For  this  central  battery 
of  rifled  cannon  the  personnel  of  two  companies  of  artillery  and  two 
squadrons  of  cavalry  might  be  sufficient.  Adding  to  these  a regiment 
of  rifles  or  light  infantry,  a compact,  formidable  flying  column  would  be 
at  hand — a fortress  in  itself  on  reaching  any  part  of  our  coast  where 
nature  has  provided  suitable  sandworks.  Upon  the  receipt  of  intelli- 
gence of  the  i)roximate  attack  of  any  point  upon  the  coast — North 
Edisto,  for  instance,  in  the  above  sketch — the  whole  of  this  armament, 
with  provisions  for  a weidi,  could  be  towed  in  two  flats  or  lighters  (such 
as  Ferguson’s,  in  Charleston)  in  the  space  of  six  hours  by  one  or  two 
small  steamers.  At  each  of  our  forts  upon  the  coast  a temporary  work 
should  be  constructed  to  receive  these  guns,  as  well  as  those  upon  the 
beach,  as  soon  as  they  are  called  in. 

Let  us  sui)pose  North  Edisto  fort,  when  the  enemy’s  fleet  appears  off 
it,  to  have  but  the  six  guns  it  has  at  present.  The  three  24-pounders, 
rifled,  on  the  beach,  as  soon  as  in  battery,  would  increase  its  armament 
to  9.  The  arrival  of  the  central  battery  would  in  six  hours  increase  it 
to  21,  of  which  at  least  15  are  rifled.  Should  the  fleet  move  to  attack 
another  point  upon  the  coast,  the  battery  and  its  support  would  also 
move  inland  in  the  creeks  on  a line  parallel  to  it,  to  meet  it  wherever  its 
services  are  required,  the  fleet  all  the  time  unconscious  that  a fort  is 
closely  following  it.  Nothing  but  a few  light-draught  steamers  and 


282  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

large  flats  always  at  lianci  is  required  for  this  most  important  service. 
Let  us  roughly  estimate  the  value  of  the  succor  brought  in  this  way  at 
the  beginning  or  in  the  progress  of  an  engagement  at  North  Edisto  : 


Guns  from  the  heach 3 

Guns  from  Charleston 1 J 


Total 15 


Ai*tillerists  from  the  beach,  saj- 50 

Cavalry  from  the  beach,  say (iO 

Artillerists  from  Charleston,  say 190 

Cavalry  from  Charleston 240 

Regiment  of  rifles 700 


Total 1,240 


Fifteen  pieces  of  formidable  ordnance  and  1,240  men,  which,  added  to 
the  force  of  even  so  small  a post  as  it  is  at  present,  would  give  us  21 
guns  and  1,500  men. 

Of  course  this  infantry  support  from  Charleston  is  what  should  at  all 
times  be  ready  to  leave  at  a moment’s  warning.  Other  regiments  could 
immediately  follow — at  any  rate,  within  twelve  hours.  With  suitable 
bomb-proofs  at  the  fort  and  proper  discretion  on  the  part  of  the  com- 
manding oflicer  the  enemy  could  be  held  in  check  until  the  arrival  of  re- 
enforcements  sufficient  to  discomfit  them.  Depots  for  ammunition  for 
these  guns  should  be  kept  at  each  post  expressly  for  them,  and  all  am- 
munition for  them  should  be  uniform. 

Supposing  Georgia  to  have  a similar  provision  made  for  her  defense, 
and  Savaunah  to  possess,  too,  her  central  battery  and  flying  column 
in  the  same  time — in  somewhat  more  time  than  it  would  take  to  dispatch 
the  Charleston  flying  column  if  Edisto  is  the  point  attacked,  but  in  much 
less  time  if  it  be  the  important  port  of  Port  Eoyal  Harbor — 24  rifled 
guns  can  at  once  be  sent  to  the  scene  of  action  from  both  cities,  and 
together  with  them  over  2,050  men.  In  a few  hours  more  5,000  men 
from  the  two  States,  uniting  at  Savannah  by  means  of  the  railroad, 
would  at  Hilton  Head  fort  defy  the  power  of  any  assailant.  The  first 
point  is  to  prevent  surprise.  This  the  sea  shore  guns  will  do.  These(*.- 
ond  is  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  seizing  any  inlet  in  less  than  a day’s 
fight.  This  the  flying  column  and  central  battery  should  do.  The  third 
is  that  he  shall  not  move  inland,  and  this  the  succors  which  can  and 
should  be  sent  in  support  of  the  flying  column  should  be  able  to  do. 
With  more  guns  and  of  heavier  metal  at  every  inlet  and  strong  garri- 
sons at  our  isolated  posts  our  coast  would  be  secure,  and  the  necessity 
of  a large  force  up  the  country,  where  it  can  do  no  service  except  in 
re-enforcing  Charleston,  would  not  exist.  Because  the  coast  is  weak, 
its  supjmrt  should  not  be  more  than  a few  hours  removed;  because 
Charleston  is  strong,  its  support  might  be  at  Aiken  or  Columbia.  Much 
can  be  done  in  uniting  the  means  of  Georgia  and  South  Carolina,  and 
even  of  North  Carolina,  in  defense  of  either  of  the  three  States  against 
an  invasion  of  the  enemy. 

At  all  the  centers  of  operations,  as,  for  instance,  Wilmington,  Charles- 
ton, and  Savannah  for  our  Atlantic  coast,  there  should  be  one  regiment 
assigned  to  the  special  duty  of  forming  part  of  the  flying  column  at  a 
moment’s  warning  during  the  said  week.  Everything  needful  for  the 
transi)ortation  and  for  the  subsistence  of  this  column  for  one  week  should 
be  stored  up  and  kept  in  readiness  to  be  carried  ofl*  at  a moment’s  warn- 
ng.  The  quartermaster  and  the  commissary  of  each  regiment  would 
upon  their  regiment  entering  on  duty  every  week  look  into  the  quality 
and  (piantity  of  provisions,  cquix)ments,  &c.,  designed  for  their  regiment 


Chai-.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  283 

when  put  in  motion.  The  advantages  are  obvious  of  having  one  regi- 
ment assigned  each  week  from  the  militia  of  Charleston  and  other  cities 
for  this  special  duty.  The  balance  are  at  rest,  and  the  one  on  duty 
when  called  out  is  not  flurried  in  its  arrangements.  Should  the  enemy 
have  forced  an  entrance  into  one  of  our  inlets,  the  central  battery  at 
Charleston,  as  well  as  the  one  at  Savannah,  starting  by  the  railroad, 
marked  upon  the  sketch,  would  meet  him  upon  any  of  the  blufls  on  the 
main-land,  under  which  he  must  necessarily  pass  in  his  progress  through 
narrow  and  tortuous  creeks.  From  these  bluffs  and  within  pistol  shot 
the  almost  vertical  fire  of  rifled  guns  would  be  destructive  even  to  iron- 
clad boats,  and  if  the  enemy  should  effect  a landing  before  the  arrival 
of  the  battery,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  of  what  advantage  it  would  be  in 
enabling  a flying  column  at  the  head  of  a bridge  or  in  a debouch  to 
arrest  his  progress,  or  even  discomfiting  him,  before  the  arrival  (neces- 
sarily more  tardy)  of  an  army.  For  carrying  out  such  a plan  sea-rangers 
in  boats  and  small  steamers  on  the  lookout,  telegrai)hs,  a good  system 
of  signals,  facilities  of  transportation  in  lighters  and  steamers,  pre- 
arranged railroad  facilities,  and  the  co-operation  of  our  Navy  are  a 
matter  of  course. 

We  have  in  South  Carolina  very  nearly  the  number  of  24-pounders  on 
siege  carriages  required  for  the  establishment  of  this  system.  I under- 
stand that  there  are  twelve  guns  of  this  description  lying  idle  at  the 
Pensacola  navy-yard,  which  1 would  recommend  our  authorities,  to 
obtain.  By  working  day  and  night  all  these  guns  can  be  rifled  in  two 
or  three  weeks.  Should  there  be  serious  difficulty  in  procuring  horses 
for  these  guns,  the  loan  of  all  the  mules  required  could  be  obtained,  I 
should  think,  from  our  planters  for  the  matter  of  their  own  defense. 
They  could  be  furnished  already  harnessed  by  the  planters,  the  Confed- 
erate Government  reimbursing  them  their  value  should  they  be  lost  or 
injured  in  the  service.  Cavalry  of  the  very  best  description  exists 
throughout  the  seaboard,  and  is  anxious  lor  employment.  There  is  no 
reason,  then,  why,  in  as  little  time  as  it  will  take  the  Lincoln  Govern- 
ment to  fit  out  a squadron,  we  should  not  contrive  to  have  an  omnipres- 
ent fort  along  the  whole  extent  of  our  seaboard. 

All  of  which  I have  the  honor  to  submit,  with  assurances  of  my  respect 
and  regard. 

AMBROSIO  JOS^l  GONZALES. 


Richmond,  September  25,  1801. 

Brigadier-General  Lawton, 

Savannah^  Ga.  : 

Intelligence  that  I believe  reliable  indicates  that  the  enemy’s  expe- 
dition is  intended  for  Brunswick.  Inform  Governor  Brown.  Can  I do 
anything  to  help  you  ? Have  ordered  the  Bartow  Artillery  comi)auy  to 
Savannah. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Savannah,  September  25,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

I can  do  nothing,  for  want  of  arms,  unless  I hold  those  now  landing 
from  steamer  Bermuda.  I sent  to-day  a special  agent  to  Richmond  on 


284  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XV. 

this  subject.  Georgia  is  stripped  of  arms.  Men  in  abundance,  if  a few 
days  are  allowed. 

A.  E.  lawto:n^, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Atlanta,  Ga.,  September  25,  18G1. 

J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Colonel  Stovall,  whose  battalion  is  at  Lynchburg,  is  here.  Cannot 
send  another  gun  out  of  the  State.  I ask  that  you  order  his  battalion 
back  to  Brunswick  on  the  coast,  and  I will  till  it  up  to  a regiment  in  the 
State.  I also  request  that  tive  other  armed  companies  of  Georgia  troops 
be  ordered  back  to  the  coast  without  delay,  as  an  invasion  of  the  coast 
is  looked  for  daily,  and  you  have  nearly  all  the  State  guns  in  the  Con- 
federate service.  Please  answer  both  requests  immediately.  Colonel 
Stovall  will  wait  here  till  I hear  from  you. 

JOSEPH  E.  BROWNT. 


Richmond,  September  25,  1861. 

Governor  Brown, 

Atlanta j Ga. : 

Have  sent  orders  to  Major  Shackleford,  as  requested.  Have  ordered 
Bartow  Artillery  Company  to  Savannah  to  report  to  General  Lawton. 
Am  reliably  informed  that  the  enemy  will  attack  Brunswick.  Be  pre- 
pared. 

J.  P.  BENJAMEST, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Atlanta,  Ga.,  September  26,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Thank  you  for  the  order  for  the  1,000  guns  to  General  Lawton.  Let 
me  beg  of  you  to  order  Colonel  Stovall’s  battalion  back  from  Lynchburg 
and  let  me  till  it  up  to  regiment  for  the  coast. 

JOSEPH  E.  BROWK. 


Richmond,  September  26,  1861. 

Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Atlanta^  Ga.  : 

Your  dispatch  received.  I cannot  order  back  to  Georgia  any  armed 
troops,  for  reasons  which  I will  explain  by  letter.  Instead  of  sending 
you  a thousand  men,  I have  ordered  1,000  of  the  rifles  at  Savannah, 
with  the  proper  quantity  of  ammunition,'  to  be  turned  over  to  General 
Lawton  for  arming  that  number  of  your  men,  as  I understand  you  have 
plenty  of  men. 

J.  P.  BEYJAMIY, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XY.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


285 


Kichmond,  September  27,  1861. 

Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Atlanta^  Ga.: 

The  thousand  rifles  were  ordered  to  be  given  you  instead  of  sending 
back  the  battalion  from  Lynchburg.  Grave  reasons  of  i)olicy  forbicl 
sending  back  any  troops  from  Virginia. 

J.  P.  BENJAMm, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Eichmond,  September  30,  1861. 

E.  P.  Lawton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Savannah: 

One  thousand  small-arms  and  one  rifled  12-pounder  were  assigned  by 
order  issued  to  the  proper  ordnance  officer  for  the  service  of  Georgia. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Abstract  from  report  of  the  Provisional  Forces,  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Brig.  Gen. 
• B.  S.  Ripley,  commanding,  for  Sepiemher,  1861. 


Stations. 


Snllivan’s  Island  (Colonel  Orr) 

Stono  forts  (Colonel  Hagood) 

Noith  and  South  Edisto  (Colonel  Dunovant)... 

Near  Georgetown  (Colonel  Manigault) 

Near  Aiken  (Colonel  Jones) 

Field’s  Point 

Poi-t  Royal  Harbor 

Fort  Walker 

Sam’s  Point 

Braddock’s  Point 

Camp  Lookout 

Near  Columbia  (cavalry) .* 

Ligbtwood  Knot  Spring  (cavalry) 

Charleston  Arsenal  (aitillery) 

12tb  13tb  and  15tb  Regiments  S.  C.  Volunteers^ 

Total 


Present  for 

4^ 

duty. 

O 

0) 

® . 

(D 

5:  d 

rt  ^ 

cS 

do 

o 

d 

t ^ 

a 

fcX) 

fch 

o 

<1 

69 

1,  244 

1,521 

1,  603 

54 

904 

1,115 

1,  274 

15 

293 

367 

382 

26 

397 

538 

567 

38 

629 

739 

898 

4 

73 

106 

112 

4 

185 

227 

239 

9 

195 

224 

256 

6 

56 

69 

76 

4 

53 

57 

69 

3 

48 

75 

96 

11 

162 

173 

194 

3 

52 

62 

64 

3 

45 

68 

69 
2,  372 

249 

4,  336 

5,341 

8,  271 

Stations  not  given. 


286  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA  , AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


Abstract  from  monthly  return  of  the  Military  District  of  Savannah,  Ga.,  commanded  by 
Brig.  Gen.  A.  R.  Lawton,  for  September,  1861. 


StatioBS. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Heavy. 

Field. 

T.impi  OnmliprlaTKl  Tslfi.Tid  

3 

48 

63 

71 

5 

Sunburv,  Ga  

3 

54 

57 

59 

Sapello  Island  

6 

177 

200 

208 

5 

Grpial.  Wai  aa.w 

3 

70 

75 

79 

5 

Isle  of  Hope 

2 

42 

44 

60 

6 

Fort  Pulaski 

10 

204 

250 

273 

36 

Thunderliolti  battery 

4 

94 

110 

72 

115 

4 

Genesis  Point 

2 

56 

76 

4 

Oglethorpe  Barracks 

4 

49 

79 

80 

6 

Fort  Screven 

• 6 

159 

170 

181 

3 

Saint  Gatbarine’s  Island  .. 

2 

67 

72 

91 

2 

Camp  Lawton,  Savannah 

IG 

242 

273 

305 

Brunswick,  Ga 

32 

477 

578 

587 

2 

5 

T ybee  Island 

40 

856 

973 

1,  056 

2 

South  end  Big  Cumberland  Island 

2 

53 

65 

74 

4 

1 

Blackbird  Island 

3 

90 

105 

112 

5 

1 

1 

Grand  total 

138 

2,  738 

3, 186 

3,427 

82 

1 " 

Apalachicola,  October  1,  1861. 
Hon.  Secretary  of  War,  • 

Richmond.,  Va.  : 

Sir  : The  citizens  of  Apalachicola,  under  a deep  sense  of  their  pres- 
ent insecurity  and  anxiety  for  the  safety  and  protection  of  their  families 
and  property,  deem  it  their  duty  to  address  you  on  the  subject  of  the 
defenses  of  their  city.  About  the  1st  June  last,  upon  application,  the 
executive  of  our  State  ordered  two  32-pounders  (old  guns)  to  be  delivered 
to  us,  and  these,  at  the  expense  of  the  citizens,  were  brought  here  and 
placed  in  battery  in  the  most  eligible  position  to  command  the  several 
approaches  to  the  town.  At  a later  period  a messenger  was  dispatched 
to  Kichmond,  who  succeeded  in  obtaining  an  additional  number  of  guns, 
and  it  was  deemed  advisable  that  these  should  be  placed  in  battery  at 
Saint  Yincent’s  Island,  to  command  the  entrance  (West  Pass)  to  our 
harbor,  and  the  work  was  commenced  and  prosecuted  with  all  the  means 
and  men  that  the  city  could  command. 

More  recently  a regiment  in  the  Confederate  service  has  been  organ- 
ized, five  companies  of  which  have  been  detailed  to  this  point,  and  are 
now  under  command  of  Colonel  Hopkins,  who  has  established  his  head- 
quarters at  Saint  Vincent’s  Island,  removed  all  the  troops  to  that  point, 
dismantled  the  battery  here,  and  issued  a peremptory  order  for  two 
rifled  cannon,  daily  expected,  and  ordered  siege  guns,  mounted  for  the 
use  of  the  city,  to  be  sent  to  liim  on  arrival,  thus  monopolizing  for  that 
station  every  available  means  of  defense,  leaving  to  our  company  of 
volunteer  artillery  and  two  companies  of  undrilled  infantry,  with  less 
than  100  invalids  and  exempts,  the  entire  and  sole  protection  of  the  city, 
and  1,500  women  and  children,  whose  natural  protectors  are  most  of 
them  enlisted  in  the  service,  and  without  the  means  to  remove  their 
families  to  places  of  greater  security.  The  only  means  of  communication 
is  with  boats,  not  only  requiring  a heavy  expenditure  in  their  employ, 
but  they  are  subject  to  capture  at  any  moment,  as  they  may  easily  be 
intercepted  in  their  trips  to  and  from  the  city  to  the  island  through  a 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  287 

wide  and  deep  channel  across  Saint  George’s  Island  between  the  two 
points,  and  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  any  guns  that  can  be  i)ut  in 
battery  at  Saint  Vincent.  The  approaches  to  our  town  by  land,  as  also 
from  the  East  Pass,  are  entirely  unguarded,  and  it  would  not  require 
a large  number  of  such  boats  as  are  now  being  constructed  by  tlie  enemy 
to  capture  the  city  before  any  intelligence  of  an  attack  could  reacli  Saint 
Vincent  or  assistance  be  rendered  by  the  forces  there.  The  capture  of 
the  city  would  invest  Saint  Vincent  on  the  main-land  side,  their  supplies 
would  be  cut  off,  and  their  entire  force  easily  reduced  to  the  alternatives 
of  death  or  capture  without  even  a show  of  defense,  as  no  possible  outlet 
of  escape  would  be  open  to  them.  The  armament  at  Saint  Vincent  con- 
sists of  four  ship-mounted  and  two  long  32-pounders,  and  recent  events 
at  Hatteras  have  demonstrated  the  insufficiency  of  such  ordnance  against 
the  heavy  and  long-range  guns  of  the  enemy.  It  is  believed  by  military 
and  scientific  men  that  an  abandonment  of  that  position  would  not  leave 
the  city  exposed  to  large  vessels,  and  that  by  removal  of  the  guns  and 
troops,  erecting  batteries  with  long-range  guns  to  command  approaches 
by  water,  causing  earthworks  to  be  thrown  up  at  assailable  jioints 
around  the  city,  with  a battery  of  light  artillery  to  furnish  our  present 
company,  our  town  would  be  more  secure  than  it  could  possibly  be  made 
in  any  other  manner. 

Lieutenant  McLaughlin,  of  the  Navy,  left  here  a few  days  since  for 
Eichmond,  and  to  him,  as  an  officer  qualified  by  experience  and  exami- 
nation of  our  position,  we  refer  to  present  these  matters  more  fully 
before  you. 

Insecurity  and  apprehension  are  predominant  feelings  now,  yet  these 
will  in  nowise  lessen  the  determination  of  our  people  to  perish  beneath 
the  ruins  of  their  city  rather  than  ignobly  desert  or  suffer  it  to  become 
the  prey  of  the  vandal  hordes  who  threaten  to  assail  it.  We  would 
speak  modestly  and  respectfully  of  the  officers  who  have  been  furnished 
by  the  Confederate  Government  to  conduct  military  operations  in  our 
State,  and  the  announcement  of  General  Grayson’s  appointment,  from 
his'  long-tried  and  acknowledged  capability,  gave  general  satisfiiction, 
but  a recent  visit  from  him  has  exhibited  in  him  such  an  enfeebled  state 
of  health  and  constitution  as  almost  to  forbid  hope  of  amendment,  and 
we  must  necessarily  be  deprived,  if  not  altogether,  to  a great  extent,  of 
his  valuable  aid  and  counsel  in  our  necessity. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,. your  obedient  servants, 

H.  E.  TAYLOE  et  al. 


Marianna,  October  2,  1861.- 

Hon.  S#E.  Mallory: 

Dear  Sir:  I returned  from  Tallahassee  on^yesterday  and  received 
yours  of  the  15th  ultimo.  I expected  to  have  received  a letter  from 
you  at  Tallahassee,  but  was  disappointed.  Having  heard  that  Governor 
Perry  had  received  one  from  you  informing  him  that  two  rifled  cannon, 
&c.,  had  been  ordered  to  Apalachicola,  I inquired  of  him  if  it  were  true. 
He  said  it  was,  and  read  the  part  of  the  letter  only  which  referred  to 
the  rifled  cannon  and  powder  being  sent.  I regret  that  Lieutenant 
McLaughlin  was  ordered  back  to  Eichmond  by  Colonel  Hopkins  and 
the  consequent  excitement  among  the  citizens,  but  I know  nothing  of 
the  particulars.  The  fact  is,  our  State  is  in  a most  deplorable  condition. 
The  regiment  at  Fernandina  is  said  to  be  demoralized  by  habitual 
intemperance  of  the  colonel  and  lieutenant-colonel,  and  I am  informed 
even  the  cannon  have  not  been  mounted,  and  dissipation  and  disorder 


288  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

prevail.  There  are  but  eight  companies,  and  never  have  been  more  in 
Hopkins’  regiment — three  companies  at  Apalachicola,  two  near  Saint 
Mark’s,  one  at  Tampa,  and  two  at  Cedar  Keys.  You  will  perceive  the 
useless  expense  of  held  officers  by  the  arrangement.  Would  it  not  be 
advisable  to  concentrate  the  regiment — if,  indeed,  eight  companies  l)e  a 
regiment — and  transfer  them  to  General  Bragg’s  command  at  Pensacola, 
and  order  the  Magnolia  Kegiment,  commanded  by  Colonel  Anderson, 
at  Pensacola,  to  the  defense  of  Apalachicola  ? Under  General  Bragg’s 
command  Hopkins’  regiment  would  be  drilled  and  made  useful,  and 
Colonel  Anderson’s  regiment,  with  the  aid  of  State  troops  convenient 
to  Apalachicola,  could  successfully  defend  the  place  with  the  aid  of 
Lieutenant  McLaughlin  and  a few  experienced  artillerists. 

Suggest  the  proposed  change  to  the  President  and  Secretary  of  War. 
Several  companies  are  organized  and  ready  to  tender  their  services  to 
the  Confederate  States  for  twelve  months,  and  consequently  there 
would  be  no  difficulty  in  supplying  the  places  of  the  companies  of 
Hopkins’  regiment,  now  at  Fort  Williams,  near  Saint  Mark’s,  Tampa, 
and  Cedar  foys,  by  more  efficient  companies  under  suitable  command- 
ers. The  officers  of  the  regiments  mustered  into  the  Confederate  service 
in  the  State  imagine  that  they  are  entirely  independent  of  State  author- 
ity, and  if  it  is  proi)er  I wish  you  would  request  the  Secretary  of  War  to 
issue  a suitable  general  order  upon  the  subject,  especially  in  this  State. 
I anticipate  no  difficulty  whatever  with  General  Bragg  or  General 
Grayson,  or  any  gentleman  of  military  education.  We  can  co-operate 
harmoniously.  By  the  by.  General  Grayson  and  myself  are  old  personal 
acquaintances  and  friends,  though  twenty  years  have  elapsed  since  we 
parted,  and  met  a day  or  two  ago  in  Tallahassee.  General  Grayson’s 
health  is  very  bad.  He  is  nearly  spent  with  consumption.  I thought 
he  would  die  last  Wednesday  night,  and  I fear  will  not  have  physical 
strength  to  discharge  necessary  duties  in  Florida. 

I think  there  would  have  been  no  difficulty  in  forming  the  Fifth  Kegi- 
ment, but  Governor  Perry  has  organized  five  of  the  companies  intended 
for  the  Fifth  Regiment  with  an  artillery  battalion,  and  appointed  D.  P. 
Holland,  esq.,  lieutenant-colonel  to  command  it  for  Confederate  service. 
The  governor  acted,  if  by  any  authority,  by  such  as  is  unknown  to  me. 
In  the  present  deranged  state  of  affairs  I shall  be  inaugurated  and  enter 
upon  the  duties  of  governor  on  next  Monday  with  a heavy  heart  and 
a fearful  apprehension  of  my  inability  to  perform  the  duties  of  the  office 
creditably  and  very  usefully ; but  to  the  best  of  my  judgment  I will 
encounter  surrounding  difficulties,  resolved  to  place  the  State  upon  the 
best  war  footing,  and  rely  upon  the  Army  Regulations  and  the  laws  of 
the  S-tate  and  the  efficient  aid  of  the  officers  sent  here  by  the  President 
to  correct  existing  evils.  From  recent  indications  I think  afcheme  of 
systematic  opposition  to  you  is  designed  by  some  men  in  our  State,  and 
I^ermit  me  to  say  to  you  that  under  all  circumstances  you  may  rely  upon 
my  friendship  promptly  to  meet,  and,  if  need  be  with  personal  responsi- 
bility, the  most  prominent  assailants. 

In  haste,  yours,  &c., 

JOHK  MILTOK. 


Special  Orders, 
Ko.  176. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen.’s  Office, 
Eichmondy  October  10,  1861. 
***** 


X.  Brig.  Gen.  E.  K.  Smith  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  Middle  and  Eastern  Florida,  and  will  relieve  Brig.  Gen.  J.  B. 


Chap.  XV. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  280 

Giayson,  whose  state  of  health  is  such  as  to  prevent  him  from  discharg- 
ing the  active  duties  of  that  command.* * 

*#***## 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General, 


Hdqrs.  Third  Eegmment  Florida  Volunteers, 

Fort  Clinch^  Fernandina,  Fla.,  October  14,  18G1. 
To  the  Secretary  of  War, 

Confederate  States  of  America^  Richmond^  Ya. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  request  that  you  order  me  to  order  one  of 
my  officers  to  muster  in  for  twelve-months’  service  Lieutenant  Colonel 
Holland’s  battalion  of  artillery.  This  battalion  is  absolutely  necessary 
here.  They  are  now  in  service  under  the  order  of  the  brigadier-general, 
and  have  been  under  my  command  and  now  are.  The  field  officers, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Holland  and  Maj.  Charles  F.  Hopkins,  are  fine  offi- 
cers. They  are  good  artillerists,  and  thoroughly  understand  their  jiro- 
fession.  They  were  appointed  by  Governor  Perry,  and  are  the  unani- 
mous choice  of  the  whole  battalion.  They  are  the  most  important  aid 
that  could  be  given  me.  I would  respectfully  request  that  the  Hepart- 
ziient  authorize  me  to  have  them  mustered  in  without  delay,  and  that 
they  may  muster  with  six  companies.  They  are  now  erecting  batteries, 
signal  stations,  establishing  points  for  the  ranges  of  the  guns,  and  have 
been  for  some  time.  They  are  in  the  Confederate  service,  but  not  yet 
mustered  in,  and  Captain  Stockton  has  other  companies  to  attend  to, 
and  cannot  muster  the  troops  as  speedily  as  their  efficiency  requires.  I 
have  the  honor  to  refer  the  Hepartment  to  the  accompanying  copies  of 
orders  and  letters  for  information  as  to  the  condition  of  this  force  and 
what  it  is  doing,  t 

Owing  to  the  illness  of  Brigadier-General  Grayson,  I cannot  ascertain 
when  the  guns  and  ordnance  stores  for  here  will  arrive.  I have  to 
specially  request  that  the  ordnance  officer  be  required  to  send  me  with- 
out delay  a supply  of  ammunition.  I have  only  2,000  caps  and  about 
fifteen  rounds  of  musket  cartridges,  and  the  artillery  battalion  have 
four  6-pounders  and  only  about  five  rounds  of  musket  cartridges.  I 
trust  the  Department  will  send  me  at  once  the  necessary  ammunition 
for  musketry  which  can  be  spared  for  this  point.  I would  urge  the 
speedy  forwarding  of  the  guns  and  requisition  made  by  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Grayson.  His  ill-health  has  caused  me  to  make  this  stateiuent  and 
request.  The  general  has  done  everything  that  man  could.  His  com- 
mand have  perfect  confidence  in  him,  and  I trust  the  officious  meddling 
of  scared  politicians,  who  have  never  raised  voice  or  hand  for  our  inde- 
pendence, will  receive  that  merited  rebuke  from  headquarters  it  deserves 
for  meddling  with  the  acts  of  better  men.  Neither  the  troops  nor  the 
people  have  confidence  in  them.  We  are  satisfied,  and  all  we  want  is 
ammunition. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  DILWOETH, 

Colonel j Commanding. 

* Revoked  October  22,  and  Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Trapier  assigned. 

tNot  found. 

19  R R YOL  VI 


290  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee^  Fla.,  October  18,  1861. 
His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States : 

Sir;  I feel  it  my  duty  to  present  for  your  consideration  the  following 
facts : 

First.  That  for  the  defense  of  Florida  cavalry  is,  perhaps,  less 
efficient  than  for  the  defense  of  any  other  State.  At  the  most  impor- 
tant points  we  should  have  batteries  with  guns  of  heavy  caliber.  To 
guard  between  important  points,  boats  of  light  draught,  with  signals, 
at  proper  distances,  and  convenient  to  those  guarding  distant  and 
exposed  positions  a few  good  horses,  to  be  used  by  expressmen  to  give 
notice  of  any  imposing  ajiproach  of  the  enemy.  Not  many  troops  are 
required  in  the  Confederate  service,  if  those  in  service  shall  be  com- 
manded at  important  points  by  brave  and  skillful  officers.  There  is 
much  derangement  of  military  affairs  in  this  State,  owing  chiefly  to  the 
desire  to  enter  the  Confederate  service  for  short  periods  and  certain 
pay  5 but  if  the  War  and  Navy  Departments  will  respect  my  opinions  I 
hope  to  establish  such  military  organizations  as  will  in  the  end  be  least 
expensive  and  most  useful.  Our  chief  reliance  in  connection  with  the 
coast  defense  should  be  infantry  and  light  artillery,  not  in  service,  but 
ready  to  be  at  a moment’s  warning,  and  to  be  concentrated  where 
needed  to  support  those  in  the  Confederate  service. 

The  recent  authority  to  W.  O.  M.  Davis,  esq.,  to  raise  a cavalry 
regiment  has  excited  a perfect  furore  upon  the  subject.  The  large 
majority  of  those  who  were  willing  to  serve  as  soldiers  of  infantry  are 
now  in  favor  of  riding  into  service,  and  I assure  you,  sir,  a battle  will 
never  be  fought  in  Florida  by  cavalry,  unless  the  want  of  proper  coast 
defenses,  artillery,  and  infantry,  shall  induce  an  invasion,  and  will  then 
be  fought  at  great  disadvantage.  I entertain  no  feeling  or  thought 
personally  unkind  to  Mr.  Davis.  He  is  a gentleman  of  fine  legal  abili- 
ties. But  I do  regret  that  the  material  for  the  judicious  defense  of  the 
State  has  been  so  much  interfered  with  by  the  disposition  excited  in 
favor  of  cavalry  service.  Independent  of  the  companies  raised  for 
Colonel  Davis’  regiment  I have  refused  commissions  to  ten  associations 
for  cavalry  comi^anies  within  the  last  two  days.  Almost  every  man 
that  has  a pony  wishes  to  mount  him  at  the  expense  of  the  Confederate 
Government,  and  I would  most  respectfully  urge  the  necessity  of  the 
appointment  of  an  honest,  prudent,  and  experienced  officer  to  visit 
Florida  immediately,  and  inquire  into  and  report  the  expenses  being 
incurred.  Let  him  first  go  to  Apalachicola,  and  ascertain  the  nature 
and  necessity  of  the  expenditures  there  in  the  employment  of  boats, 
&c.,  and  report  immediately  to  the  proper  Departments  j thence  to  other 
positions,  and  examine  and  report.  It  will  afford  me  pleasure  to  aid  in 
the  investigation,  and  if  the  officer  will  come  to  Tallahassee  I will,  to 
the  best  of  my  ability,  direct  the  course  of  inquiry.  I am  fully  per- 
suaded that  one-half  the  amount  that  will  be  expended,  if  there  shall 
be  no  immediate  check  to  expenditures,  wisely  appropriated,  will  secure 
the  defense  of  Florida,  and  by  means  that  will  be  useful  in  a future 
emergency.  The  unnecessary  expense  for  cavalry  would  supply  the 
means  for  the  proper  coast  defenses ; would  enable  me  to  equip  com- 
panies of  light  artillery  and  infantry,  which  equipments  might  be  pre- 
served to  protect  the  peace  which  we  hope  to  obtain  by  the  present 
war.  But  the  hundreds  of  horses  which  are  now  being  withdrawn  from 
agricultural  industry  will  be  of  little  avail  in  war,  and  leave  the  State 
without  the  means  of  agriculture,  which  will  bo  aifficult  to  supply. 


CfiAP.  XV.] 


CORRESPO^'DENCE,  ETC.—  CONFEDERATE. 


291 


General  Grayson  is  in  a (lying  condition.  General  E.  K.  Sinitli,  I am 
informed,  has  been  appointed  to  succeed  him,  and  permit  me  to  suggest 
that  his  command  shall  extend  west,  so  as  to  embrace  Apnlachicola  and 
Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  and  to  express  tlie  hope' that  his  staff  will  be  com- 
posed of  gentlemen  of  military  education  and  experience.  This  sug- 
gestion is  made  because  Colonel  Hopkins  entertains  the  opinion,  if  I 
•am  correctly  informed,  that  General  Grayson’s  command  does  not 
embrace  Apalachicola,  and  I regret  to  say  that  Colonel  Hopkins’  mili- 
tary ability  is  much  doubted  by  many  worthy  citizens,  and  unpleasant 
circumstances  have  consequently  occurred,  which  I ai^prehend  will  result 
unhappily. 

From  a misapprehension  of  facts,  the  Fourth  Eegiment  was  tendered 
by  my  worthy  predecessor  without  a full  complement  of  companies. 
Colonel  Hopkins  has  three  of  these  companies  at  Apalachicolay  there 
are  two  at  Saint  Mark’s,  two  at  Cedar  Keys,  and  one  or  two  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Tampa.  Thus  scattered,  it  is  impossible  for  them  to 
act  as  a regiment  without  previous  instructions  and  competent  officers. 

I would  respectfully  suggest  that  Colonel  Hopkins  be  ordered  with 
his  three  companies  to  Saint  Mark’s,  to  protect  that  place  and  the  coast 
between  the  Ocella  and  Crooked  Eivers,  and  if  the  Departments  will 
furnish  me  with  two  good  engineers  and  two  good  drill  officers  of 
artillery  I will  defend  Apalachicola  with  State  troops,  and  such  troops 
as  I may  be  able  to  raise  and  place  in  a camp  of  instruction  for  the 
army  of  reserve.  If  such  an  order  should  be  deemed  advisable,  I would 
be  pleased  to  be  informed  of  it  three  or  four  days  before  Colonel  Hopkins 
shall  leave  there,  and  I will  visit  the  place  and  put  the  troops  in  x)rox)er 
l^ositions  of  defense. 

There  is  another  matter  to  which  I would  respectfully  invite  attention. 
By  letter  from  the  War  Department,  dated  June  30,  1861,  the  governor 
of  this  State  was  required  to  furnish  1,000  men  as  the  quota  of  the  State 
in  the  army  of  reserve,  and  to  idace  them  in  a cam})  of  instruction.  For 
this  purpose  four  comi^anies  were  raised  under  special  commission,  and 
only  four,  and  these  were  assembled  at  Fernandina,  called  a battalion  of 
artillery,  and  put  into  the  Confederate  service,  under  command  of  Mr.  D. 
P.  Holland  as  lieutenant- colonel,  with  Mr.  Charles  F.  Hopkins  as  major. 
I am  not  apprised  that  such  a battalion,  if  any,  was  called  for  or  author- 
ized by  the,  Secretary  of  War,  and  the  appointment  of  the  officers  by 
the  governor  was,  in  my  judgment,  without  authority,  and  contrary  to 
the  ordinances  of  the  Convention,  the  Constitution,  and  the  laws  of  the 
State,  and  that,  if  in  the  course  of  events,  any  court-martial  shall  be 
ordered,  the  matter  will  be  inquired  into  by  the  civil  authority,  the  com- 
missions declared  void,  and  the  so-called  battalion  will  be  disorganized 
and  demoralized. 

I have  felt  it  my  duty  thus  candidly  to  submit  to  you  my  opinion,  and 
invoke  your  judgment  upon  the  matters  submitted  for  your  considera- 
tion. It  has  been  said  that  perhaps  General  Smith  would  not  accept 
the  command  in  Florida,  in  which  event  I hope  the  regiments  and  com- 
panies which  have  been  or  may  be  accepted  for  service  in  this  State  by 
a general  order  of  the  War  Department,  not  interfering  with  General 
Bragg’s  command,  may  be  made  subject  to  my  orders,  and  the  defense 
of  the  State  shall  be  successful,  and  at  the  least  i)ossible  expense. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor  of  Florida, 


292  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  LChap.  XY. 

.October  21,  18G1. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War. 

My  Dear  Sir  : The  following  are  the  only  points  that  occur  to  me 
to  suggest : 

1.  That  the  special  attention  of  General  Trapier  be  directed  to  such* 
points  in  his  department  as  the  governor  may  consider  to  be  of  chief 
military  importance. 

2.  That  he  should  be  instructed  to  arrange  with  the  governor  for 
obtaining  the  ten  companies  in  the  speediest  manner  possible,  and,  in 
order  to  avoid  delay  in  bringing  the  post  at  Fernandina  under  better 
commard,  he  should  be  authorized  to  appoint  a colonel  to  take  com- 
mand of  the  companies  as  they  are  mustered,  unless  the  Department  is 
prepared  to  designate  one  at  once  for  the  command. 

3.  That  he  should  be  authorized  to  make  such  alterations  in  the  num- 
ber and  organization  of  the  forces  employed  in  Florida  as  may  in  his 
judgment  be  advisable  j for  which  purpose  he  might  be  authorized  to 
muster  or  discharge  troops  according  to  exigency,  keeping  the  Depart- 
ment advised  of  his  acts. 

4.  It  would  also  be  well  to  authorize  him,  if  he  deems  it  advisable,  to 
arrange  with  the  Cuban  Telegraph  Company  for  the  surrender  of  the 
line  between  Savannah  and  Florida  to  the  Confederate  States  during 
the  war. 

5.  If  it  requires  special  authority  to  enable  him  to  do  so,  he  might  be 
authorized  to  employ  and  attach  to  each  post  a capable  drill  officer. 

liespectfully,  yours,  ^ 

D.  L.  YULEE. 


Columbia,  October  22,  1861. 

Hon.  Mr.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  been  informed  another  large  vessel  has  arrived  at  Saint  Mary’s 
with  arms,  &c.  From  your  last  letter  I am  in  hopes  you  will  send  2,000 
rifles  for  our  flanking  companies  and  300  cavalry  pistols  for  the  men  just 
mustered  in.  It  is  essential  to  our  service,  as  I have  put  out  4,000  of 
arms  in  a few  days  past,  which  entirely  exhausted  our  supply. 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


\ 


War  Departiment,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  October  22,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier: 

Sir  : The  President  has,  as  you  will  perceive  from  the  inclosed  papers, 
ac(;epted  your  tender  of  service,  has  appointed  you  brigadier- general, 
and  assigned  you  to  the  Department  of  Eastern  and  Middle  Florida. 
Your  instructions  are  brief  and  simple.  Do  everything  that  your  means 
and  energies  will  permit  to  place  the  coast  of  Florida  in  a state  of  de- 
fense. You  will  first  proceed  to  Fernandina,  as  the  point  most  impor- 
tant and  most  likely  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  enemy  j but  you  are 
left  to  your  own  discretion  as  to  the  proper  location  of  your  headquar- 
ters. 


CiiAr.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  293 

Your  staff  will  be  appointed  aud  commissioned  in  accor  dance  with 
yonr  recommendation,  unless  some  special  objection  should  exist.  Ui)on 
one  imint  you  may  require  the  aid  of  this  Department.  You  will  find, 
as  I am  informed,  that  troops  have  been  mustered  into  the  service  of 
the  Confederacy  in  such  manner  as  to  render  their  services  almost  value- 
less, either  by  reason  of  the  incompetency  and  inefficiency  of  their  offi- 
cers, or  because  mustered  for  cavalry  or  artillery  where  such  arms  are 
not  required  or  cannot  be  jn’ocured,  or  for  other  like  reasons.  In  a 
word,  I am  informed  that  a radical  reform  on  this  subject  is  required  in 
Florida.  Under  these  circumstances  you  may  be  at  a loss  how  to  i)ro- 
ceed,  and  I would  therefore  suggest  that  on  your  application  the  De- 
partment would  not  hesitate  to  muster  out  of  service  all  such  organiza- 
tions as  would  come  within  the  class  above  described,  and  then  muster 
the  men  afresh  by  companies,  so  as  to  leave  it  in  our  power  to  organize 
the  regiments  and  appoint  the  field  officers,  instead  of  leaving  them  to 
be  elected  by  the  men.  We  might  thus  hope  to  obtain  efficient  and 
competent  officers;  and  for  your  guidance  I inclose  you  a circular  letter, 
prepared  in  answer  to  the  constant  inquiries  addressed  to  this  Depart- 
ment, aud  which  will  inform  you  of  the  policy  on  which  we  act  in  receiv- 
ing tenders  of  troops.  I send  you  likewise  a set  of  the  laws,  so  far  as 
passed,  which  you  will  require  for  your  guidance  in  many  cases  that 
must  arise. 

I am  informed  by  Mr.  Yulee  that  the  Cuban  Telegraph  Company 
would  place  its  line  at  the  service  of  the  Government  at  little  or  no  cost, 
with  the  view  of  having  it  kept  in  order  until  the  return  of  peace  shall 
make  it  profitable.  If  this  be  so,  you  are  authorized  to  make  arrange- 
ments with  them  for  that  purpose,  as  the  keeping  up  of  your  communi- 
cations with  Savannah  cannot  but  be  very  useful  in  your  operations. 

You  will  be  sustained  by  this  Department  as  far  as  possible  in  your 
efforts  to  discharge  the  duties  confided  to  you,  but  our  resources  in 
small-arms,  in  ordnance,  and  ammunition  are  very  limited  when  com- 
pared with  the  enormous  coast  line  we  have  to  defend,  and  we  cannot 
therefore  supply,  as  we  would  wish,  the  several  points  where  defenses  are 
necessary.  We  must  concentrate  our  means  as  promptly  as  possible  at 
the  different  assailable  points  after  the  attack,  not  having  enough  to 
furnish  any  but  the  most  important  in  advance. 

Wishing  you  success  aud  distinction  in  your  new  command,  I am,  your 
obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIY, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 

[Inclosure.] 

Special  Orders,  >.  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen.’s  Office, 

Yo.  186.  ( Richmond,  October  22,  1861; 

**#*##* 

X.  Paragraph  X,  Special  Orders,  No.  176,  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
General’s  Office,  of  October  10,  1861,  is  revoked. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Trapier,  Provisional  Army,  is  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  Department  of  Eastern  and  Middle  Florida,  and  will 
proceed  at  once  to  Fernandina,  under  such  special  instructions  as  may 
be  given  him  by  the  Secretary  of  War. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

JXO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


294  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Hdqrs.  Mil.  Dep’t,  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

Tallahassee^  October  23,  1861. 

Hon.  Secretary  of  War, 

Richmond^  Ya : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  the  report  of  Maj.  W.  L. 
L.  Bovveu,  announcing  the  capture  of  two  sloops  and  their  crews.  I 
have  submitted  a like  copy  to  Col.  W.  S.  Dilworth,  Third  Eegimeut 
Florida  Volunteers,  at  Fernaudina,  who  succeeded  to  the  command 
upon  General  Grayson’s  death. 

The  vessels  you  notice  sail  under  the  “American  colors,  with  papers 
from  Key  West,  with  license  to  engage  in  the  fisher^^  on  the  Florida 
coast,  and  supply  the  Key  West  market  with  the  same.”  There  is  a 
feature  in  this  case  that  induces  me  to  inform  the  Department,  after  a 
consultation  with  his  excellency  the  governor  of  Florida.  It  seems  the 
smacks  belong  to  a firm  in  Key  West,  known  as  William  H.  Wall  & Co., 
who  I learn  from  a refugee  here  from  the  island  are  men  good  to  the 
Southern  cause.  One  of  the  firm,  though  a signer  of  the  ordinance  of 
secession,  has  taken  the  oath  to  the  Federal  side,  but  says  it  was  done 
under  duress.  The  refugee  states  he  was  a book-keeper  for  several  years 
in  the  house  of  the  Messrs.  Wall  & Co.,  the  alleged  owners  of  the  smacks, 
and  says,  in  addition,  that  he  is  sure  the  firm  has  not  only  wished  for  the 
success  of  our  struggle,  but  that  they  have  aided  with  money.  It  has 
not  been  made  known  to  any  one  here  that  they  (the  vessels)  are  true 
to  the  Confederacy;  so,  in  the  absence  of  Colonel  Dilworth  at  his  post 
near  Fernandina,  I,  acting  as  assistant  adjutant-gen  3ral  during  Lieuten- 
ant Wood’s  absence,  most  respectfully  write  the  Department,  that  a 
delay  of  several  days  may  not  occur  in  this  case,  where  doubts  exist  as 
to  whether  the  smacks  are  prizes  or  not,  it  being  said  they  belong  to 
friends,  yet  sail  under  our  enemy’s  flag.  In  the  mean  time  I have  written 
to  Major  Bowen,  and  said  it  would  be  well  to  keep  his  prisoners  under 
guard  until  he  can  hear  from  higher  authority.  His  excellency  Gover- 
nor Milton  informs  me  that  the  crews  are  for  the  most  part  Spaniards, 
and  may  claim  protection  of  that  flag,  and  also  that  at  Key  West  the 
Federal  authorities  force  all  persons,  regarvlless  of  nationality,  to  take 
the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States. 

I respectfully  inform  you  that  in  my  letter  to  Colonel  Dilworth  I men- 
tioned my  intention  of  addressing  you,  to  avoid  delay. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  UPSHUR  MAYO, 

First  Lieutenant,  (7.  8,  Army, 


[Inclosure.  1 

Headquarters,  Fort  Brooke, 

Tampa,  Fla.,  October  16,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  B.  Grayson, 

Commanding  Middle  and  Fast  Florida: 

Dear  Sir  : After  my  complimentary  regards,  permit  me  to  report 
for  your  orders  13  prisoners  of  war,  captured  under  my  command  on 
the  10th  and  11th  of  this  month,  being  the  crew  of  the  sloops  William 
Batty  and  Lyman  Dudley,  sailing  under  the  American  colors  (Stars  and 
Stripes),  with  papers  from  Key  West,  with  license  to  engage  in  the  fishery 
on  the  Florida  coast,  and  supply  the  Key  West  market  with  the  same. 
The  sloops  are  of  the  first  class,  well  rigged,  and  in  good  order.  One 
measures  65^  tons,  the  other  56fg-  tons. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  295 

The  sloops  have  been  duly  turned  over  to  the  i)rize  cominissipner  as 
legal  prizes  to  the  Confederate  States,  and  the  prisoners  are  detained  in 
safe  custody  for  your  disposal;  and,  in  consequence  of  the  inconvenience 
and  difficulty  of  subsisting  troops  at  this  post,  I hope  you  will  order  the 
Ijrisoners  to  be  sent  to  some  other  place,  or  disposed  of  in  some  other 
manner  as  soon  as  practicable. 

With  a deep  regret  for  your  ill-health,  and  with  due  regard  to  your 
orders,  I am,  sir,  most  respectfully,  yours,  &c.,  • 

W.  L.  L.  BOWEN, 

Major j Commanding  Military  Forces^  Tampa  Bay. 

The  sloops  William  Batty  and  Lyman  Dudley  are,  to  the  best  of  my 
knowledge  and  belief,  the  property  of  William  H.  Wall  & Co.,  of  Key 
West.  They  have  been  seized  at  Tampa  Bay  by  the  military  fdr  sailing 
under  the  Federal  colors  and  with  papers  from  Key  West.  Having- 
been  in  the  employment  of  Messrs.  William  H.  Wall  & Co.  for  several 
years,  I know  them  to  be  true  Southern  men,  and  have  largely  aided  the 
Confederate  cause. 

William  Pinkney,  one  of  the  firm,  has  taken  the  United  States  oath 
under  duress  on  the  island,  but  signed  the  ordinance  of  secession.  The 
permission  for  their  vessels  to  sail  under  the  Federal  flag  is  only  to  keep 
him  from  seizure  and  imprisonment. 

CHAS.  ANTONIO. 


Eichmond,  October  23,  1861. 

Gov.  John  Milton, 

Tallahassee.,  Fla. : 

General  Kirby  Smith  has  been  assigned  to  duty  with  Army  of  the 
Potomac.  General  Trapier,  of  South  Carolina,  has  been  assigned  to  your 
State,  and  Mr.  Yulee  leaves  to-morrow  morning  with  his  instructions. 
General  Trax^ier  will  go  first  to  Fernandina,  and  you  can  address  him 
there. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee^  October  21,  1861. 


Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Well  pleased  that  General  Trapier  has  been  assigned  to  the  Military 
Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida.  Would  respectfully  suggest 
that  the  Military  Department  of  the  State  be  so  arranged  as  to  embrace 
the  State,  distinguishing  the  departments  to  which  General  Bragg  and 
General  Trapier  have  been  assigned.  The  reason  of  the  suggestion  is 
that  Apalachicola  and  Saint  Andrew’s,  two  imx^ortant  points,  are  not 
embraced  in  a general  order.  We  have  at  Saint  Mark’s  howitzers  and 
empty  shells.  No  powder  or  fuse  to  prexjare  them.  We  need  guns  of 
large  caliber  and  ammunition. 

Eespectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON, 


Governor  of  Florida, 


296  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  G’A.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Mil.  Dist.,  Savannah,  Ga., 

No.  300.  j October  25,  18G1. 

*#*#*#* 

2.  By  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War  all  unarmed  troOps  in  camps 
of  instruction,  who  have  been  mustered  in  for  the  war,  will  hold  them- 
selves in  readiness  to  proceed  forthwith  to  Richmond,  Va.  Command- 
ing officers,  quartermasters,  and  commissaries  of  such  troops  will  make 
the  necessary  arrangements  for  an  immediate  move,  and  report,  by 
letter,  to  these  headquarters. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  R.  Lawton : 

THOS.  J.  BERRY, 

Aide-de-Campy  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department,  G.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  October  26,  1861. 

Col.  W.  S.  Dilworth, 

Comdg.  Third  Regt.  Fla.  Vols.y  Hdqrs.  Fort  Clinchy  Fla. : 

Sir:  I am  in  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  14th  October,  with  its  sev- 
eral inclosures,  submitted  to  this  Department  by  Capt.  Thomas  E. 
Buckman,  who  came  to  Richmond  by  your  orders.  Captain  Buckman’s- 
company  having  been  accepted  as  a “ company  of  infantry,  armed  with 
double  barreled  shot-guns,  for  twelve  months,^^  I have  directed  Briga- 
dier General  Trapier  to  have  the  company  mustered  in  on  those  terms 
whenever  the  required  conditions  are  fulfilled. 

With  regard  to  your  request  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Holland's  bat- 
talion of  artillery  be  mustered  in  as  organized,  with  six  companies,  for 
twelve  months,  I have  to  say  that  this  battalion  has  never  been  accepted 
by  this  Department,  nor  can  we  accept  artillery  companies  in  battalions, 
but  only  by  independent  companies  or  batteries,  leaving  the  question  of 
any  further  organization  to  rest  with  the  proper  authority.  Neither  do 
we  furnish  any  batteries  to  companies  of  artillery  offered  for  twelve 
months  only.  It  appears,  however,  that  this  battalion  possesses  but  a 
single  battery,  sufficient  only,  and  barely  sufficient,  for  a single  com- 
pany. I have  therefore  directed  Brigadier- General  Trapier  to  accept, 
and  muster  in  a single  company,  if  offered,  furnished  with  this  battery 
for  twelve  months,  but  not  to  accept  any  other  company  of  artillery  tor 
twelve  months  not  armed  with  batteries,  except  such  as*  he  may  deem 
necessary  for  working  heavy  guns  in  battery,  and  those  only  by  inde- 
pendent companies.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Holland  has  been  informed 
that  his  battalion  cannot  be  accepted  as  at  present  organized,  and  there- 
fore that  his  commission  cannot  be  confirmed.  However  able  he  may 
be  as  an  officer,  and  however  valuable  his  services  may  be  to  you  as  an 
artillerist,  of  which  I have  read  with  great  pleasure  your  flattering  tes- 
timonials, this  course  is  dictated  necessarily  by  a regard  for  the  inter- 
ests of  the  service  and  for  the  general  policy  of  this  Department,  a 
brief  view  of  which,  so  far  as  concerns  the  accepting  and  organization 
of  troops,  &c.,  you  will  find  stated  in  the  accomi)anying  circular,  which 
I respectfully  inclose.  It  is  now,  of  course,  needless  for  me  to  add  that 
the  additional  field  pieces  which  you  ask  for  on  behalf  of  this  battalion 
cannot  be  furnished. 

An  artillery  company  furnishing  its  own  battery  will  be  equipped  for 
the  field  when  mustered  into  service,  but  no  person  other  than  the 
proper  officer  of  the  Government  can  be  authorized  to  purchase  horses 


Chap.  XV.] 


297 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

or  any  other  equipments  or  supplies  for  the  battery  or  for  tlie  company, 
and  such  as  may  be  furnished  will  be  accepted  only  at  a fair  valuation. 

The  remaining  topics  of  your  letter  shall  receive  due  consideration, 
and  your  requisitions  for  ammunition,  &c.,  are  referred  to  the  attention, 
of  the  Chief  of  Ordnance. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIV, 
Acting  Sccretm^if  of  War. 


ISTorfolk,  October  2G,  18G1. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

A Federal  soldier’s  hat  was  picked  up  to-day  at  Colonel  Taylor’s 
farm,  near  Willoughby’s  Point,  3^  miles  from  Old  Point.  It  contained 
two  Boston  papers,  one  of  the  19th  and  one  of  the  21st.  They  contain 
important  developments  as  to  the  destination  of  the  great  expedition. 
The  gunboats  are  to  concentrate  in  Hampton  Eoads,  and  the  ti  ansi)orts 
are  to  repair  to  Annapolis,  and  there  embark  a force  of  25,000  men, 
under  General  Sherman.  Several  of  the  larger  steamers  are  loaded  with 
surf-boats.  The  papers  state  that  the  expedition  is  intended  for  Charles- 
ton and  other  places  on  our  coast.  At  sundowm  the  lookout  reports 
over  100  sail  of  vessels  in  the  Boads.  They  are  arriving  and  dei)arting 
continually.  The  main  part  of  the  ex])edition  is  still  at  the  Boads,  and 
great  activity  prevails  in  the  fleet.  Will  send  papers  bv  Mondav’s  mail. 

JAS.  F.  MILLIGAK, 

Ca^ptain,  Signal  Officer^  Department  of  Norfolk. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  190.  ) Eiclmoncl,  October  2G,  18G1. 

******* 

XIII.  The  State  of  Georgia  will  hereafter  constitute  a separate 
department,  to  be  designated  the  Department  of  Georgia,  the  command 
of  which  is  assigned  to  Brigadier- General  Lawton,  headquarters  Savan- 
nah, Ga. 

XIY.  The  Department  of  Middle  and  Eastern  Florida^  announced  in 
paragraph  XII,  Special  Orders,  Xo.  130,  Adjutant  and  Inspector-Gen- 
eral’s Office,  of  August  21,  1861,  will  extend  west  to  Choctawhatchee 
Biver. 

* * * # * * * 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  W"ar : 

JXO.  WITHEBS, 
Assistant  A d jut  ant  ■ General. 


Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee.,  October  28,  18G1. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : The  special  order  by  which  the  Chattahoochee  Biver  is  estab- 
lished as  the  line  between  the  two  military  departments  of  Florida  ex- 
cludes Apalachicola  and  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay  from  the  department  to 
which  General  Trapier  has  been  assigned,  both  places  being  west  of  the 
river,  and  therefore  in  West  Florida.  It  may  be  best  that  these  places 
should  be  in  General  Bragg’s  department,  for  the  following  reasons,  viz: 


298  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  CA.,  and  middle  and  east  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

First.  For  necessary  supplies  Apalachicola  and  Saint  Andrew’s  are 
more  conveniently  connected  with  Pensacola  than  with  any  important 
position  in  Middle  or  East  Florida. 

Second.  The  means  of  communication  by  telegraph  and  mail  facilities 
are  more  speedy  and  less  expensive  j also  for  transportation  of  troops, 
guns,  ammunition,  &c. 

Third.  The  military  department  east  of  the  Chattahoochee  Eiver,  in 
the  present  deranged  state  of  affairs,  is  more  than  sufficient  to  command 
the  utmost  energies  of  any  general  to  make  a successful  defense  of  the 
various  important  positioas  subject  to  and  threatened  with  attack. 

You  may  inquire,  then,  why  I suggested  by  telegram  that  Apalachi- 
cola and  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay  should  be  embraced  in  General  Trapier’s 
command.  At  the  time  the  suggestion  was  made  these  places  were  not, 
by  any  general  orders  emanating  from  or  authorized  by  the  War  De- 
partment known  to  me,  embraced  in  any  military  department.  From  a 
misapprehension  of  the  locality  of  Apalachicola  General  Grayson  had 
assigned  Colonel  Hoi)kins  to  the  command  of  the  fort  at  Apalachicola, 
meaning,  I suppose,  the  fort  at  Saint  Vincent’s  Island,  12  miles  distant 
from  Apalachicola.  The  public  interest  and  the  proper  defense  of  the 
place  required  the  immediate  attention  of  an  experienced  and  compe- 
tent officer.  Very  heavy,  and  in  my  judgment,  upon  the  information 
received,  very  unnecessary,  expenses  were  being  incurred.  As  to  expense, 
one  item  of  $130  per  diem  for  a steamboat,  for  which  there  was  neither 
urgent  nor  reasonable  necessity.  As  to  defenses,  one  item  : a ditch  was 
commenced,  to  be  3 feet  deep,  3 feet  wide,  and  about  3 miles  long,  to  be 
depended  upon  to  enable  not  exceeding  500  men  to  defend  the  city  from 
an  attack  by  land. 

Moreover,  unpleasant  differences  had  arisen  between  Colonel  Hopkins 
and  Captain  Dunham,  of  the  State  troops,  which  excited  and  alarmed 
the  citizens  and  threatened  most  serious  and  disreputable  consequences, 
the  official  orders  relative  to  which  by  General  Grayson  and  myself  will 
be  made  known  to  you  by  certified  copies  inclosed  by  next  mail.  I did 
not  suppose  that  General  Bragg  could  give  his  immediate  personal 
attention  at  Apalachicola,  or  that  I could  confer  as  promptly  with  him 
as  with  General  Trapier,  to  reniedy  existing  evils.  Colonel  Hopkins  is  a 
gentleman,  bu^  perhaps  a little  too  excitable,  and  may  not  be  possessed 
of,  in  an  eminent  degree,  the  knowledge  of  men  and  science  of  war  requi- 
' sire  in  a military  commander. 

In  a letter  bearing  date  30th  June  the  Secretary  of  War  notifies  the 
governor  of  this  State  that ‘‘ the  President  deems  it  prudent,  if  not 
essential  to  the  public  safety,  to  form  and  orgaiiizea  reserve  army  corps 
of  30,000  men,  and  apportion  to  Florida  the  quota  of  1,000  men.  Your 
excellency  will  therefore  receive  lor  the  war  1,000  men  by  independent 
companies,”  &c. 

Wheu  1 came  into  office  not  a company  had  been  raised,  and  the  opin- 
ion, I think,  was  entertained  by  my  worthy  predecessor  that  the  requi- 
sition could  not  be  even  partially  complied  with.  1 entertain  a different 
opinion,  and  hope  to  be  able  in  a few  wee!:s  to  report  to  you  1,000  men 
in  camps  ready  for  instruction.  For  one  battalion  I shall  establish  a 
camp  near  Apalachicola,  to  be  known  as  Camp  Benjamin,  in  honor  of  the 
Acting  Secretar^^  of  War,  when,  if  necjessar}’,  the  companies  can  housed 
in  defense  of  the  place.  I have  not  yet  decided  where  the  other  camp 
will  be  established,  desirihg,  after  an  interview  with  General  Trapier, 
to  place  it  where  it  can  be  sustained  at  least  expense  and  the  companies 
that  compose  it  made  most  useful  j but  permit  me,  with  due  deference, 
to  protest  against  any  authority  in  future  to  individuals  to  raise  a com- 


Chap.  XY.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. c6nFEDERATE.  299 

])aiiy  or  companies  of  any  kind  in  this  State.  It  brings  their  influence 
to  accomplish  the  objects  they  liave  in  view  in  conflict  with  State  author- 
ity, and  has  prevented,  and  will  continue  to  prevent,  if  not  checked,  the 
executive  of  the  State  from  being  able  to  comply  with  the  requisitions 
of  the  President  through  the  War  Department. 

Your  attention,  and  through  you  that  of  the  President,  is  respectfully 
invited  to  the  following  extract  of  a letter  addressed  to  me  officially  by 
Col.  J.  P.  Anderson,  commanding  near  Pensacola  the  First  Florida  llegi- 
ment,  viz : 

You  will  have  heard  of  the  affair  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  on  the  morning  of  the  9th 
instant.  The  object  of  the  expedition  was  fully  and  completely  accomplished,  though 
the  loss  of  such  men  as  Captain  Branford,  of  Florida;  Lieutenant  Nelms,  of  Georgia; 
Sergeant  Routh,  of  Tallahassee ; Private  Tillinghast,  &c.,  would  not  be  compensated 
for,  in  my  opinion,  by  the  total  annihilation  of  Billy  Wilson  and  his  whole  band  of 
thieves  and  cut-throats.  The  Florida  Regiment  only  had  100  men  in  the  expedition 
out  of  1,060,  and  lost  6 killed,  8 wounded,  and  12  prisoners,  as  follows,  viz:  Killed, 
Captain  Bradford,  Sergeant  Routh,  Privates  T^illinghast,  Hale,  Thompson  of  Apalachi- 
cola, and  Smith.  Wounded,  Corporal  Lanier,  Privates  Echols,  McCorkle,  Sims, 
William  Denham,  Hicks,  Sharrit,  and  O’Neal  (Peter,  of  Pensacola).  These  are  doing 
well  and  will  recover ; some  are  only  slightly  wounded.  Prisoners  : R.  Hale,  Company 
A,  and  Bond,  Company  A;  Mahoney,  Company  B,  and  Nichols,  Company  B ; Bev. 
Parker  and  Finley,  Company  E;  Holliman,  Godiie,  John  Jarvis,  M.  Mosely,  and  Pat- 
terson, of  Company  F ; also  Lieutenant  Farley,  Company  E.  I deeply  regret  that  such 
men  as  Lieutenant  Farley,  Parker,  and  Finley  should  have  fallen  into  the  enemy’s 
hands.  However,  they  write  to  us  that  they  are  well  treated,  but  destiny  unknown. 
By  any  civilized  nation  in  the  world  most  of  these  prisoners  would  bo  promptly  deliv- 
ered up,  for  they  were  taken  while  standing  as  a safeguard  over  the  enemy’s  hospital, 
to  xtrevent  it  from  sharing  the  fate  of  the  balance  of  the  camp.  They  protected  it  from 
jlame  and  sword  most  scrupulously,  but  failing  to  hear  the  signal  for  us  to  retire, 
only  remained  too  faithful  to  their  trust,  and  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy 
by  so  doing.  Their  names  should  illustrate  one  of  the  brightest  x>ages  of  Florida’s 
history. 

In  a few  days  I will  present  to  your  consideration  my  views  in  regard 
to  the  defenses  of  Florida  and  the  organization  of  a military  depart- 
ment embracing  parts  of  Georgia  and  Alabama  adjacent  to  the  Chatta- 
hoochee Eiver,  the  importance  and  advantage  of  which  will  be  readily 
understood. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor  of  Florida. 


Eichmond,  October  29,  1861. 

General  Lawton, 

Savannah  : 

Colonel  Mercer  was  appointed  brigadier-general  to-day.  The  enemy’s 
fleet  sailed  South  this  morning;  destination  unknown. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Tallahassee,  October  29,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Florida  wants  arms.  She  has  never  received  a musket  from  the  Con- 
federate States.  The  Gordon  brings  sabers  and  pistols.  Can  I get 
some  ? 

Eespectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor  of  Florida. 


300  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AKD  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cn.vp.  XV. 

Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee^  Fla.,  October  29,  1S61. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  G.  8.  A.  : 

Sir  : On  the  28th  instant  I addressed  a letter  to  the  Hon.  J.  P.  Ben- 
jamin, Secretaiy  of  War,  in  which  I invited  his  attention  and  requested 
him  to  call  the  attention  of  your  excellency  to  the  extract  made  from  a 
letter  of  Col.  J.  Patton  Anderson,  First  Florida  Regiment,  relative  to 
members  of  his  regiment  being  made  jirisoners  ‘‘  while  standing  as  a 
safeguard  over  the  enemy’s  hospital  to  prevent  it  from  sharing  the  fate 
of  the  balance  of  the  camp.” 

Permit  me,  sir,  with  all  due  respect,  to  invite  such  demand  on  the 
part  of  your  excellency  as  the  laws  of  nations  will  sustain  for  the  hon- 
orable release  of  all  the  prisoners,  and  especially  those  from  Florida, 
captured  under  these  circumstances;  but,  should  the  enemy  be  insensi- 
ble to  such  demand,  then,  that  in  any  exchange  of  prisoners  which  may 
be  made,  the  prisoners  thus  taken  may  be  among  the  first  exchanged. 

October  30. — I had  the  honor  to  receive  your  highly-esteemed  favor 
of  the  25th,*  and  avail  myself  of  the  courteous  invitation  to  a free  corre- 
spondence. 

The  extent  of  our  coast  and  its  character  are  easily  ascertained  by 
maps  and  coast  surveys,  but  a personal  acquaintance  with  the  localities, 
settled  portions  of  the  State,  and  mixed  character  of  the  population 
would  be  requisite  to  a just  appreciation  of  our  exposed  position  in  the 
l)resent  war.  My  oi)inion  has  been  and  is  yet,  that  if  General  Scott,  as 
the  Oommander-iu  Chief  of  the  United  States  troops,  with  full  powers 
to  direct  their  movements,  really  desired  the  subjugation  of  the  South, 
of  which  1 have  no  doubt,  and  had  possessed  the  distinguished  quali- 
ties of  a soldier  which  have  been  ascribed  to  him,  with  the  least  intel- 
ligence as  a statesman  as  to  causes  and  effects,  the  conquest  of  Florida 
would  have  been  promptly  made.  Virginia  would  not  have  been  dis- 
turbed. The  conquest  of  Florida,  as  one  of  the  seven  States,  would 
have  had  a powerful  influence  upon  foreign  nations,  an  inspiring  effect 
upon  the  minds  of  his  troops  and  of  the  citizens  and  Government  of  the 
United  States,  and  formed  a basis  for  future  0])erations  which  would 
have  checked  Virginia  and  other  States  that  have  not  seceded,  and 
dispirited  many  in  the  seceded  States  who  apprehended  with  fear  and 
trembling  the  consequences  of  a change  of  government.  The  fate  of 
the  South  would  have  been  hair-hung.  But,  as  if  God  in  mercy  permit- 
ted General  Scott’s  madness  and  folly,  every  movement  he  made  but 
gave  strength  and  vigor  to  our  cause.  As  it  is,  unable  to  conquer  any 
other  State,  may  not  Florida  claim  their  attention?  With  our  feeble- 
ness they  are  well  acquainted  through  traitors,  some  of  whom  yet 
remain  among  us. 

Independent  of  the  force  at  and  about  Pensacola  there  are  no  troops 
by  proper  authoriry  in  Confederate  service  excei)t  the  Third  and  what 
is  termed  the  Fourth  Regiments,  and  such  companies  of  cavalry  as 
liav^e  been  received.  The  Third  Regiment,  commanded  by  Col.  W.  S. 
Dilworth,  a civilian,  is  scattered  from  Fernaudina  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Saint  John’s  River  and  Saint  Augustine,  and,  if  I am  correctly  inform- 
ed, is  in  a deplorable  condition.  I presume  there  is  not  a field  officer 
attached  to  it,  unless  it  may  be  Major  Church,  at  Saint  Augustine,  of 


Not  found. 


CriAr.  XY  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  301 

strict  sobriety;  but  the  colonel,  W.  S.  Dil worth,  is  imi)roving,  and  will, 
I think,  make  an  efficient  officer. 

With  regard  to  what  is  called  the  Fourth  Eegiment,  commanded  by 
Col.  Edward  Hopkins,  there  were  but  eight  imperfect  conii)anies  when 
he  was  elected,  and  I shall  not  consent  that  another  may  be  added  to  it, 
for  reasons  you  will  appreciate.  Of  two  companies  ordered  to  vote,  one 
was  never  attached  to  it,  but  was  under  the  command  of  General  Eragg, 
and  did  not  vote.  The  other  was  in  State  service  for  six  months,  com- 
manded by  a nephew  of  Colonel  Hopkins,  voted  for  him  for  colonel,  was 
in  three  weeks  afterwards  mustered  out  of  service,  and  has  never  had  a 
moment’s  connection  with  the  regiment.  The  time  of  election  was  only 
known  a day  or  two  before  it  occurred,  and  was  intended  to  secure  the 
command  to  D.  P.  Holland,  who  happened  to  be  a pet  of  Governor 
Perry,  and  whose  character  was  so  odious  that  he  was  beaten  by  Ho])- 
kins — the  only  man,  perhaps,  in  the  State  that,  if  the  election  had  been 
properly  advertised,  Hopkins  could  have  defeated;  and  the  reason 
assigned  by  Governor  Perry  to  the  attorney-general  of  the  State,  to 
myself,  and  perhaps  others,  why  he  commissioned  Hopkins,  was  that  he 
apprehended  that  if  he  refused  to  do  so  he  would  be  charged  with  hav- 
ing refused  because  he  defeated  Holland.  For  the  character  of  Mr. 
Holland  I refer  you  to  Mr.  Mallory,  Judge  Hawkins,  or  any  other  gentle- 
man in  West  or  Middle  Florida,  where  he  is  known.  In  East  Florida, 
where  his  true  character  is  not  yet  ascertained,  he  is  figuring  in  com- 
mand of  four  companies,  by  the  illegal  appointment  of  Governor  Perry 
as  lieutenant-colonel  of  an  artillery  battalion,  to  which  I have,  in  a 
previous  letter,  invited  your  attention. 

Governor  Perry  is,  I reckon,  as  you  have  perceived,  a man  of  strong 
jirejudices,  without  very  extraordinary  intellectual  abilities. 

The  eight  companies  said  to  compose  the  Fourth  Eegiment  are  some 
of  them  in  a deplorable  condition,  and  scattered  as  follows : Three  of 
the  companies  are  on  Saint  Vincent’s  Island,  12  miles  from  Apalachi- 
cola, relative  to  which  you  will  find  papers  inclosed ; one  company  at 
Saint  Mark’s,  commanded  by  Captain  Dial,  an  efficient  officer ; one  at 
the  light  house,  12  miles  off,  commanded  by  Captain  Law,  a well  dis- 
posed but  ignorant  man,  and  his  men,  that  would  have  made  fine  sol 
diers  if  properly  commanded,  are  much  demoralized;  one  company  is  at 
Tampa,  and  an  effort  making  there  to  get  another,  commanded  by  a 
major  of  no  military  education,  and,  if  I am  informed  rightly,  on  an 
accidental  visit  to  Florida ; the  other  two  companies  at  Cedar  Keys,  com- 
manded by  Lieut.  Col.  M.  Whit.  Smith,  who  is  said  to  drink  to  great 
excess. 

Hopkins,  whom  I now  believe  most  honestly  to  be  too  irritable,  involved 
himself  in  difficulties  at  Apalachicola,  and  was  ordered  by  General 
Grayson  to  remain  on  Saint  Vincent’s  Island,  with  his  three  companies, 
but  left  without  permission  and  came  to  Tallahassee.  General  Grayson 
was  very  sick  and  would  not  see  him,  but  I have  reason  to  believe  if  he 
had  lived  he  would  have  had  him  dismissed  from  the  service. 

General  Grayson  requested  me  to  direct  all  military  movements.  We 
were  personal  acquaintances  thirty  years  ago.  To  discourage  young 
officers  from  coming  in  conflict  with  officers  claiming  to  be  in  Confeder- 
ate service,  I ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  James,  in  command  of  State 
troops  at  Apalachicola,  to  report  to  and  obey  the  orders  of  Colonel  Ho^)- 
kins,  and  for  a few  days  intrusted  the  defense  of  the  place  to  him ; but 
his  conduct  has  been  so  extraordinary  that  I have  revoked  the  order, 
and  thrown  him  back  upon  General  Grayson’s  order — to  confine  himself 
to  Saint  Vincent’s  Island  and  its  defenses. 


302  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EA^ST  FLA,  [Chap.  XV. 

Asa  matter  of  ecoiiomj^  aod  public  safety  I would  respectfully  sug- 
gest that,  inasmuch  as  the  regiment  has  never  been  completed  accord- 
ing to  the  terms  upon  which  it  was  understood  to  have  been  accepted, 
the  field  officers  be  retired  from  the  service,  and  the  companies  be  re- 
tained, for  the  present,  under  the  command  of  their  respective  captains, 
subject  to  the  orders  of  General  Trapier  or  the  governor  of  the  State  ; 
that  the  pretended  battalion  of  artillery  be  refused,  and  thrown  back 
for  the  present  upon  the  State.  There  was  but  one  order  relative  to  it 
obtained  from  General  Grayson,  a copy  of  which  is  inclosed,  and  under 
circumstances  a knowledge  of  which  you  can  obtain  from  Dr.  Sabal,  the 
medical  director  of  General  Grayson,  now  on  his  way  to  Eichmond. 

Then,  sir,  if  you  will  accept  of  twenty  companies  for  twelve  months, 
and  reserve  to  yourself  the  appointment  of  field  officers,  and  appoint 
such  as  are  known  to  you,  or  such  as  I may  recommend,  I can  have  the 
companies  ready,  I think,  in  a fortnight,  embracing  the  eight  companies 
now  under  Hopkins’  command.  Freed  of  him,  I will  add  two  fine  com- 
panies, and  the  regiment  will  be  complete  and  equipped.  Then,  by 
adding  six  companies  to  the  four  now  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Holland,  another  regiment  of  infantry  may  be  formed,  with  an  artillery 
company  attached,  equipped  with  the  guns,  &c.,  now  used  by  Holland’s 
battalion,  the  entire  equi[)ment  being  not  more  than  sufficient  for  one 
company,  allowing,  meanwhile,  Holland’s  four  companies  to  remain  on 
duty  where  they  now  are  until  the  regiment  is  completed. 

The  State  troops  at  Apalachicola  are  under  command  of  my  aide-de- 
camp,  Col.  Eichard  F.  Floyd — an  accomplished  gentleman  and  competent 
officer — and  a copy  of  his  orders  is  inclosed.  By  letter  he  is  ordered  to 
defend  the  place,  if  attacked,  to  the  last  extremity. 

Now,  permit  me  to  say  that  Georgia  and  Alabama  are  as  much,  if  not 
more,  interested  in  the  defense  of  Apalachicola,  so  far  as  commerce  is 
concerned,  as  Florida;  therefore,  in  view  of  our  extended  coast,  and  the 
almost  insurmountable  obstacles  to  its  successful  defense,  I would  rec- 
ommend, most  respectfully  and  earnestly,  that  a military  department 
be  composed  of  the  counties  contiguous  on  both  sides  of  the  Chattahoo- 
chee Eiver,  so  as  to  embrace  Columbus,  Ga.  Look  at  the  map  and  the 
relative  positions  of  the  counties  in  Georgia,  Alabama,  and  Florida. 
Such  a military  department,  under  a brigadier- general  of  military  edu- 
cation, experience,  and  sobriety,  would  contribute  greatly  to  Southern 
defense. 

The  military  department  proposed,  most  respectfully,  may  be  com- 
posed of  the  following-named  counties  in  Georgia,  Alabama,  and  Florida, 
viz : In  Georgia,  the  counties  of  Decatur,  Thomas,  Miller,  Early,  Baker, 
Clay,  Calhoun,  Eandolph,  Quitman,  Stewart,  Muscogee;  in  Alabama, 
the  counties  of  Henry,  Dale,  Barbour,  and  Eussell ; in  Florida,  the  coun- 
ties of  Leon,  Gadsden,  Wakulla,  Jefferson,  Madison,  Liberty,  Washing- 
ton, Calhoun,  Jackson,  and  Franklin. 

The  proposed  military  department  has  been  submitted  to  the  consid- 
eration of  the  governors  of  Georgia  and  Alabama.  The  remaining 
counties  of  Middle,  East,  and  South  Florida  will  form  a military  depart- 
ment sufficient  in  itself  to  command  the  utmost  vigilance  of  an  exi>eri- 
enced  and  able  officer. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 


JOHN  MILTON. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


303 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Tallahassee^  Fla.^  Oetober  30,  1801. 

Ilis  Excellency  John  Milton, 

Governor  of  Florida : 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  instructions  of  the  IGtli  instant,  requiring 
me  to  visit  Eernandina  and  report  to  you  the  condition  of  tlie  defenses 
at  that  place,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  tlie  following,  viz: 

The  defenses  consist  of  a sand  and  palmetto-log  battery  of  eight  guns, 
all  mounted,  to  wit ; Five  32-pounders,  two  24-i)ounders  (smooth  bore), 
and  one  rifled  O-inch  gun  on  a ship  carriage.  This  battery  I conceive 
to  be  very  injudiciously  arranged,  having  24-iiounders,  32-pounders,  and 
rifled  guns  all  in  the  same  battery  in  barbette,  except  that  two  of  the 
32-pounders  are  partially  masked  by  slight  traverses  on  the  parapet. 
These  traver.-  es  confine  the  field  of  fire  seaward  to  about  lo^.  These 
guns  are  all  placed  on  a straight  line,  except  the  rifled  gun,  which  is 
placed  just  in  rear  of  the  left  gun,  and  when  fired  its  direction  Avill  be 
obliquely  over  the  short-range  guns,  thereby  endangering  the  men  at 
these  guns,  and  at  the  same  time  drawing  the  fire  of  the  enemy  on  the 
whole  battery  long  before  they  come  within  the  reach  of  the  24-pounders 
and  32-poun(lers.  There  is  also  one  24-pounder  and  two  32-pounders  un- 
mounted at  Fort  Clinch,  and  one  8-inch  columbiad  landed  at  the  wharf 
at  Fernandina  on  the  27th  instant. 

The  weather  during  my  visit  was  so  stormy  as  to  render  it  impossible 
for  me  to  visit  Colonel  Holland’s  camp  at  the  south  end  of  the  island,  18 
miles  distant  j neither  did  I witness  the  drill  of  the  troops  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity  of  Fernandina  for  the  same  reason  ; but  the  idea  formed 
by  seeing  the  men  and  officers  about  the  streets  was  any  thing  but  favor- 
able to  their  discipline,  having  seen  sev’eral  staggering  through  the 
streets  on  the  Sabbath  day.  They  are  sadly  in  want  of  an  efficient  com- 
mander anil  a good  drill-master  for  both  artillery  and  infantry.  I learned 
that  Colonel  Holland  had  not  yet  located  his  permanent  camp  at  the 
south  end  of  the  island ; neither  had  any  breastworks  been  thrown  up, 
he  having  but  a few  days  before  moved  to  that  point.  His  command 
consists  of  four  companies  of  artillery,  with  four  brass  6-pounders,  500  0- 
])Ound  balls,  and  75  grape  and  canister,  and  500  cannon  friction  tubes — 
ids  men  are  armed  with  muskets  and  carbines — 4,000  caps,  and  a lot  of 
balls.  Of  ammunition,  as  lar  as  I could  learn,  there  are  300  32-pounder 
caps,  500  cannon  friction  tubes,  770  32 -pound  balls,  80  32-pound  shells, 
100  rounds  of  shell  and  fixed  ammunition  for  the  32  pounder  rifled  gun, 
00  24-pound  balls,  12,000  ball  and  buck-shot  cartridges,  2,000  caps  (the 
latter — balls  and  caps — delivered  to  the  officer  in  command  of  the  fort), 
7,000  caps  still  in  possession  of  General  Finegan.  The  above  consti- 
lutes,  as  far  as  I could  learn,  all  the  ammunition  on  the  island. 

There  are  at  this  t me  seven  comiianies  on  the  island,  one  of  which  is 
a cavalry  company  and  the  others  are  infantry.  These  are  exclusive  of 
the  four  companies  belonging  to  Colonel  Holland’s  battalion  of  artillery. 
This  battalion  has  never  been  mustered  into  either  State  or  Confederate 
service,  but  an  order  for  them  to  be  furnished  with  the  requisite  arms 
and  equipments  issued  by  General  Grayson  has  been  forwarded  to  Eich- 
mond,  showing  the  amount  necessary  to  place  this  battalion  in  condi- 
tion for  active  and  efficient  service. 

Eespectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  L.  DANICY, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 


304  COASTS  OF  S.  a,  GA.,  and  middle  and  east  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Tallahassee,  October  31,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Have  not  seen  or  heard  from  General  Trapier.  Full  investigation 
satisfies  me  that  troops,  guns,  &c.,  should  be  removed  promptly  from 
Saint  Vincent’s  Island  to  Apalachicola.  Shall  I order  the  movement? 
A messenger  here  waiting  for  the  order. 

JOHNT  MILTOl^, 

Governor  of  Florida. 


Eichmond,  October  31,  1861. 

Gov.  John  Milton, 

Tallahassee^  Fla. : 

You  are  authorized  to  remove  the  guns  and  other  munitions  of  war 
from  Saint  Vincent’s  Island  to  Apalachicola.  General  Trapier  will  be  in 
Fernandina  in  two  or  three  days. 

J.  P.  BENTJAMIY, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Executive  Depahtment, 
Tallahassee^  Fla.,  October  31,  1861. 
His  Excellency  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Governor  of  Georgia : 

Sir  : I have  this  day  recommended  to  the  President  and  Secretary  of 
War  the  establishment  of  a military  department,  to  be  composed  of  the 
following  counties  in  Georgia,  Alabama,  and  Florida,  lying  on  or  near 
the  Chattahoochee  Eiver,  viz  : 

In  Georgia : Decatur,  Thomas,  Miller,  Early,  Baker,  Olay,  Calhoun, 
Eandolph,  Quitman,  Stewart,  and  Aluscogee.  In  Alabama:  Henry, 
Dale,  Barbour,  and  Eussell.  In  Florida:  Leon,  Gadsden,  Wakulla, 
Jefferson,  Madison,  Liberty,  Washington,  Jackson,  Calhoun,  and 
Franklin. 

I respectfully  invite  your  consideration  and  approval  of  the  measure 
proposed.  Georgia  and  Alabama  derive  even  more  commercial  advan- 
tages from  Apalachicola  than  Florida  herself,  and  both  those  States  are 
deeply  interested  in  its  defense. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfullv, 

JOHN  MILTON. 


Abstract  from  monthly  return  of  the  Department  of  Georgia,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen. 
A.  B.  Lawton,  for  October,  1861. 


Stations. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Heavy. 

Field. 

Smith  PTifl  ’Rip’  rJiiTnhftrlanrl  Taland 

6 

116 

142 

150 

4 

Vnyt,  Pnlnalri  - 

17 

290 

352 

379 

36 

Itrimswirlr  Oa  

9 

129 

140 

154 

5 

Oslothorpe  Barracks 

1 

68 

87 

99 

6 

Genesis  Point  

2 

39 

70 

76 

5 

Great  Warsaw  battery 

6 

120 

140 

171 

5 

Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  305 


Abstract  from  monthly  return  of  the  Department  of  Georgia,  ^c. — Continued. 


Stations. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Artillery. 

OflBcers. 

Men. 

Heavy. 

Field. 

Thunderbolt  battery  

3 

100 

109 

116 

4 

Saint  Simon’s  Island 

39 

697 

855 

919 

8 

Sn.pftlln  Taland ... 

11 

268 

321 

364 

5 

Talft  nf  FTnpft •. 

2 

50 

55 

7o 

6 

Jekyl  Island 

23 

359 

499 

563 

6 

Simbnry,  Oa.. 

3 

43 

49 

71 

Smith  Nflwpnrt 

4 

67 

73 

73 

Near  Darien 

4 

68 

74 

75 

fj-arteret’a  Point 

3 

53 

56 

64 

Camp  Pawton  (Savannah)  

21 

396 

421 

432 

damp  fJnmnniny  (Savannah) 

6 

63 

86 

101 

Skidaway  Island 

28 

498 

636 

658 

Tvbee  Island 

54 

896 

1, 086 

1, 183 

2 

Camp  Wayne,  "Waynpiavino  

7 

165 

175 

190 

8 

other  points 

4 

67 

71 

74 

Grand  total 

253 

4, 552 

5, 497 

5,982 

83 

17 

Headquarters  Department  of  Georgia, 

Savannah,  November  1,  1861. 

Hou.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War,  BicJimond,  Ya.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  to  you  a communication  received  to- 
day from  Col.  T.  J.  Warthen,  commanding  a regiment  at  one  of  the 
camps  of  instruction  recently  placed  under  my  authority,  and  by  your 
directions  ordered  to  Eichmond.  These  camps  having  been  established 
by  the  governor,  under  some  sort  of  authority  from  the  late  Secretary 
of  War,  he  (the  governor)  attempts  such  control  over  them  as  may  delay 
their  preparations  for  departure.  Of  course  no  attention  will  be  paid 
by  me  to  this  notice  of  “protest,”  and  I only  inclose  the  letter  to  explain 
the  precise  state  of  things  at  the  time  I assume  command  of  these  camps. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  LAWTON", 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Camp  Stephens, 

October  30,  1861. 

General  A.-E.  Lawton; 

But  a few  hours  since  I received  a communication  from  his  excellency 
the  governor,  stating  that  he  had  not  been  advised  by  the  Secretary  of 
War  of  the  action  of  the  Department  in  ordering  this  regiment  to  Vir- 
ginia, and,  moreover,  stating  that  he  had  just  written  to  the  Department 
protesting,  in  the  name  of  the  State,  against  this  and  other  regiments 
being  removed  from  the  State.  I thought  it  due  to  you  that  you  should 
be  notified  of  the  same. 

Again  signifying  to  you  that  I shall  obey  with  pleasure  any  order 
emanating  from  you,  I subscribe  myself,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  J.  WAETHEN, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Twentieth  Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers, 

20  R R — VOL  VI 


306  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Eichmond,  November  1.  1861. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Columbia^  8.  G.: 

I have  just  received  information,  which  I consider  entirely  reliable, 
that  the  enemy’s  expedition  is  intended  for  Port  Eoyal. 

J.  P.  BE:f^JAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 

(^Same  to  Generals  Drayton  and  Eipley.) 


Columbia,  November  1,  1861. 

non.  Mr.  Benjamin: 

Telegraph  received.  Please  telegraph  General  Anderson,  at  Wilming- 
ton, and  General  Lawton,  Savannah,  to  send  what  forces  they  can  spare, 
as  the  difficulty  with  us  is  as  to  arms.  I have  telegraphed  them  both. 

P.  W.  PIOKEES. 


Charleston,  November  1,  1861. 

To  Secretary  of  War: 

Dispatch  received.  Will  act  at  once.  A fine  strong  southeast  gale 
blowing,  which  will  keep  him  off  for  a day  or  so.  Will  advise. 

E.  S.  EIPLEY. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Georgia, 

Savannah^  November  1,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War,  Eiclimond^  Ya.: 

Sir  : It  is  now  generally  understood  that  the  governor  of  this  State 
is  preparing  to  call  out  a large  force  of  State  troops,  to  be  thrown  on 
the  coast  of  Georgia.  A brigade  has  already  been  organized  and  a 
brigadier-general  appointed  by  the  governor.  This  may  not  be  at  all 
embarrassing,  but  I am  now  informed  that  the  governor  proposes  to 
organize  a division  forthwith,  and  to  cooimission  a major-general  and 
send  him  to  the  coast,  under  an  act  passed  at  the  last  session  of  the 
legislature  of  Georgia.  This  may  lead  to  serious  embarrassment,  and 
both  General  Mercer  and  myself  see  cause  for  uneasiness  in  the  con- 
templated action  of  the  governor.  As  all  the  arrangements  for  defense 
on  this  coast  have  been  made  without  reference  to  State  authority,  I 
desire  instructions  from  the  Department  as  to  the  course  which  must  be 
adopted,  if  an  officer,  commissioned  by  the  governor  of  Georgia,  of  a 
higher  grade  than  the  Confederate  general  now  on  duty- here,  shall 
claim  the  command.  I desire  the  views  of  the  Department,  that  I may 
act  with  promptness  and  feel  assured  that  my  action  will  be  approved. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  LAWTOK, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Savannah,  November  1,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War,  EicJimondj  Va. : 

Dear  Sir  : I have  to-day  written  you  an  official  letter  in  reference  to 
the  prospect  of  a major-general  of  the  State  of  Georgia  being  ordered 


Chap.  XV.l 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


307 


by  the  governor  to  this  coast.  Pardon  me  for  using  the  vehicle  of  a 
private  note  to  convey  some  facts  which  I did  not  wisli  to  communicate 
more  formally.  Governor  Brown  has  suddenly  shown  a disi)osition  to 
exercise  a good  deal  of  authority  over,  and  claim  much  credit  for,  the 
coast  defense,  and  his  desire  now  is  to  make  such  appointments  as  will 
secure  the  control  to  him  in  case  of  an  attack.  He  was  anxious  to 
appoint  Colonel  Mercer  major-general,  so  as  to  secure  it  through  him; 
but  Colonel  Mercer  would  not  lend  himself  to  the  arrangement.  Hence 
my  urgent  dispatch  in  reference  to  his  appointment  in  the  Confederate 
service,  and  I was  much  gratified  to  find  by  your  reply  that  the  appoint- 
ment was  made.  It  is  now  well  understood  that  Governor  Brown  will 
at  once  appoint  General  W.  H.  T.  Walker  a major-general,  and  his  com- 
mission will  no  doubt  bear  date  before  the  time  that  this  note  will  reach 
you.  General  Walker  is  an  old  friend  of  mine,  and  under  other  circum- 
stances I could  have  no  objections  whatever  to  serving  under  him,  as 
he  is  several  years  my  senior,  but  I fear  that  the  feelings  with  which 
he  has  now  left  the  Confederate  service,  fomented  by  the  temper  which 
Governor  Brown  has  (in  the  past  at  least)  exhibited  towards  the  War 
Department,  might  cause  great  embarrassment  here,  if  he  is  permitted 
to  assume  command  under  State  authority.  Besides,  after  passing 
through  the  labor,  the  anxiety,  the  alarms,  and  complaints  of  the 
people  on  the  coast,  I would  regret  to  see  the  results  pass  from  my 
control,  when  we  are  comparatively  in  a condition  to  receive  the  enemy. 
If  it  must  pass  into  other  hands,  I would  gladly  receive  an  order  for 
service  in  some  other  dei3artment. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  LAWTOII. 


Charleston,  November  1,  1861. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Milton, 

Tallahassee^  Fla.: 

Sir  ; You  have,  I presume,  been  officially  informed  from  the  War-De- 
partment of  my  appointment  to  the  command  of  the  Military  Depart- 
ment of  East  and  Middle  Florida.  I accordingly  write  to  put  myself 
in  correspondence  with  your  excellency,  and  to  advise  the  adoption  of 
such  preliminary  measures  for  the  defense  of  that  portion  of  the  State 
as  may  very  well  be  commenced  in  anticipation  of  my  arrival  to  take 
command  in  person.  I am  not  accurately  informed  as  to  the  number 
of  troops  now  in  the  field  in  that  portion  of  Florida.  The  force  which, 
in  my  judgment,  with  the  lights  now  before  me,  will  be  required  cannot 
fall  short  of  7,000  men,  of  all  arms,  and  I would  respectfully  suggest 
the  propriety  of  at  once  calling  for  a sufficient  number  of  regiments 
to  make  up  that  force. 

Fernandina  (or  Amelia  Island)  is  obviously  the  point  most  likely  to 
become  the  object  of  the  enemy^s  first  attack,  and  I have  accordingly 
already  taken  steps  for  its  better  protection.  An  engineer  officer  of  the 
corps  of  this  State,  a gentleman  of  skill  and  experience,  kindly  put  at 
my  service  by  Governor  Pickens,  is  now  under  orders  for  that  place  and 
on  his  way  there,  with  instructions  from  me  for  his  guidance,  and  author- 
ity to  make  such  alterations  and  additions  to  the  batteries  already 
erected  there  as  may  seem  to  be  immediately  called  for  for  their  greater 
strength  and  security. 

I am  organizing  my  staff,  and  hope  to  be  able  to  proceed  to  Florida 
by  the  10th  of  this  month.  Meanwhile  I shall  be  glad  to  hear  from 


308  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  xr. 

your  excellency,  and  to  receive  any  suggestions  you  may  have  to  make 
at  this  city. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TRAPIEE, 

Brigadier- General,* 

[Indorsement.] 

Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee,  Fla.,  November  5,  1861. 

To  the  Secretary  of  War: 

Will  the  President  receive  two  more  infantry  regiments  in  this  State, 
for  twelve  months^  service,  under  command  of  General  Trapier,  the 
companies  to  be  raised  by  me,  and  when  i reported  ready  the  President 
to  appoint  the  field  officers  ? I do  not  think  it  possible  to  raise  immedi- 
ately more  than  two  regiments  in  this  State.  If  other  forces  are  needed, 
therefore  the  necessity  of  the  new  military  department  recently  sug- 
gested by  me. 

Yery  respectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor  of  Florida, 


Eichmond,  November  2,  1861. 

Governor  Pickens, 

Columbia,  S,  C,: 

Will  send  dispatches  and  give  you  re-enforcements  with  speed  as  soon 
as  I know  that  your  coast  is  actually  the  point  of  attack. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Executive  Department, 

Tallahassee,  October  31  {via  Columbus,  November  2),  1861. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

The  steamer  Salvor,  owned  and  commanded  by  James  McKay,  of 
Tampa,  has  been  captured  by  the  enemy  on  the  quicksand  between 
Tortugas  and  Key  West.  Cargo,  21,000  stand  of  arms,  100  boxes  of 
revolvers,  6 rifled  cannon,  and  ammunition. 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor, 


Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 


Wilmington,  November  2,  1861. 


I promised  Governor  Pickens  if  he  would  help  me  to  return  the  favor 
in  case  South  Carolina  was  attacked.  He  says  the  fleet  will  attack 
Port  Eoyal. . In  that  event  will  you  justify  me  in  sending  one  or  two 
regiments  and  a field  battery  ? 

J.  E.  ANDEESON, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


309 


Eichmond,  November  4,  1861. 

Oeneral  Joseph  K.  Anderson, 

Wilmington,  N,  G,: 

As  soon  as  Governor  Pickens  informs  you  that  South  Carolina  is 
attacked,  you  may  send  him  all  the  aid  that  you  can  possibly  spare. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Savannah,  November  4,  1861. 

J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War : 

The  enemy^s  fleet  concentrating  between  Savannah  Eiver  and  Port 
Eoyal.  Point  of  attack  still  doubtful.  More  than  twenty  vessels  in 
sight. 

A.  E.  LAWTON, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Charleston,  November  4,  1861. 

Oeneral  Cooper, 

Adjutant-  General : 

Enemy’s  fleet  concentrating  between  Tybee  and  Port  Eoyal.  Have 
started  re  enforcements  to  General  Drayton.  Am  occupying  the  coun- 
try inland  with  cavalry,  and  concentrating  the  force  here  to  re  enforce 
either  Drayton  or  Lawton.  Desire  authority  for  General  Anderson  to 
re-enforce  me.  Not  much  fear  of  any  landing  north  of  Edisto. 

E.  S.  EIPLEY. 


Charleston,  November  5,  1861. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Forty-one  vessels  reported  off  Beaufort.  Attack  imminent.  Have 
requested  General  Lawton  to  re-enforce  Hilton  Head  with  from  500  to 
1,000  men,  and  have  requested  General  Anderson  to  send  me  two  regi- 
ments and  a field  battery.  Will  you  confirm  the  requests?  Shall  start 
in  person  as  soon  as  reserve  is  organized,  and  attack  as  soon  after  they 
land  as  I can  reach  them. 

E.  S.  EIPLEY. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  206.  I Richmond,  November  5,  1861. 

* * * * * * # 

XII.  The  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  East  Florida  are 
constituted  a military  department,  and  General  E.  E.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army, 
is  assigned  to  its  command. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


310  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Goldsborough,  November  6,  1861. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

The  following  letter  has  just  reached  me,  having  been  picked  up  near 
the  wreck  of  the  steamer  Union,  addressed  by  Louis  H.  Pelouze,  acting 
assistant  adjutant-general,  to  the  captain  of  that  steamer : 

In  the  event  of  your  transport  being  separated  from  the  fleet,  you  will  proceed  to 
Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  and  report  to  the  quartermaster  of  that  port. 

E.  C.  GATLm, 
Brigadier-  General* 


Columbia,  November  6,  1861. 

Hon.  Mr.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

As  I anticipated,  they  have  passed  the  batteries,  and  will  take  Beau- 
fort. My  difficulty  is  in  want  of  arms.  I gave  out  the  last  to  arm  the 
4,000  recently  mustered  in.  I cannot  rely  on  half  armed  men  ordered 
out,  except  to  defend  the  railroad.  If  I cannot  get  arms,  can  you  not 
spare  Gregg’s  regiment  from  Suffolk,  and  order  it  immediately  to  Poco- 
taligo,  or  near  there  See  if  any  troops  there  at  present.  All  to  report 
to  General  Lee. 

F.  W.  PICKEJS^S. 


Charleston,  November  6,  1861. 

S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General : 

General  Drayton  telegraphs  from  Fort  Walker  at  11  p.  m.  yesterday: 

No  one  wounded  here ; only  3 slightly  at  Bay  Point.  Enemy  threat- 
ened another  attack  this  afternoon,  but  withdrew  on  firing  four  or 
five  shots  at  them.  Now  about  fifty  sail  within  4 or  5 miles,  several 
brigs,  large  transports.”  De  Saussure’s  regiment  I trust  reached  Dray- 
ton this  morning,  and  hope  that  General  Lawton  has  re-enforced  him 
with  1,000  men  from  Savannah.  One  regiment  from  Wilmington  ex- 
pected to  arrive  momentarily  here.  Have  arranged  transportation  by 
Savannah  Eailroad,  and  hope  to  have  steamers  to  transport  a large  force 
to  attack  speedily,  should  he  effect  a landing. 

E.  S.  EIPLEY. 


Executive  Department, 
Milledgeville^  Ga.,  November  7,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War^  Bichmondj  Va. : 

Sir  : I herewith  transmit  to  your  Department  copy  of  letter  received 
by  me  from  his  excellency  the  governor  of  Florida,  informing  me  that 
he  has  “ recommended  to  the  President  and  Secretary  of  War  the  estab- 
lishment of  a military  department,  to  be  composed  of”  certain  counties 
of  Georgia,  Alabama,  and  Florida.* 

While  I am  not  fully  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  establishing  the 
new  military  department  proposed  by  the  able  and  patriotic  executive 
of  Florida,  I have  no  objection  to  its  establishment  should  the  President 


See  Milton  to  Brown,  October  31,  p.  304. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  311 

and  War  Department  deem  it  advisable  to  carry  out  the  recommenda- 
tion of  Governor  Milton. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JOSEPH  E.  BROWN. 


WiLMiNGrTON,  N’ovember  7,  18G1, 


Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  sent  one  regiment  and  one  field  battery  to  Charleston,  and 
await  such  certain  information  of  attack  as  will  justify  me  in  sending 
more  troops  under  your  instructions. 

J.  R.  ANDERSON, 
Brigadier • General^  Commanding. 


Savannah,  November  8,  18G1. 

J.  P.  Benjamin: 

The  enemy  has  taken  complete  possession  of  Port  Royal  entrance  and 
now  contfbls  the  inland  navigation  at  that  point.  I sent  1,000  men  to 
re-enforce  General  Drayton  on  Hilton  Head.  They  have  returned  to  me 
with  but  few  casualties,  having  been  in  the  hottest  of  the  fight. 

A.  R.  LAWTON, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Columbia,  November  8,  18G1. 

Hon.  Mr.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

I telegraphed  you  this  morning  to  ask  lor  Gregg^s  regiment  to  report 
at  Pocotaligo,  but  have  no  reply.  Ripley  is  absent  from  Charleston. 
Telegraph  me  for  Captain  McCord^s  company  to  report.  It  is  readjL 
A fine  company  just  received  for  Hampton’s  Legion,  but  I armed  it 
to-day  to  send  to  Beaufort.  Do  give  me  an  order  for  Coit’s  company 
also.  All  our  regiments  are  safe  from  Hilton  Head  and  Bay  Point. 
We  must  defend  Charleston,  and  I have  no  arms  for  any  more  men,  but 
have  ordered  out  a large  reserve  to  meet  at  Gillisonville  or  Pocotaligo. 
Let  me  know  if  Lee  is  in  command,  so  I may  order  troops  to  him. 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Coosawhatchie, 
November  8,  18G1  {via  Pocotaligo). 

General  Cooper, 

Adjutant-  General : 

Enemy  attacked  forts  in  Port  Royal  yesterday  morning.  After  a 
hard  cannonade  silenced  Fort  Walker.  General  Drayton  withdrew  his 
troops  last  night  to  main  line.  No  i)ositive  news  from  Bay  Point,  but 
the  enemy  have  passed  in  and  have  i^ossession  of  Port  Royal.  General 
Lee  arrived. 


R.  S.  RIPLEY. 


312  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


General  Orders,  ) ‘ Headquarters, 

No.  1.  ) CoosawhatcMe,  S.  G.,  November  8,  1861. 

I.  In  pursuance  of  -instructions  from  the  War  Department,  General 
R.  E.  Lee,  G.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the  military  department 
composed  of  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  East  Florida. 

II.  Capt.  T.  Ai  Washington,  0.  S.  Army,  is  announced  as  adjutant- 
general  of  the  department;  Oapt.  Walter  H.  Taylor,  Provisional  Army, 
as  assistant  adjutant- general ; Oapt.  Joseph  O.  Ives,  0.  S.  Army,  as 
chief  engineer ; Lieut.  Gol.  William  G.  Gill,  Provisional  Army,  as  ord- 
nance officer,  and  Mr.  Joseph  Manigault  as  volunteer  aide-de-camp  to 
the  commanding  general. 

* * * * * * # 


By 


order  of  General  Lee : 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

Captain^  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General^  C.  8.  Army. 


Headquarters, 
CoosawhatcMe,  November  9,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  On  the  evening  of  the  7th,  on  my  way  to  the  entran(je  of  Port 
Eoyal  Harbor,  I met  General  Ripley,  returning  from  the  battery  at  the 
north  end  of  Hilton  Head,  called  Fort  Walker.  He  reported  that  the 
enemy’s  fleet  had  passed  the  batteries  and  entered  the  harbor.  Nothing 
could  then  be  done  but  to  make  arrangements  to  withdraw  the  troops 
from  the  batteries  to  prevent  their  capture  and  save  the  public  property. 
The  troops  were  got  over  during  the  night,  but  their  tents,  clothing,  and 
provisions  were  mostly  lost,  and  all  the  guns  left  in  the  batteries.  Gen- 
eral Drayton’s  command  was  transferred  from  Fort  Walker  to  Bluffton; 
Colonel  D Lino  van  t’s  from  Bay  Point  to  Saint  Helena  Island  and  thence 
to  Beaufort.  . There  are  neither  batteries  nor  guns  for  the  defense  of 
Beaufort,  and  Colonel  Dunovant  crossed  Port  Royal  Ferry  yesterday, 
and  was  halted  at  Garden’s  Corner.  ^ General  Drayton  reports  he  has 
but  955  men  with  him,  and  no  fleld' battery,  the  troops  from  Georgia 
that  were  on  the  island  having  returned  to  Savannah  without  orders. 
Colonel  Dunovant’s  regiment  is  in  as  destitute  a condition  as  General 
Drayton’s  command,  as  they  were  obliged  to  leave  everything  behind, 
and  number  between  600  and  700  men.  I wrote  to  General  Lawton  to 
endeavor  to  withdraw  the  guns  from  the  battery  at  the  south  end  of 
Hilton  Head.  I have  received  as  yet  no  report  from  him  nor  any  official 
account  from  the  commanders  of  the  batteries.  I fear  every  gun  has 
been  lost.  At  present  I am  endeavoring  to  collect  troops  to  defend  the 
line  of  the  railroad  and  to  push  forward  the  defenses  of  Charleston  and 
Savannah. 

Colonel  Clingman’s  regiment  of  North  Carolina  volunteers,  six  com- 
panies of  Colonel  Edwards’  regiment  of  South  Carolina  volunteers, 
and  Colonel  Martin’s  South  Carolina  cavalry  compose  the  force  now 
here.  The  enemy,  having  complete  possession  of  the  water  and  inland 
navigation,  commands  all  the  islands  on  this  coast,  and  threatens  both 
Savannah  and  Charleston,  and  can  come  in  his  boats  witliiii  4 miles  of 
this  place.  His  sloops  of  war  and  large  steamers  can  come  up  Broad 
River  to  Mackay’s  Point,  the  mouth  of  the  Pocotaligo,  and  his  gun- 
boats can  ascend  some  distance  up  the  Coosawhatchie  and  Tulifiny.  We 
have  no  guns  that  can  resist  their  batteries,  and  have  no  resource  but  to 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  313 

prepare  to  meet  them  iu  the  field.  They  have  lauded  on  Hilton  Head. 
Their  fleet  is  in  Port  Eoyal  Harbor.  Four  of  their  gunboats  are  reported 
to  be  approaching  Beaufort.  I fear  there  are  but  few  State  troops  ready 
for  the  field.  The  garrisons  of  the  forts  at  Charleston  and  Savannah 
and  on  the  coast  cannot  be  removed  from  the  batteries  while  ignorant 
of  the  designs  of  the  enemy.  I am  endeavoring  to  bring  into  the  field 
such  light  batteries  as  can  be  prepared. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  F.  LFF, 

. General,  Commanding. 


Eichmond,  November  9,  1861. 

Governor  Pickens, 

Columbia,  8.  C. : 

General  Lee  is  in  command  of  the  department  embracing  South  Caro- 
lina and  Georgia,  as  well  as  Eastern  Florida.  This  was  done  in  order 
to  enable  him  to  concentrate  all  our  forces  at  any  point  that  might  be 
attacked.  It  is  not  necessary  to  send  you  regiments  from  this  distance, 
but  we  will  order  more  troops  to  your  aid  from  North  Carolina.  You 
may  retain  all  armed  troops  in  South  Carolina  and  all  unarmed  troops 
that  can  be  made  useful  in  batteries.  General  Lee  has  full  power  to 
act,  and  it  would  be  well  to  send  him  a copy  of  this  dispatch,  that  he 
may  not  scruple  in  using  all  the  means  of  the  Government  within  his 
reach  for  your  defense. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  November  10,  1861. 

Secretary  of  War  : • 

Circumstances  may  soon  arise  to  make  it  necessary  that  martial  law 
should  be  proclaimed  in  this  city.  I ask  for  authority  to  take  the  step. 

J.  H.  TEAPIEE. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Georoia, 

Savannah,  November  10,  1861. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Coosawhatchie.,  8.  C. : 

General  : I had  the  honor  to  receive  yesterday  your  letter  of  the 
8th  instant,*  covering  extract  of  Special  Orders,  No.  206,  from  head- 
quarters of  the  Army  [A.  and  I.  G.  O.,  November  5,  1861]. 

Permit  me  to  express  my  extreme  gratification  at  the  contents  of  this 
extract,  which  assures  me  that  I am  to  have  the  benefit  of  your  military 
skill  and  experience  in  the  present  emergency ; no  one  can  appreciate 
the  necessity  for  such  assistance  more  than  I do.  I earnestly  desire  a 
personal  interview  with  you  at  the  earliest  practicable  moment,  and 
trust  that  it  may  be  in  your  power  to  visit  Savannah,  if  only  to  remain 
here  one  night  and  return  to  Carolina  the  next  morning.  The  present 
arrangements  of  the  railway  trains  will  make  it  very  convenient  for  you 
to  accomplish  such  a visit.  It  would  afford  me  great  pleasure  to  call 
on  you  at  your  present  headquarters  and  there  confer  fully  with  you, 
but  scarcely  feel  justified  in  absenting  myself  from  my  command  at  this 


Not  found. 


314  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

critical  juncture,  even  for  the  space  of  twelve  hours,  unless  you  attach 
much  importance  to  it,  and  cannot  visit  Savannah. 

The  number  of  troops  recently  received  by  me  in  a comparatively 
unorganized  condition,  and  the  changes  now  suddenly  made  in  the 
posting  and  disposition  of  them  to  meet  the  movements  of  the  enemy, 
together  with  the  great  pressure  at  this  moment  on  each  department 
of  the  staff,  will  necessarily  cause  delay  in  furnishing  you  with  an  accu- 
rate and  forward  statement  of  the  troops,  guns,  ammunition,  &c.,  under 
my  command.  In  the  mean  time  I have  the  pleasure  to  state,  for  your 
information,  that  my  command  consists  of  about  5,500  men,  mustered 
into  the  service  of  the  Confederate  States,  and  distributed  along  the 
coast.  About  2,000,  under  command  of  Brigadier-General  Mercer,  are 
stationed  at  and  near  Brunswick.  The  remainder,  say  3,500  men,  are 
on  this  side  of  the  Altamaha  River,  and  all  but  500  of  this  number  within 
20  miles  of  Savannah. 

Having  to-day  ordered  up  all  the  troops  from  Tybee  Island  (about 
1,000),  I will  have  about  2,800  men  near  the  city  that  can  move  promptly, 
exclusive  of  450  at  Fort  Pulaski  and  200  at  Green  Island  battery,  on 
Yernon  River,  protecting  an  important  landing  about  12  miles  in  rear 
of  Savannah. 

Of  the  5,500  troops  under  my  command,  about  500  are  cavalry  and  the 
rest  infantry,  with  the  exception  of  three  field  batteries  (two  of  these 
pieces  were  sent  to  Hilton,  with  the  re-enforcements  to  General  Dray- 
ton, and  lost). 

The  cavalry  are  very  well  mounted  and  armed ; the  light  batteries 
have  a limited  supply  of  horses,  and  but  moderately  well  drilled.  The 
infantry  are  made  up  chiefly  of  raw  troops,  though  all  substantially 
armed ; about  2,000  of  them  are  very  well  drilled  and  disciplined. 

As  all  the  volunteer  corps  in  and  about  Savannah  have  been  mustered 
into  service,  they  are  included  in  the  5,500  j but  there  are  about  3,000 
men,  armed  after  a fashion,  under  State  organization,  now  in  camp  on 
the  line  of  railway,  and  can  be  called  to  Savannah  in  a few  hours. 
AVith  the  assistance  of  the  naval  officers  we  are  now  blocking  up  the 
channel  in  several  places,  and  hope  for  good  results. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  R.  LAWTON, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


CoosAWHATCHiE,  November  10,  1861. 

Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : 

Dispatch  from  Governor  Pickens  received.  Am  I at  liberty  to  employ 
troops  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  passing  through  the  States  to 
Virginia? 

R.  E.  LEE. 


Richmond,  November  11,  1861. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Goosawhatchie  {via  Pocotaligo) : 

You  are  authorized  to  use  the  entire  resources  of  South  Carolina 
and  Georgia  that  are  under  control  of  the  Confederate  Government  for 
your  defense,  whether  troops,  munitions  of  war,  or  supplies  of  every 
kind. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


315 


Milledgeville,  Kovemher  li,  18G1. 

J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

The  city  of  Savannah  is  menaced  by  the  enemy,  and  we  are  in  great 
need  of  arms.  You  have  nearly  all  our  guns.  I request  that  you  send 
to  Savannah  immediately  the  brigade  of  State  troops  trained  here  under 
command  of  General  W.  Phillips,  now  known  in  the  Confederate  service 
as  the  Phillips  Legion,  Colonels  Wofford  and  Boyd’s  regiments,  and 
Stovall’s  battalion ; also  regiment  of  Georgia  regulars.  All  these  troops 
were  trained  at  the  State’s  expense  and  thoroughly  armed  by  her,  and 
her  safety  now  requires  their  services  with  their  arms.  Please  answer 
immediately. 

JOSEPH  E.  BROWK. 


Columbia,  November  11,  1861. 

Hon.  Mr.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

There  are  910  Enfield  rifies  in  Charleston  not  paid  for  by  Colonel  Cun- 
ningham. If  I can  get  them  for  troops  mustered  into  the  Confederate 
service  can  I do  so  ? I would  like  to  know  the  number  of  armed  men  I 
can  rely  on  to  be  sent  me.  I have  no  arms ; if  I had  I would  ask  for 
none.  The  great  battle  will  be  near  Stono,  but  cannot  take  place  until 
they  are  largely  re-enforced,  some  weeks  hence.  I could  raise  20,000 
men  if  I only  had  the  arms.  Mr.  Lee  has  been  acting  commissary  here, 
but  has  no  direct  authority,  and  cannot  act  without  constant  permission. 
There  is  a necessity  for  an  assistant  commissary. 

F.  W.  PICKEN^S. 


Hdqrs.  Mil.  Dept.  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

Fort  Clinch^  Amelia  Island^  Fla.,  November  12,  1861. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War^  G.  S.  A.,  Richmond^  Ya, : 

Sir  : I had  the  honor  to  receive  yours  of  the  26th  ultimo  by  the  hands 
of  Captain  Buckman,  and  strictly  adhered  to  the  instructions  therein 
contained  until  the  present  emergency  arose,  which  has  thrown  on  me  a 
heavy  responsibility,  as  unexpected  as  it  has  been  onerous  and  disa- 
greeable. A full  report  of  my  acts  and  doings  I ask  to  submit  to  you, 
and  which  I trust,  under  the  circumstances,  you  will  indorse  and  sanction. 
Let  me  iiremise  by  stating  that  General  Trapier  has  not  yet  assumed 
command  of  this  department,  and  consequently  I am  in  command  of  this 
department.  I cannot  now  state  when  General  Trapier  will  be  here,  as 
I cannot  calculate  how  the.  disaster  at  Port  Royal  may  infiuence  the 
movements  of  our  Government.  But  to  the  point.  In  my  last  communi- 
cation I addressed  you  on  the  subject  of  the  battalion  of  artillery,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Holland  in  command  and  Major  Hopkins  second  in  com- 
mand. They  were  presented  in  this  shape  by  Governor  Perry,  and 
received  by  Brigadier-General  Grayson,  deceased,  then  in  command  of 
this  department. 

On  the  28th  day  of  September,  A.  D.  1861  (see  copy  of  order  of  Brig- 
adier-General Grayson),  Brigadier-General  Grayson  also  ordered  them 
supplied  by  the  quartermaster  and  commissary  departments  at  this^ 
place.  Four  companies  were  received  in  this  way,  and,  stating  that  the 
mustering  officers  would  soon  muster  them  into  the  service  formally,  under 


316  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

this  order  they  have  continued  in  service.  Last  week,  however,  an  order 
arrived  from  Governor  Milton  to  disband  them,  they — the  battalion — 
regarding  that  they  were  not  in  the  State  service  but  in  the  Confederate 
service.  In  the  mean  time  the  Port  Eoyal  affair  occurred  on  Thursday 
last.  The  United  States  war  vessels  are  in  sight  every  day,  though  not 
more  than  one  at  a time,  evidently  reconnoitering  our  coast  and  condi- 
tion. This  battalion  of  four  companies  on  Saturday  offered  to  go  in  the 
service  in  any  shape  I might  name,  but  if  not  mustered  at  once  they 
would  leave  the  island  or  accept  a proposition  which  had  been  made  by 
an  officer  in  Georgia  to  receive  them  there  into  service  in  Georgia.  It  is 
only  one  mile  and  a quarter  from  this  (Amelia  Island)  to  Cumberland, 
in  Georgia.  The  four  companies  composing  this  battalion— Captain 
Buckman’s,  Eichards’,  Brink’s,  and  Kendrick’s — are  well  drilled.  They 
are  armed  with  muskets,  and  I supplied  them  with  five  field  pieces,  and 
since  have  received  from  our  Government  two  beautiful  6-pounders,  rifled- 
bore  field  pieces,  carrying  some  12  or  14  pounds  elongated  shot  and  shell. 
Placed  iti  this  situation,  in  imminent  peril,  with  only,  in  the  aggregate 
of  the  Third  Eegiment  at  this  post,  659  men,  no  soldiers  that  I could  call 
from  other  posts,  I have  mustered  these  companies  into  the  Confederate 
States  service  as  light  infantry,  and  will  accept  two  companies  more, 
making  in  all  six  companies  in  the  battalion  for  twelve  months  from  the 
28th  day  of  September  last,  the  day  on  which  four  of  the  companies 
were  received  by  General  Grayson. 

I have  also  notified  proper  parties  that  horses  will  be  received  on  the 
same  terms  as  in  the  cavalry  service  for  the  purpose  of  working  the 
field  artillery.  I am  fully  aware  that  it  is  irregular  to  use  infantry  as 
field  artillery;  still,  the  regiments  which  I have  the  honor  to  command 
were  mustered  into  the  service  as  light  infantry,  and  now  they  are  con- 
verted into  heavy  artillery  in  part.  I would  ask  that  this  battalion  be 
increased  into  a regiment.  We  want  them ; we  really  need  them.  This 
island  is  20  miles  long  on  the  sea-shore.  I have,  exclusive  of  the  bat- 
talion, only  659  soldiers  to  defend  it.  When  in  surf-boats  a landing  can 
be  effected  anywhere,  and  small  gunboats  can  come  in  in  the  rear  from 
Georgia  or  from  the  south  end,  there  should  be  here  at  least  2,000 
troops,  stationed  here  permanently.  Allow  me  also  to  state  that  I do 
not  believe  it  possible  to  raise  ten  men  in  this  State  who  will  enlist  for 
the  term  of  three  years  or  during  the  war.  This  was  a strong  reason 
why  I ordered  this  battalion  to  be  mustered  into  the  service.  I find,  sir, 
that  it  will  not  do  to  rely  on  State  troops  to  defend  our  country.  There 
should  be  but  one  system  of  defense,  and  that  should  be  originated 
and  organized  and  systematized  by  the  Confederate  States  Army.  I 
hope,  sir,  that  my  course  will  receive  the  sanction  of  the  Government 
which  I have  the  honor  to  serve,  and  I assure  you  nothing  was  ever 
more  painful  to  me  in  my  life  than  this  of  being  so  situated  when  I felt 
compelled  to  act  without  having  the  proper  authority ; and  I beg  leave 
to  refer  you  to  Messrs.  Ward,  Morton,  and  Owens — our  Delegates  in  Con- 
gress— who  know  my  character,  and  that  it  is  not  my  disposition  or  na- 
ture to  assume  unauthorized  and  undelegated  power.  Should  the  Gov- 
ernment sustain  my  acts  in  this  matter  it  will  be  a source  of  pleasure 
and  gratification,  but  if  condemned,  then  my  ruortification  will  be  most 
acute.  Still,  I will  have  the  consolation  of  knowing  that  I was  actuated 
by  the  purest  and  most  patriotic  motives.  Ex-Senator  Yuleeand  every 
man  with  whom  I have  had  any  conversation  say  that  my  course  was 
dictated  by  necessity ; still  I hope  soon  to  have  your  approval. 

My  adjutant,  Lieut.  J.  O.  A.  Gerry,  will  inform  you  particularly  as  to 
our  defenses,  ammunition,  &c.  We  have  at  this  point,  the  northeast 


Chap.  XV.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  317 

end  of  Amelia  Island,  at  and  near  Fort  Olincli,  eight  32-pounders ; two 
24  and  one  32  pounder  rifle,  mounted ; one  lO-inch  rifle  and  three  8-inch 
columbiads,  nearly  mounted.  We  are  hard  at  work  placing  these  last 
in  position,  and  we  hope  by  the  end  of  this  week  to  have  them  in  fight- 
ing trim.  We  have  about  100  rounds  for  each  gun.  So  soon  as  these 
guns  are  up  I have  little  fear  that  the  enemy  can  come  in  through  the 
main  channel  j at  least  I shall  not  believe  it  until  I have  a practical 
demonstration  of  the  fact.  With  proper  batteries  at  the  south  end  of  the 
island — say  one  S-inch  columbiad  and  four  32  or  24  pounders,  and 
infantry  enough,  say  2,000  in  all — I do  not  think  the  enemy  could  even 
land,  or  if  they  did  land,  we  could  make  them  embark.  We  need  par- 
ticularly field  artillery,  which  could  be  carried  with  great  rapidity  from 
point  to  point  over  the  island  or  along  the  beach ; and  nature  has  done 
much  in  making  breastworks  all  along  the  beach  in  the  shapeof  sand  hills, 
behind  which  not  only  field  artillery  could  be  maneuvered  to  great  advan- 
tage, but  also  musketry,  though  in  this  respect  our  muskets  are  the  old 
United  States  musket,  and  not  an  efficient  weapon  by  any  means. 

For  the  port  of  Saint  Augustine  I need  everything  in  the  way  of  de- 
fense except  the  guns.  However,  I shall  write  you  or  the  proper  offi- 
cer fully  on  this  topic  in  the  even^  General  Trapier  should  not  arrive 
soon.  We  heard  distinctly  the  firing  at  Port  Royal  at  this  place  on  last 
Thursday  for  about  five  hours,  and  the  news  of  its  occupancy  has  sad- 
dened us,  but  at  the  same  time  determined  us  to  stand  more  firmly  at 
our  post,  as  we  regard  an  attack  here  as  imminent.  On  Friday  a war 
steamer  appeared  in  the  offing,  three-masted.  On  Saturday  another, 
and  on  Sunday  and  Monday  a sloop  of  war.  To-day  none  have  come 
in  sight.  They  come  near  the  west  end,  run  south,  and  usually  go  as 
near  the  shore  as  3 miles  at  the  south- end,  showing  that  they  are  re- 
connoitering  and  making  a critical  exi  mination  of  our  defenses,  &c. 
They  have  now  cut  off  all  water  communication  with  Charleston,  and 
their  next  object,  I apprehend,  will  be  to  break  up  the  inland  naviga- 
tion between  this  and  Savannah,  the  benefits  of  which  to  us  are  incal- 
culable. I hope  our  Government  will  adopt  some  more  speedy  means 
of  raising  troops  for  the  Confederate  States.  I could  raise  all  the  troops 
necessary  for  our  defense  in  one  week  from  this  time  if  they  could  go 
immediately  into  the  Confederate  States  service  for  twelve  months  •,  but 
when  raised  by  the  State  the  whole  military  body  has  been  attempted 
to  be  painted  with  the  political  hues  of  the  poor  politicians,  and  our  citi- 
zens are  very  averse  to  going  through  the  chrysalis  condition  of  State 
service,  and  after  being  pulled,  hauled,  and  packed,  as  a gambler  would 
his  cards,  for  two  or  three  months,  then  turned  over  to  the  Confederacy, 
unarmed,  undisciplined,  and  undrilled,  their  time  wasted  and  their  coun- 
try unbenefited.  There  has  been  in  Florida  East  too  much  politics 
mixed  with  the  military  in  organizing  the  regiments. 

Again  expressing  my  most  sincere  and  deep  regret  that  circumstances 
have  compelled  me  to  act  without  the  propei^  authority,  and  which  ne- 
cessity alone  could  or  should  justify,  and  hoiking  soon  to  have  the  sanc- 
tion of  my  country  to  the  course  I have  pursued,  I leave  the  matter  in 
your  hands.  I fear  I have  already  tried  your  patience,  but  your  name  is 
so  familiar,  though  not  acquainted  personally  with  you,  I feel  that  I am 
addressing  a friend  to  every  man  who  is  true  to  his  country,  and  I ask 
you  to  mete  out  to  mein  this  matter  that  same  measure  you  would  have 
meted  to  you  under  similar  circumstances.  God  knows  I have  worked 
harder  here  than  lever  did  in  my  life,  and  that  my  only  motive  has  been 
to  serve  my  country.  I volunteered  and  was  a private  in  the  ranks 
until  this  (the  Third)  regiment  was  formed,  when  I was  elected  a colonel, 


318  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

and  to-day  would  have  been  a private,  had  I not  been  elected  to  the 
colonelcy  of  the  regiment. 

Trusting  that  our  country  may  soon  be  delivered  from  its  present 
troubles,  I subscribe  myself,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  DIL WORTH, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Department. 


Richmond,  Novemher  12,  1861. 

Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Milledgeville,  Ga. : 

There  are  reasons  of  public  policy  which  would  make  it  suicidal  to 
comply  with  your  request  to  withdraw  Georgia  troops  from  the  enemy’s 
front  at  this  moment.  This  Government  will  co-operate  with  all  its 
power  for  the  defense  of  your  State,  but  it  must  do  so  in  the  manner  it 
deems  most  certain  to  produce  the  desired  effect  of  repulsing  the  enemy 
at  all  points,  and  cannot  scatter  its  armies  into  fragments  at  the  request 
of  each  governor  who  may  be  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  his  people.  Be 
assured  that  no  effort  will  be  spared  to  aid  you,  and  be  good  enough  to 
communicate  your  confidence  in  this  assurance  to  your  people,  thus 
allaying  all  needless  panic. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Richmond,  November  12,  1861. 

General  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Charleston^  S,  C.: 

General  Lee  has  now  command  of  the  whole  coast  of  Carolina  and 
Georgia.  I cannot  authorize  you  to  proclaim  martial  law.  Let  the 
governor  take  that  responsibility,  if  found  necessary.  If  the  enemy 
advance  to  attack  the  city,  of  course  the  city  will  then  become  a camp 
under  military  law,  if  the  necessities  of  its  defense  so  require. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Columbia,  November  13,  1861. 

President  Davis: 

Steel-clad  steamer  Fingal,  cargo  arms,  &c.,  just  run  the  blockade, 
and  safe  at  Savannah.  Now  please  send  me  an  order  for  arms,  as  it  is 
necessary.  I am  just  off  for  Charleston.  Arm  us,  and  we  are  safe. 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Savannah,  November  13,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Your  dispatch  refusing  to  send  back  any  of  Georgia’s  guns  with  her 
troops  is  forwarded  to  me  here.  You  said  a few  days  since  in  your 
dispatch  that  you  would  send  us  armed  troops  if  attacked.  A kind 
Providence  has  enabled  Major  Anderson  to  land  here  to-day  with  over 
10,000  Enfield  rifles  belonging  to  the  Confederacy.  I now  ask,  not  for 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  319 

men,  but  guns.  Let  us  have  5,000  of  these  in  place  of  5,000  of  the 
State’s  guns  now  in  vour  service.  Please  answer  immediately. 

JOSEPH  E.  BKOWK 


Eiciimond,  November  13,  1861. 

Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown,  Savannah: 

As  soon  as  I know  what  arms  I have  received  I will  give  to  Georgia 
troops  all  that  I can  possibly  spare  for  her  defense.  I beg  you  to 
remember  that  ten  other  governors  are  making  just  such  demands  as 
yourself,  and  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  complain  that  other  exposed 
points  should  also  be  provided  for.  I will  do  my  best,  if  not  prevented 
by  exaggerated  demands  which  I have  no  means  of  satisfying. 

J.  P.  BENJAMm, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Eichmond,  November  13,  1861. 

General  Lawton,  Savannah: 

Order  to  Savannah  all  the  unarmed  troops  offered  for  the  war  that 
are  or  can  be  mustered  into  our  service,  so  that  I may  arm  them  with 
rifles  from  the  Fingal  as  far  as  I can  possibly  spare  them.  I cannot 
consent  to  put  these  arms  into  the  hands  of  any  troops  mustered  for  a 
less  term  than  the  war. 

J.  P.  BENTJAMH^, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


• Eichmond,  November  13,  1861. 

Governor  Pickens,  Columbia^  S,  C, : 

Have  you  got  the  rifles  from  Eraser  & Co.  ? As  soon  as  I know  what 
number  of  arms  I have  received  by  the  Pingal,  I will  arm  your  troops 
with  every  musket  or  rifle  that  I can  possibly  spare. 

J.  P.  BEE^JAMIl!^^, 

- Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Tallahassee,  November  14,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

General  Traj)ier  has  not  arrived.  The  troops  and  munitions  of  war 
removed  from  Saint  Vincent’s  Island  and  works  destroyed.'  An  attack 
threatened  at  Apalachicola.  We  need  arms  and  munitions  of  war. 
With  them  we  can  hold  the  place.  A vessel  has  arrived  at  Savannah 
with  arms,  &c.  Authorize  me  by  telegraph  to  send  an  agent  to  get 
one  or  two  good  cannon  and  equipments  and  small-arms,  and  I will 
defend  Apalachicola  successfully.  Please  answer  immediately. 

JOHN  MILTON. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  November  14,  1861. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding  Department  of  South  Carolina^  &c, : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  report  of  the 
9th  instant,  not  very  encouraging  in  its  contents,  but  evidently  written 


320  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

before  you  bad  beeu  enabled  to  gather  in  all  the  information  necessary 
to  enable  you  fully  to  judge  of  tb^e  condition  of  your  department. 

Tbe  arrival  of  tbe  steamer  Fingal  at  this  critical  moment  is  very 
opportune,  and  altbougb  tbe  number  of  small-arms  received  is  smaller 
than  I bad  at  first  hoped,  it  is  no  contemptible  addition  to  our  means  of 
defense. 

Misled  by  a telegram  which  reported  you  to  be  at  Savannah,  I sent 
to  you  yesterday  at  that  point  the  following  dispatch,  which  I hope  was 
forwarded  to  you : 

Of  the  9,000  Enfield  rifles  received  by  the  Government  on  the  Fingal,  4,500  are 
assigned  to  your  command,  to  be  placed  by  you  iu  the  bauds  of  Georgia  and  South 
Carolina  troops  in  our  service  for  the  war.  Order  4,500  to  be  sent  immediately  to 
General  Albert  S.  Johnston  at  Nashville,  and  a few  hundred  will  remain,  which  please 
send  here.  Put  none  of  these  arms  in  the  hands  of  troops  not  enlisted  for  the  war. 
The  governor  of  Georgia  has  received  1,100  rifles  by  the  same  steamer,  so  that  you  will 
have  5,600  for  service  within  your  department. 

As  soon  as  I hear  what  further  supplies  we  have  on  the  Fingal  iu  the 
way  of  cannon,  &c.,  I will  appropriate  to  you  as  full  a share  as  I possibly 
can  of  whatever  you  may  desire  to  aid  your  defense.  I ordered  Col.  A. 
K.  Wright,  by  dispatch  yesterday,  to  proceed  at  once  to  Savannah  for 
aiding  the  coast  defense,  and,  as  this  is  a full  regiment,  for  the  war,  I 
doubt  not  you  will  find  it  expedient  to  arm  it  with  the  new  weapons. 
The  10,000  blankets  on  the  Fingal  have  been  ordered  here,  where  our 
troops  need  them  much  more  than  in  more  southern  latitudes.  It  is  the 
Presidents  wish  that  you  scruple  not  in  employing  every  governmental 
resource  within  your  reach,  even  troops  in  transit.  You  will,  however, 
scarcely  need  this,  for  most  of  these  troops  are  without  arms,  and  have 
been  ordered  here  to  receive  arms  collected  by  the  Potomac  Army  from 
various  sources.  I have  a long  letter  from  an  inhabitant  of  Charles- 
ton, signing  himself  John  H.  Eobertson,  informing  me  that  the  forts  in 
the  harbor  are  in  very  incompetent  hands.  The  writer  speaks  highly  of 
Captain  Ehett  as  a gentleman,  but  says  he  is  totally  without  the  exfieri- 
ence  necessary  for  so  important  a post.  Of  Captain  Wagner  he  speaks 
in  very  different  terms,  representing  him  to  be  not  only  incompetent, 
but  neglectful  and  dissipated,  never  spending  the  night  in  his  fort,  but 
coming  to  town  to  indulge  in  excesses  with  the  common  prostitutes.  Of 
course  this  is  for  your  private  information,  and  the  writer,  who  seems 
to  be  actuated  by  the  best  of  motives,  ought  not  to  be  exposed  to  the 
hostility  of  these  officers.  I know,  however,  your  habitual  vigilance, 
and  this  communication  was  perhaps  needless. 

Don’t  fail  to  keep  us  constantly  advised,  especially  of  your  wants,  and 
rely  on  my  very  best  efforts  to  support  you  with  the  whole  means  of 
the  Government  that  can  with  prudence  be  diverted  from  other  exposed 
points.  . 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BEFTJAMm, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Savannah,  November  14,  1861. 

J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I trust  you  will  let  us  have  as  many  of  the  guns  as  possible.  They 
landed*  here,  and  cannot  be  needed  worse  elsewhere.  There  are  four 
rifled  cannon.  Do  let  us  have  two  of  them  for  fort,  which  lacks  heavy 
guns.  Answer  at  Milledgeville. 


JOSEPH  E.  BROWN. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  321 

Eichmond,  November  14,  18G1. 

Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Milledgeville : 

Out  of  about  9,000  rifles,  I have  assigned  half  to  General  Lee’s  com- 
mand and  the  other  half  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston’s  command.  Gen- 
eral Lee  will  therefore  have  4,500,  which,  when  added  to  the  1,100  brought 
in  for  Georgia,  makes  5,600  arms  for  the  defense  of  Charleston  and  Sa- 
vannah. As  soon  as  I get  the  account  of  the  cannon  on  board  I will 
appropriate  to  the  same  purpose  every  piece  that  I can  fairly  assign  to 
your  coast.  I shall  know  in  a day  or  two  what  is  possible. 

J.  P.  BEXJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Charleston,  November  14,  1861. 

J.  P.  Benjamin: 

I have  just  learned  that  the  small-arms,  &c.,  on  the  Eingal  are  the 
property-  of  the  Confederate  Government.  General  Lee  is  now  here,  and 
has  made  requisition  on  me  for  five  regiments.  I have  the  men  ready, 
but  no  arms.  Will  you  send  me  an  order  for  them?  You  know  their 
situation,  and  will  surelv  helj)  us  in  ammunition. 

E.  W.  PICKENS. 


Eichmond,  November  14,  1861. 

Governor  Pickens, 

Charleston^  S.  G. : 

I have  assigned  to  General  Lee  4,500  of  the  arms  received  by  the 
Eingal,  being  half  of  all  that  are  for  us.  The  State  of  Georgia  has 
also  1,100  on  board,  so  that  General  Lee  will  have  5,600  for  arming  his 
department. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Hdqrs.  Eirst  Military  District,  Dept,  of  S.  C., 

Georgetown^  November  15,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  E.  Lee: 

General:  There  are  two  redoubts  near  the  mouth  of  Winyaw  Bay,  on 
Cat  and  South  Islands.  ' 

The  first  has  mounted  two  32-pounders,  50  rounds  each;  one  rifl(^  12- 
pounder,  50  rounds,  and  two  24-pounders,  150  rounds  each;  three  prin- 
cipal faces  nearly  completed;  two  bastions  in  rear,  and  curtain  entirely 
unfinished ; no  bomb-proof.  South  Island  redoubt,  four  24-pounders, 
125  rounds  each  ; one  rifle  6-pounder,  50  rounds ; one  18-pouuder,  125 
rounds  ; three  faces  finished,  still  open  in  rear ; bomb  proof  will  be  com- 
pleted in  ten  days ; garrisoned  by  320  men  of  Tenth  Eegiment.  There  are 
near  Georgetown,  of  Tenth  Eegiment,  565  men ; three  companies  cav- 
alry are  on  South  Island,  two  near  Georgetown,  135  men  ; one  company 
rifles  attached  to  Tenth  Eegiment,  for  local  duty  near  Georgetown,  50 
men ; one  section  light  artillery  on  Waccamaw'  Neck,  40  men — 1,110  men. 
I have  called  on  General  Harllee,  local  volunteers,  for  800 ; 280  have 
reported  for  duty ; 200  more  to  arrive  to-morrow;  480 — 1,590;  the  re- 
21  R R VOL  VI 


322  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  fCnAP.  xv. 


mainder^  320  cannot  be  here  under  a week.  The  1,110  men  are  well 
armed,  drilled,  and  equipped,  and  have  about  100  rounds  of  ammunition 
to  each  man.  The  480  are  badly  armed,  mostly  with  shot-guns,  are  un- 
drilled, fully  supplied  with  ammunition,  but  are  scarcely  lit  for  service 
yet. 

1 will  do  the  best  I can,  should  the  enemy  appear. 

There  is  also  at  the  mouth  of  the  North  Santee  Eiver  a redoubt 
mounting  three  guns,  12-pounders,  not  yet  completed  and  not  garrisoned ; 
ammunition  there  suflBcient.  We  have  a full  supply  of  powder  and  suffi- 
cient 24, 18,  and  12  pounder  round  shot.  You  will  perceive  that  the 
other  guns  are  short  of  the  proper  number  of  balls. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


A.  M.  MANIGAULT, 
Colonel  Tenth  Eegimentj  &c. 


Charleston,  JToven\her  15,  1861. 

Hon.  Mr.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

I understand  the  Fingal  has  powder  as  well  as  arras.  Be  so  kind  as 
to  set  aside,  if  possible,  30,000  i)ounds  of  cannon  powder  as  essential  for 
a supply  of  our  forts  if  we  are  to  fight  such  a fight  as  at  Hilton  Head. 
I believ^e  we  can  have  musket  and  rifle  powder,  but  I would  be  glad  if 
some  musket  were  allowed  also.  If  they  are  re-enforced  by  30,000  men, 
we  will  use  at  least  15,000  men  on  James  Island.  I am  deeply  obliged 
for  the  arms  divided  between  us  and  Georgia.  We  only  want  more. 
Can  we  get  another  regiment  from  North  Carolina  ? We  only  have  two. 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  1.  ) Charleston^  S.  0.,  November  16,  1861. 

I.  Commodore  Ingraham,  C.  S.  Navy,  is  assigned  to  duty  in  Charles- 
ton Harbor.  He  will  superintend  the  preparation  and  armament  of 
the  batteries  for  its  defense  j assign  to  duty  the  naval  officers  at  his  dis- 
posal as  ordnance  officers  at  the  batteries,  and  execute  such  other 
orders  relative  to  the  naval  operations  in  the  harbor  as  he  may  receive 
from  Flag-Officer  Tatnall,  Provisional  Army. 

II. *  Lieut.  Col.  John  S.  Preston,  assistant  adjutant-general,  C.  S.  Army, 
is  hereby  ordered  to  inspect  and  muster  into  the  service  of  the  Confed- 
erate States  for  the  war  such  troops  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina  as 
may  be  transferred  by  the  governor  of  the  State.  These  regiments  must 
be  armed  and  equipped  by  the  State,  except  three  regiments,  or  2,500 
men,  who  will  be  armed  by  the  Government  with  the  Enfield  rifle. 
Uj)on  the  assembling  of  these  troops  at  such  places  of  rendezvous  as 
may  be  selected  by  the  governor,  the  mustering  and  inspecting  officer 
will  make  requisitions  upon  .the  proper  Departments  for  arms,  transporta- 
tion, and  such  other  munitions  as  may  be  necessary,  and  report  his 
operations  from  time  to  time  to  the  general  commanding. 

By  order  of  General  Lee : 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 
Ca])tainj  Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


323 


Kichmond,  November  17,  1861. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Charleston^  /S’.  C.: 

As  soon  as  I can  learn  what  ammunition  is  on  board  tlie  Pin  gal  you 
shall  have  your  full  share  of  everything.  Be  assured  my  solicitude  for 
your  defense  is  as  great  as  your  own,  and  nothing  shall  be  refused  that 
we  can  possibly  give. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  2.  ( Coosawhatchie,  8.  0.,  November  17,  1861. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley,  Provisional  Army,  will  proceed  to  Charles- 
ton, S.  0.,  and  relieve  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  in  his  command  at  that 
place.  The  latter,  on  being  relieved,  will  proceed  to  Fernandina,  Fla., 
and  take  command,  pursuant  to  existing  orders  from  the  War  Depart- 
ment. General  Eipley  will  prosecute  vigorously  the  completion  of  the 
water  and  land  defenses  of  Charleston,  and  General  Trapier  will  make 
use  of  all  means  in  his  power  for  the  defense  of  Cumberland  Sound. 

II.  The  following  disposition  of  troops  will  be  carried  into  effect  as 
soon  as  practicable,  viz : Heyward’s  and  De  Saussure’s  regiments.  South 
Carolina  volunteers,  under  the  immediate  command  of  General  Dray- 
ton ; Clingman’s  and  Eadcliffe’s  North  Carolina  volunteers  will  continue 
near  Graham ville,  and  Dunovant’s  and  Edwards’  South  Carolina  volun- 
teers at  their  present  positions. 

*##**#* 


By 


order  of  General  Lee : 


T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

Captain^  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General^  G.  8.  Army. 


Headquarters  Provisional  Forces, 

Coosawhatchie,  November  18,  1861. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Captain  : Being  about  to  repair  to  Charleston,  in  obedience  to  the 
orders  of  the  general  commanding,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  fol- 
lowing information  concerning  the  troops  in  this  vicinity : 

Bluffton  is  held  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Colcock’s  cavalry,  in  observa- 
tion only.  It  has  been  reported  to  me  that  there  are  two  companies*  of 
infantry  of  Heyward’s  Ninth  [Eleventh]  regiment  remaining  there,  but 
I have  nothing  definite.  This  section  of  country  is  under  charge  of 
General  Drayton’s  command,  which  it  is  intended  to  move  forward  as 
soon  as  possible  to  occupy  positions  to  cover  Bluffton  and  the  roads  to 
Hardeeville.  General  Drayton’s  command  is  composed  of  Heyward’s 
and  De  Saussure’s  regiments.  Ninth  [Eleventh]  and  Fifteenth  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Colcock’s  cavalry.  Colonel 
Clingman’s  regiment  of  North  Carolina  volunteers  (Twenty-fifth),  occu- 
pies a point  on  the  Honey  wood  road  in  advance  of  Grahamville,  intended 
to  be  a guard  for  that  town  and  to  cover  the  roads  leading  from  Tenny’s 
or  Boyd’s  Landing.  His  quartermaster  and  commissary  are  directed  to 


324  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XT. 


establish  depots  and  obtain  supplies  of  subsistence  at  Grahamville,  as 
far  as  possible  5 whether  they  will  be  successful  remains  to  be  seen,  and 
the  regiment  will  have  to  be  looked  after  in  the  general  depots. 

Captain  TrezevanCs  company  of  cavalry  is  in  advance  of  Colonel 
Clingman,  in  observation  of  Boyd^s  and  Tenny's  Landings.  General 
Drayton’s  command  is  supplied  from  his  own  depots  at  Hardeeville. 

At  the  estate’s  landing,  near  Hugueniu’s  plantation,  are  stationed  the 
8-inch  howitzer  battery,  under  General  Goiizales,  as  volunteer  aide  de- 
camp to  myself.  The  howitzer  battery  is  manned  by  the  Palmetto 
Guard  (State  troops),  and  has  attached  to  the  command  the  Charleston 
Light  Dragoons  and  Eutledge  Mounted  Eifles  j the  last  are,  however,  in 
observation  near  Pocotaligo  and  Port  Eoyal  Ferries. 

Colonel  Eadcliffe’s  Eighth  North  Carolina  Volunteers  is  on  the  right 
• of  Gonzales’  command,  in  position  to  support  the  battery  or  to  defend 
the  roads  from  Eutaw  Church  or  to  move  forward  to  support  Clingman. 
He  is  supplied  partly  by  purchase  and  partly  from  the  depot  here. 

A force  of  negroes,  under  the  supervision  of  General  Gonzales,  is 
engaged  in  obstructing  the  Coosawhatchie  below  the  landing;  and,  this 
being  done,  the  steamer  John  A.  Moore  and  several  flats,  sent  from 
Charleston,  are  available  for  transportation  from  the  railroad  to  the 
landing  by  water.  Mr.  Gregory  is  engaged  with  his  negroes  iii  obstruct- 
ing the  Tuliflny. 

At  Coosawhatchie  is  Colonel  Edwards’  full  regiment  and  Captain 
Moore’s  light  artillery,  both  waiting  orders,  &c. 

Six  companies  of  Dunovant’s  Twelfth  South  Carolina  Volunteers  are 
at  Pocotaligo  Corners,  the  re’maining  four  being  at  Hardeeville.  It  is 
supposed  that  it  was  intended  to  order  them  to  rejoin  their  regiment, 
but  the  order  may  be  delayed  until  the  arrival  of  the  general. 

Colonel  Jones’  Fourteenth  South  Carolina  Volunteers  holds  Garden’s 
Corner,  and  is  stretched  in  observation  towards  Combahee  Ferry,  in 
advance  towards  Port  Eoyal  Ferry.  This  is  guarded  by  Fripp’s  cavalry. 
Another  force  of  Colonel  Martin’s  regiment,  which  has  its  headquarters 
at  Pocotaligo  (it  may  be  well  to  add  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Colcock’s 
regiment  is  a portion  of  Colonel  Martin’s  regiment,  with  one  or  two  [com- 
panies] under  Major  Farr,  a force  of  Martin’s  regiment),  is  also  guarding 
the  district  of  country  about  Combahee,  Ashepoo,  and  Paw  Paw. 

Capt.  Leo.  D.  Walker,  assistant  adjutant-general,  with  Messrs.  Walter 
Blake,  Eawlins  Lowndes,  and  Paul,  volunteer  aides-de-camp,  are  now 
engaged  in  endeavoring  to  block  the  rivers  at  some  point  below  the  rail- 
road bridges.  They  are  to  be  assisted  by  Mr.  Nolan,  who  has  been  sent 
out  by  the  superintendent  of  the  railroad  for  the  purpose. 

The  general  idea  of  the  disposition  of  the  troops  has  been  to  cover  the 
railroad  bridges  in  the  direction  of  Savannah  and  have  them  not  too 
far  from  the  railroad,  that  they  might  move  in  either  direction,  in  case 
of  an  attack  on  the  road  or  on  Savannah  or  Charleston. 

If  everything  were  in  order,  and  the  troops  well  disciplined,  there 
would  be  no  great  difficulty  in  accomplishing  the  ends  of  the  disposi- 
tion, but  General  Drayton’s  command  has  not  moved  from  Hardeeville, 
and  our  troops  are  very  raw ; they  require  severe  discipline  and  con- 
stant watching ; it  will  take  some  time  of  this  to  make  them  efficient. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General, 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  . 325 

Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee^  Fla.^  November  19,  18G1. 
His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America : 

Dear  Sir:  The  presence  of  General  Grayson,  although  unable  to 
render  service,  the  expectation  of  General  Smith  for  two  weeks,  and 
of  General  Trapier  for  the  last  three  weeks,  have  prevented  me  from 
adopting  and  enforcing  with  energy  measures  necessary  to  tlie  defense 
of  the  State.  At  all  important  points  we  are  threatened  with  attack  ; 
nowhere  prepared  to  meet  the  enemy  j and  when,  as  governor  of  the 
State,  I have  applied  for  arms  and  munitions  of  war,  I have  been 
answered  a requisition  should  be  made  by  the  oilicer  in  command  of 
the  military  department,  yet  none  is  in  command.  It  would  have  been 
almost  as  reasonable  under  the  circumstances  to  have  referred  me  to  the 
Emperor  of  China.  We  need  troops  and  munitions  of  war,  and  officers 
ofmilitary  education,  experience,  and  ability,  and,  if  not  promptly  aided, 
Florida  may  be  lost  to  the  Southern  Confederacy.  Her  citizens  ha\  e 
almost  despaired  of  protection  from  the  Confederate  Government — will 
lose  confidence  in  it ; but  being  one  of  the  first  States  to  withdraw  from 
the  United  States,  and  to  resolve  to  maintain  her  independence,  her 
gallant  sons  and  daughters  would  rather  perish  bravely,  sword  in  hand, 
vindicating  their  rights,  than  yield  submissively  to  or  entertain  a 
moment’s  thought  of  ever  living  under  the  same  Government  with  the 
people  of  the  North.  If  General  Trapier  will  not  accept  the  command 
(and  I presume  he  will  not  while  the  enemy  holds  or  threatens  an  inch 
of  South  Carolina),  let  us  have  arms  and  munitions  of  war,  and  have  an 
order  issued  immediately,  placing  the  troops  in  this  State  which  have 
been  mustered  into  the  Confederate  service,  not  embracing  any  in 
General  Bragg’s  department,  under  my  command,  and  subject  to  my 
orders  as  governor  and  commander  in-chief  of  Florida,  and  if  I cannot 
hold  positions  exposed  to  the  nayal  armament  of  the  enemy,  I will 
prevent  the  enemy  from  holding  the  positions  and  defend  the  State 
against  invasion.  From  every  portion  of  the  State  I have  been  appealed 
to  by  the  citizens  to  assume  the  command  in  i)erson,  and  have  been 
prevented  by  a desire  to  avoid  coming  in  conflict  with  the  authority  and 
policy  of  the  Confederate  Government.  Since  the  death  of  General 
Grayson  I have  corrected  the  evils  arising  from  intemperance  among 
the  Confederate  as  well  as  the  State  troops.  It  is  highly  important  that 
some  one  should  be  in  command  having  the  experience  and  common 
sense  necessary  to  avoid  useless  expenditures  and  to  enforce  discipline 
among  the  troops,  and  make  them  available  for  the  defense  of  the  State. 

These  views  are  respectfully  suggested  for  your  consideration,  with 
the  sincere  avowal  that  I would  rather  co-operate  with  General  Trapier 
in  this  military  department,  if  he  will  accept  the  command  and  repair 
here  immediately.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  sir, 

JOHN  MILTON. 

P.  S. — I am  informed  that  upon  the  steamer  which  has  just  arrived 
at  Savannah  rifled  cannon  and  Enfield  rifles  have  been  received,  and 
respectfully  ask  your  excellency  to  place  at  my  disposal  1,000  Enfield 
rifles  and  two  rifled  cannon,  with  equii)ments  complete,  and  send  them 
by  Ca])tain  Noyes,  the  bearer,  and  I will  successfully  defend  Apalachi- 
cola and  Saint  Mark’s.  Also,  let  Florida  have  1,000  sabers,  1,000  pis- 

^ Some  personal  matters  here  omitted. 


326  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

tols  for  cavalry,  and  equipments,  and  a few  hundred  bags  of  buck-shot. 
If  General  Trapier  should  decline  the  command  here,  and  your  excel- 
lency would  prefer  to  liave  the  military  department  under  the  command 
of  an  officer  appointed  by  yourself  rather  than  the  governor  of  Florida, 
then  I respectfully  recommend  Col.  Eichard  F.  Floyd,  a citizen  of  this 
State,  a native  of  Georgia,  and  now  in  command  at  Apalachicola  by  my 
appointment.  He  is  about  fifty  years  old  ; a soldier  and  a geutlemaii 
of  strict  sobriety  and  integrity ; a good  disciplinarian,  and  a gentleman 
of  excellent  sense  and  unquestionable  courage. 

Eespectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON. 


State  of  South  Carolina, 

Headquarters^  November  19,  1861. 

General  Lee, 

Commanding : 

Sir  : As  you  have  recently  arrived  to  take  command,  I think,  per- 
haps, it  may  be  useful  to  you  to  have  a general  and  authentic  statement 
of  the  forces  now  in  actual  service  from  Georgetown  to  Hardeeville.  I 
therefore  inclose  the  within  statement,  that  you  may  know  what  troops 
you  can  use  for  any  immediate  emergency. 

I am  not  yet  prepared  to  state  exactly  what  regiments  can  be  raised 
immediately  or  mustered  in.  I suppose  you  will  have  about  2,500  of  the 
arms  recently  arrived  to  put  in  their  hands  and  I think  I can  have 
1,000  j that  is,  in  all  3,500.  If  the  regiments  are  mustered  in  and  get 
those  arms,  which  no  doubt  will  be  the  case,  it  will  give  about  20,000 
men,  who  can  be  relied  on,  with  arms.  As  to  what  you  can  get  in  an 
emergency  from  General  Lawton  and  General  Anderson,  I can  know 
LO thing  certain. 

With  very  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


[In  closure.] 


Commands. 


Stations. 


Boyce’s  artillery 

Citadel  Cadets 

Claremont  troops 

Clingman’s  regiment 

Coit’s  artillery 

College  Cadets 

De  Saussure’s  brigade 

De  Saussure’s  regiment 

Duuovant’s  regiment 

Edwards’  regiment 

Gonzales’  siege  train  (four  guns) 

Hagood’s  regiment 

Hatch’s  battalion 

Heyward’s  regiment 

Jones’  regiment 

Lafayette  Artillery 

Lamar’s  artillery 

Lucas’  battalion 

Martin’s  regiment  (mounted) 

McCord’s  Zouaves 

Moore’s  artillery  (6  guns) 

Itadcliffe’s  Togimeut 

Regular  artillery 

Regular  infantry 

Vigilant  Rifles  

White’s  battalion 


Grahamville 


Charleston 

Hardeeville 

Pocotaligo  and  Hardeeville. . . 

Coosawhatchie 

Huguenin’s  Neck 

Cole’s  Island 

James  Island  and  Bull’s  Bay. 

Hardeeville 

Garden’s  Corner 

Fort  Pickens  (Stono) 

Fort  Johnson  I 

Fort  Pickens  (Stono) 


Grahamville 

Huguenin’s  Neck 

Fort  Sumter 

To  be  kept  in  Fort  Moultrie 
Fort  Palmetto  (Stono) 


Strength. 


124 

126 

65 

1, 100 
132 
60 
2,  750 
800 
800 
600 
80 
750 
500 
1,  000 
800 
60 
131 
70 
650 
92 
110 
1,  000 
5C0 
420 
80 
240 


Total 


13, 100 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  327 

Eichmond,  November  19,  1801. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Charleston : 

I desire  the  cartridges  for  Enfield  rifles  divided  between  you  and  Gen- 
eral Johnston  in  proper  proportion,  reserving  for  me  such  ]>ortion  of  tlie 
cartridges  as  is  proper  for  the  rifles  that  remain  after  dividing  9,000 
between  you  and  General  Johnston.  Divide  the  accouterments  equally 
between  yourself  and  General  Johnston.  Send  to  him  the  500  sabers 
that  are  aboard.  Keep  the  10,000  i)ounds  of  the  cannon  ])owder,  and 
send  me  the  remaining  7,000  pounds  belonging  to  the  War  Department. 
Send  me  all  the  rifle  powder,  as  you  have  plenty  at  Augusta  Arsenal. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Aeting  Seeretarg  of  War, 


Savannah,  November  21,  1861. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generaf  Richmond^  Ya.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the 
Secretary  of  War,  that  I have  just  returned  to  this  city  after  having 
inspected  the  batteries  and  posts  along  the  coast  from  Charleston  to 
Eernandina,  Fla. 

The  guns  from  the  less  important  i)oints  have  been  removed,  and  are 
employed  in  strengthening  those  considered  of  greater  consequence. 
The  entrance  to  Cumberland  Sound  and  Brunswick  and  the  water 
approaches  to  Savannah  and  Charleston  are  the  only  points  which  it  is 
proposed  to  defend.  At  all  of  these  places  there  is  much  yet  to  be  done, 
but  every  effort  is  being  made  to  render  them  as  strong  as  the  nature 
of  the  i^ositions  and  the  means  at  hand  will  permit.  They  ought,  after 
their  completion,  to  make  a good  defense  against  any  batteries  that  are 
likely  to  be  brought  against  them.  * More  guns  could  be  usefully  employed 
if  available  for  this  service ; those  at  hand  have  been  placed  in  the  best 
positions  and  the  troops  distributed  so  as  to  work  them  to  advantage. 
The  batteries  are  tolerably  supplied  with  ammunition,  having  about  50 
rounds  to  the  gun.  This  amount  it  would  be  well  to  have  increased  to 
100  rounds. 

The  greatest  difficulty  to  be  contended  with  is  the  want  of  artillerists 
and  proper  officers  as  instructors.  The  naval  officers  directed  to  report 
to  me  have  been  assigned  to  duty  at  the  batteries  in  Charleston  Har- 
bor as  ordnance  and  artillery  officers,  with  the  exception  of  Captains 
Buchanan  and  Sinclair,  whom  I have  directed  to  return,  having,  while 
uncertain  as  to  any  attack  being  in  contemplation,  no  appropriate  duties 
for  them  to  perform,  and  believing  their  services  were  important  at  their 
former  stations. 

I have  been  able  to  learn  nothing  of  any  'movements  of  the  enemy’s 
fleet  along  the  coast  of  Georgia  or  Florida,  and  am  inclined  to  believe 
that  they  have  not  yet  made  any  further  demonstrations  of  attack. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General j Commanding, 


General  Orders,  > Headquarters, 

No.  2.  * 1 Coosawhatchie,  8.  0.,  November  21,  1861. 

I.  In  consequence  of  the  general  scarcity  of  ammunition,  the  general 
commanding  desires  to  impress  upon  the  commanders  of  regiments  and 


328  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

corps  the  absolute  necessity  of  economizing  the  supplies  they  have  on 
hand  to  the  utmost  extent.  To  this  end  the  guards  will  not  be  allowed 
to  load  their  pieces  unless  in  the  actual  presence  of  the  enemy  or  in 
danger  of  surprise,  and  all  hunting  parties  will  be  strictly  forbidden  to 
use  the  public  ammunition.  Each  soldier  will  be  held. strictly  account- 
able for  the  number  of  rounds  issued  to  him,  and  company  officers  are 
directed  to  make  constant  ins})ections  of  the  cartridge-boxes  and  their 
magazines,  in  order  to  assure  themselves  that  there  is  no  improi)er 
wastage. 

II.  The  commanding  general  has  also  learned  that  the  arms  issued 
to  some  of  the  regiments  are  not  of  uniform  caliber,  and,  consequently, 
there  has  been  some  disproportion  in  the  corresponding  ammunition. 
As  this  might  not  improbably  prove  a fatal  error,  it  is  strictly  enjoined 
upon  all  commanders  to  give  a careful  i)ersonal  examination  of  all 
requisitions  for  ammunition,  and  also  to  superintend  the  distribution 
of  the  same  to  the  men. 

III.  The  attention  of  the  troops  in  this  department  is  called  to  the 
evil  practice  of  tearing  down  fences  and  other  ijrivate  property  for  fire- 
wood and  other  purposes.  All  intiTference  with  the  rights  of  citizens 
is  highly  injurious  in  its  tendency,  and  is  strictly  forbidden.  The  gen- 
eral hopes  that  it  will  only  be  necessary  to  remind  the  troops  that  they 
are  citizens  as  well  as  soldiers,  and  that,  as  they  take  up  arms  to  re]>el 
the  enemy  from  our  soil,  they  should  still  be  more  careful  to  preserv^e  it 
sacred  from  their  own  depredations.  Prompt  and  severe  punishment 
will  follow  all  irregularities  of  this  nature  in  future,  and  it  is  strictly 
enjoined  upon  all  officers  to  see  to  the  literal  execution  of  this  order. 

By  order  of  General  Lee: 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 
Captain^  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Eichmond,  November  22,  1861. 

Governor  Milton, 

Tallahassee : 

We  shall  not  recognize  any  action  of  Colonel  Dil worth  in  contraven- 
tion of  instructions  sent  to  him.  General  Trapier  has  gone  to  Fernan- 
dina  and  will  assume  command  at  once,  and  thus  bring  matters  into 
l)roper  order.  His  command  extends  to  the  Ohoctawhatchee,  and  not 
to  the  Chattahoochee,  as  you  supposed. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Columbia,  November  26,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

You  telegraphed  me  that  instead  of  sending  me  Gregg’s  regiment  or 
others  you  would  send  some  North  Carolina  regiments  to  us.  If  you 
could  send  another  it  would  be  of  great  service,  particularly  if  armed. 
You  must  judge  if  an  attack  on  Charleston  is  intended,  for  if  it  is  we 
will  want  at  least  six  more  armed  regiments  there,  thb  line  is  so  long. 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Chap.  XV.]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  329 

Headquarters  Provisional  Forces, 

Charleston^  November  20,  1801. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Coosawhatehie : 

Captain  : I have  received  a dispatch  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Black 
that  he  has  received  reliable  information  tliat  the  enemy  has  landed  at 
Otter  Island  and  Fenwick’s  Island.  The  abandonment  of  the  ports  of 
course  leaves  the  streams  Ashepoo  and  Paw  Paw  open,  as,  from  what  I 
learn  from  Captain  Walker,  they  cannot  be  immediately  obstructed. 
Forces  are  required  for  each  river.  I have  none  at  my  disposal.  I shall, 
however,  in  addition  to  the  movement  of  the  Rifle  Regiment,  South  Caro- 
lina Militia,  send  two  companies  of  Orr’s  regiment,  to  act  with  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Black  on  the  main,  and  annoy,  if  not  stop,  the  enemy  if  he 
attempts  to  pass  through  Dobson  Creek. 

Meantime  the  work  of  fortifying  and  arming  progresses  slowly,  but, 
as  there  is  but  little  more  powder  to  be  had,  the  number  of  our  guns 
will  not  assist  us  very  materially.  I beg  to  represent  the  want  to  the 
general  commanding,  that  it  may  be  supplied,  if  possible. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Coosawhatehie,  November  20,  1801. 

General  R.  S.  Ripley,  P.  A., 

Charleston,  S.  C. : 

Sir  : The  commanding  general  directs  me  to  say  that  the  enemy  can 
land  on  all  the  islands  he  can  approach  with  his  armed  vessels,  but  he 
will  hardly  find  it  to  his  advantage  to  hold  them  after  they  have  been 
pillaged.  Urge  forward,  therefore,  the  obstructions  to  the  Ashepoo  and 
Edisto,  and  see  if  laborers  cannot  be  obtained  on  the  line  of  rivers  to  be 
obstructed. 

The  deficiency  in  powder  is  a serious  calamity,  and  the  general  desires 
you  to  furnish  these  headquarters  with  a statement  of  what  is  at  your 
disposal  on  account  of  the  Confederate  States.  The  State  has  in  addi- 
tion 14,175  pounds  of  cannon  iiowder,  whiclrit  will  no  doubt  distribute 
for  the  defense  of  Charleston. 

Col.  William  V.  Mallard  is  reported  to  be  at  Jacksonborough,  on  the 
Edisto,  with  two  companies  of  infantry.  As  he  is  not  mentioned  in  your 
report  of  troops  furnished  this  ofiice  on  your  departure,  you  will  please 
inform  these  headquarters  in  what  service  he  belongs. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

^ Captain,  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


•Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

liardeeville,  November  20,  1801. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.,  Coosawhatehie,  S.  C. : 

Sir:  I inclose  you  a copy  of  a communication  from  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Colcock,  and  although  I have  indorsed  my  apiiroval  of  his  aiiplication 


330  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

for  howitzers,  I nevertheless  need  some  guns  at  Eed  Blufi*  and  Eew 
River  Bridge  at  once,  if  in  your  reach. 

The  enemy  are  evidently  soundiug  and  examining  our  rivers  with 
reference  to  Savannah,  and  to  retard  their  approach  towards  it  via  New 
River  would  be  only  secondary  to  doing  so  via  Tybee  and  Pulaski.  I 
am  desirous  of  taking  the  offensive,  but,  without  artillery,  any  display 
with  my  small  infantry  and  cavalry  force  would  prove  of  little  avail 
against  any  expedition  of  respectable  numbers. 

I feel  assured  of  an  onward  movement  towards  Red  Bluff  whenever 
our  enemy  gets  a hint  of  its  strategic  importance. 

It  is  not  only  difficult  to  get  the  pile-driver,  as  t>roposed  at  our  last 
interview,  but  mechanics  also.  I am  now  endeavoring  to  procure  chains 
and  anchors  from  Savannah,  and,  by  the  aid  of  the  rafts  as  supports  to  the 
chain  cables,  present  a very  strong  resistance  to  any  advancing  boats. 
When  I get  the  pile-driver  I will  sink  piles  and  flats  likewise. 

I have  an  expedition  out  to-night,  and  hope  to  produce  such  an  im- 
pression upon  the  marauders  as  will  make  them  less  venturesome,  for 
some  few  days  at  least,  and  afford  me  better  opportunity  of  carrying  on 
my  defenses  on  ^ew  River. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

THOS.  P.  DRAYTOK, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


[Inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  Lower  Squadron  Mounted  Regiment, 

Blnfftonj  November  26,  1861. 

Brigadier-General  Drayton, 

Hardeeville : 

General  : I sent  out  a guard  boat  last  night,  under  command  of 
Sergeant  Mikell ; he  returned  this  morning  with  a boat  load  of  negroes 
and  plunder,  whom  he  captured  while  making  their  way  to  Bull  Island. 

About  three  nights  ago  Baynard’s  man  Cyrus  sent  two  negroes 
(William  and  Paddy,  supposed  to  be  trustworthy)  to  Bull  Island  to 
reconnoiter,  with  instructions  to  return  the  same  night.  They  remained 
on  the  island  two  days,  and  then  returned  stealthily  during  Cyrus’ 
absence  and  enticed  off  portions  of  their  families.  Last  night  William 
attempted  to  repeat  the  operation,  but  was  caught  and  brought  over  to 
me.  I have  had  him  tied,  and,  together  with  the  negroes  captured  by 
Mikler,  placed  under  a guard  and  sent  off*  to  Hardeeville,  with  instruc- 
tions to  report  to  you.  Some  of  them  belong  to  the  Baynards,  who  I 
believe  are  at  Hardeeville,  to  whom  they  can  be  delivered  there.  Most 
of  them  belong  to  Mr.  James  Pope,  who  I am  told  is  at  Robertsville. 
You  will  please  communicate  to  him  the  fact  of  their  arrest.  Mr.  Farr 
will  inform  you  what  disposition  he  wishes  made  of  his  boy.  I thought 
it  necessary,  both  for  the  example  to  the  other  negroes  and  to  save  so 
much  property,  that  these  negroes  should  be  placed  inside  of  our  lines 
and  in  a place  of  safety. 

Our  vedettes  who  have  come  in  so  far  report  all  quiet  this  morning. 
I have  omitted  to  mention  that  a barge  of  considerable  size,  and  filled 
with  men,  approached  Hunting  Island  Landing  yesterday  morning.  On 
the  reception  of  the  intelligence  I ordered  out  a detachment  of  infantry 
and  one  of  cavalry  and  hurried  down  in  person  to  reconnoiter,  but  the 
enemy  was  in  full  retreat,  having  probably  heatd  our  drum  and  retired 
without  attempting  to  land.  These  boats  are  getting  rather  imperti- 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


381 


nent,  and  we  want  one  or  two  howitzers  down  here.  I wish  you  would 
telegraph  to  General  Lee,  requesting  him  to  send  me  down  two  howitzers 
in  addition  to  the  cavalry  which  he  wrote  me  this  morning  he  was  trying 
to  get  to  me. 

I inclose  a list  of  the  names  of  the  negroes  sent,  with  the  names  of 
their  owners. 

Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  J.  COLCOCK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Mounted  Regiment. 


Headquarters  Camp  Marion, 

November  27,  1861 — 7 a.  m. 

[Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton:] 

General  : The  expedition  to  BuU  Island,  about  which  I wrote  you, 
left  here  last  night  about  10.30  o’clock,  consisting  of  a detail  of  about 
40  men  from  Major  Smith’s  command,  under  command  of  Capt.  Man- 
ning J.  Kirk.  It  was  conducted  by  him  with  great  prudence  and  ability 
and  proved  a complete  success,  resulting  in  the  capture  of  38  negroes,’ 
most  of  them  belonging  to  Joseph  Baynard.  By  my  directions,  after  the 
party  were  embarked,  fire  was  applied  to  the  fodder  and  corn  houses, 
which  were  completely  destroyed.  From  what  I can  learn  from  the 
negroes  there  were  no  Yankees  on  the  island  last  night.  My  impression 
is  that  they  only  come  over  in  the  day-time  for  foraging  purposes  and 
leave  at  night.  As  some  of  our  wagons  are  going  to  Hardeeville  for 
stores,  I have  ordered  the  prisoners  sent  up  to  Hardeeville,  under  a 
proper  guard.  Please  have  them  delivered  to  their  owner,  Mr.  Baynard, 
who,  not  being  in  the  village,  I suppose  must  have  returned  last  night 
to  Hardeeville. 

Please  telegraph  this  information  to  General  Lee,  from  whom  I re- 
ceived a letter  yesterdaj^,  saying  he  was  making  an  effort  to  send  me 
down  a re-enforcement  of  cavalry,  and  request  him  to  hasten  them 
forward,  as  I have  but  little  doubt  that  the  enemy  will  attack  us>  soon 
in  retaliation  for  our  Bull  Island  expedition.  I wish  you  would  send 
down  a regiment  of  infantry  as  soon  as  possible. 

Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  J.  COLCOCK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Comdg.  Lower  Squadron  Mounted  Infantry. 

P.  S. — I neglected  to  inform  you  that  Baynard’s  fellow  (Pompey)  had 
to  be  killed  to  prevent  his  escape.  Captain  Young  and  his  party 
arrived  late  last  night  and  shall^have  every  assistance  I can  render. 


Indorsement.] 

General  Drayton  takes  pleasure  in  forwarding  the  inclosed  letter  to 
General  Lee,  and  trusts  the  next  one  may  result  in  the  capture  of  some 
of  the  Lincolnites.  Cavalry,  artillery,  and  transportation  are  our  great 
wants. 

THOS.  F.  DKAYTONT, 
Brigadier- General^  Com  m and ing. 


332  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Savannah,  Ga.,  November  27,  1861. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  AdjutaiU- General : 

Sir  : As  directed  in  Special  Orders,  No.  2,  Headquarters,  Coosawbat- 
chie,  November  17, 1861, 1 proceeded  to  Fernandiiia  and  to  the  batteries 
along  the  coast  to  examine  the  condition  of  their  armament,  and  have 
the  honor  to  make  the  following  report : 

1st.  The  batteries  on  Amelia  Island  are  not  yet  completed  j some  of 
the  guns  are  to  be  changed,  and  others  have  yet  to  be  mounted.  These 
are,  one  10-inch  rifle  gun  ; one  32-pounder  rifle  gun;  three  8-inch  colum- 
biads;  four  army  and  four  navy  pattern  32-pounder  guns;  two  24- 
pounder  guns  ; and  of  field  guns,  two  3-inch  rifle  guns  ; four  6-pounder 
bronze  guns ; one  6 x)Ounder  iron  gun. 

The  guns  in  position  (barbette)  are  well  mounted,  except  an  8-inch 
columbiad,  which  has  an  unequal  bearing  on  the  platform.  It  is  being 
remedied  by  letting  the  pintle  bolster  deeper  into  the  pintle  cross.  In 
the  columbiad  carriages  yellow  pine  is  substituted  for  oak,  and  I directed 
an  additional  iron  strap,  to  secure  the  braces,  to  be  added  to  each  brace. 
I may  add  that  all  the  columbiad  carriages  on  the  coast  are  made  of 
yellow  pine,  and  are  additionally  strengthened  in  the  same  way. 

* The  guns  are  all  supplied  with  the  necessary  equipments ; have  all 
the  inijilements  for  firing  hot  shot  and  for  preparing  and  firing  shells, 
and  are  provided  with  shot,  shells,  fuses,  and  ammunition  for  70  rounds 
each. 

I have  directed  a few  articles  to  be  sent  to  Colonel  Dilworth.  He  asked 
for  45  sabers  and  1,000  Enfield  rifles. 

2d.  The  battery  on  the  south  end  of  Cumberland  has  four  32  pounder 
naval  guns  en  barbette.  The  carriages,  platforms,  and  guns  are  in 
excellent  order,  but  the  battery  is  almost  deficient  in  implements. 
There  are  no  shells  ; 50  rounds  of  powder  and  shot  for  each  gun.  Orders 
have  been  given  for  its  supply  at  once,  and  until  furnished  spare  im- 
Xflements  and  shells  have  been  sent  from  Amelia  Island. 

3d.  The  battery  on  Jekyl  Island  has  one  42-pounder  gun  en  barbette; 
four  32-j)ouuder  navy  guns  en  barbette.  They  appear  to  work  well,  and 
have -each  about  60  rounds  shot  and  shell ; not  a sufficient  number  of  the 
latter.  This  battery  is  scantily  furnished  with  imxilements.  I have 
arranged  to  send  them,  througli  Lieutenant  Harden,  acting  ordnance 
officer  at  Brunswick,  all  that  will  be  required. 

4th.  Saint  Simon’s  batteries  have  one  10-inch  columbiad ; one  8-inch 
columbiad  (in  process  of  mounting) ; two  42-iiounder  guns ; five  32- 
pounder  guns.  The  guns  and  carriages  work  well,  except  the  10-inch 
columbiad,  which  bears  too  heavily  on  the  pintle  bolster.  This  was 
directed  to  be  remedied  by  cutting  awaj^  a small  part  of  the  chassis. 
The  battery  is  supplied  with  implements;  each  gun  has  about  75  rounds 
of  shot  and  shell,  with  the  ammunitioni  But  as  the  guns  are  to  be  dis- 
tributed in  several  batteries,  I conceived  it  ])roper  to  order  additional 
stores.  (See  requisition  for  depot  at  Brunswick.) 

5th.  Fort  Pulaski  has  five  10-inch  columbiads  en  barbette  ; six  8-inch 
columbiads  en  barbette  ; two  10-inch  mortars  en  barbette  ; three  8-inch 
columbiads  in  casemate;  two  42-x3ounder  guns  in  casemate;  twenty  32- 
pounder  guns  in  casemate  ; one  24-pounder  gun,  plank  casemate.  The 
guns  and  carriages  are  in  excellent  condition ; have  an  abundance  of  all 
kinds  of  implements,  fuses,  &c.  Each  gun  has  about  120  rounds  of  shot 
and  shell.  Some  of  the  fuses  are  imperfect;  these  I am  renewing  with 
new  ones  from  the  Augusta  Arsenal.  • 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  333 

The  fuses  in  a number  of  instances  are  imperfect  in  several  batteries  j 
as  fast  as  they  can  be  made  others  are  snpi)iied.  Tlie  two  mortars  have 
but  70  shells  between  them.  I have  ordered  an  additional  sup])ly  to  the 
fort,  and  have  recommended  two  12-i)ounder  field  howitzers  to  be  placed 
so  as  to  flank  the  ditch. 

6th.  Fort  Jackson  [Ga.]  has  one  32-poander  navy  gun  (rifled) ; five 
32-pounder  navy  guns ; three  18-pounder  guns.  They  are  in  good  order, 
ami  are  supplied,  or  being  supplied,  with  the  necessary  implements,  &c. 
Each  gun  has  about  60  rounds. 

7th.  Battery  on  Green  Island  has  one  10-inch  rifled  gun  (caliber  6.4) ; 
one  10-inch  columbiad ; two  8-iuch  columbiads  j two  42-pounder  guns ; 
four  32-pounder  guns.  The  rifle  gun  has  just  been  mounted.  I fired 
from  it,  and  with  9^^  elevation  attained  a range  of  about  IJ  miles.  The 
guns  and  carriages  work  extremely  well ; they  have  everything  to  make 
their  fire  eflective.  The  battery  is  supplied  with  about  60  rounds  to  a 
gun ; has  a portable  shot-furnace,  which  I think  too  small  for  this  point. 

8tli.  Thunderbolt  battery  has  one  8-inch  gun  (columbiad);  three  18- 
I)ounder  guns.  The  battery  is  in  good  order,  and  has  about  50  rounds 
to  a gun. 

The  batteries  in  the  neighborhood  of  Savannah  are  well  served,  and 
with  the  allowance  of  ammunition  will  do  very  effective  service. 

I have  advised  in  every  case  the  adoption  of  ricochet  firing.  This, 
if  the  guns  are  not  fired  too  rapidly,  will,  in  my  opinion,  enable  all  the 
batteries  to  make  a good  defense  against  shipping.  To  make  the  men 
more  deliberate,  particularly  in  the  commencement  of  an  action,  the 
gunners  should  not  be  permitted  to  fire  but  a certain  number  of  rounds 
in  an  hour,  and  the  loading  be  by  detail.” 

There  has  been  some  trouble  in  firing  shell  from  several  of  the  bat- 
teries ; the  fuses  in  some  instances  were  imx)erfect,  and  the  fuse  plugs 
\ imiDroperly  driven  in  others.  I have  made  arrangements  for  a new 
supply  of  fuses  as  rapidly,  as  they  can  be  supplied  at  (he  Augusta 
Arsenal,  and  have  given  instructions  so  as  to  insure  the  proper  loading 
of  shells,  &c. 

Some  of  the  regiments  on  the  coast  are  armed  with  shot-guns  and 
sporting  rifles.  I’hey  have  little  or  no  ammunition.  I propose  to  put 
up  for  the  shot-guns  a blank  cartridge,  to  fire  a small  linen  bag  con- 
taining twelve  buck-shot. 

I requested  the  State  Ordnance  Officer  to" give  me  the  calibers  of  the 
rifles,  to  make  fixed  ammunition  for  them.  I will  furnish  each  regiment 
with  a caliber  gauge,  and  it  will  enable  them  to  furnish  me  with  the 
kind  and  quantity  of  cartridges  required. 

Fire  and  light  balls,  rockets,  fuses,  port-fires,  fixed  ammunition  and 
cannon  i)owder,  implements  and  gun  carriages,  are  required  most  at 
l)resent.  These  I have  been  engaged  on  at  the  Augusta  Arsenal,  and 
I will  repair  thither  and  push  the  force  employed  there  as  much  as  pos- 
sible in  supplying  the  above  deficiency.  I find  it  necessary  to  be  ther@ 
to  superintend  the  works  in  construction,  as  there  is*  no  one  there  of 
sufficient  experience  in  artillery  or  ordnance  duties  to  direct  matters. 

In  an  order  from  the  Ordnance  Officer,  received  in  October,  I was  di- 
rected to  obtain  reports  from  all  the  batteries  along  the  coast  of  Georgia 
and  Florida  as  far  as  Apalachicola,  with  the  vdew  of  furnishing  those 
batteries  with  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores.  Some  of  these  reports  have 
been  received,  and  I will  prepare  the  arsenal  to  supply  their  wants. 

In  conclusion,  I will  state  that  the  powder  mills  at  the  arsenal  have 
been  delayed  in  their  work.  On  my  return  there  I will  work  them  at 


334  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  CA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


once  night  and  day,  and  expect  to  turn  out  from  300  to  500  pounds  of 
cannon  per  day.  If  i)ossible,  this  amount  shall  be  increased. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  G.  GILL, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Ordnance  Officer. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  November  29,  1861. 
His  Excellency  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Columbia,  8.  C.: 

My  Dear  Sir:  I have  received  your  letter  of  the  24th  instant,*  and 
thank  you  for  writing  so  freely. 

Generals  Evans  and  Pemberton  will  be  sent  to  General  Lee  immedi- 
ately. 

The  deficiencies  of  which  you  speak  in  the  character  of  your  brigadier- 
generals  will,  I hope,  be  compensated  for  by  the  presence  of  General 
Lee  and  the  addition  of  General  Pembertoni 

More  than  half  the  amount  of  powder  received  was  ordered  to  be  fur- 
nished to  General  Lee.  The  whole  amount  was  less  than  that  asked  for 
by  you. 

In  regard  to  arms,  I wish  indeed  that  I had  more  to  give  you.  Gov- 
ernor Letcher  has  now  500  for  you  in  addition  to  the  500  previously  fur- 
nished. This  is  but  a small  supply,  but  will  be  increased  as  fast  as  our 
means  will  admit. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly, 

JEFFEESOE  DAYIS. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  November  29,  1861. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Milton, 

Tallahassee,  Fla. : 

Sir  : The  President  has  received  your  letter  of  the  19th  instant  in 
regard  to  the  condition  of  things  in  Florida,  &c.,  and  has  referred  it  to 
me  for  reply. 

Since  the  date  of  your  letter  the  arrival  of  General  Trapier  and  the 
organization  of  the  military  district  under  his  command  have  doubtless 
put  an  end  to  the  apprehensions  you  suggest,  and  render  it,  therefore, 
unnecessary  for  the  President  to  avail  himself  of  your  proffered  services. 
Wa  rely,  nevertheless,  with  confidence  upon  your  vigilant  and  zealous 
co-operation  in  all  our  efibrts  for  the  defense  of  Florida  against  the  com- 
mon enemy.  Your  excellency  may  rest  assured,  and  you  may  assure 
the  patriotic  people  of  your  State,  that  you  shall  not  be  overlooked  in 
our  efibrts  for  the  common  defense.  Of  this  the  arrival,  I hope  by  this 
time,  of  the  munitions,  &c.,  requested  by  Judge  Baker  and  the  meas- 
ures of  preparation  organized  by  General  Trapier  have  already  given 
you  some  assurance.  No  effort  shall  be  intermitted  by  the  Confederate 
Government  to  insure  the  safety  of  your  State,  either  now  or  hereafter. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  335 

Headquarters, 

GoosawhatcMe,  S.  (7.,  December  3,  18G1. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond.^  Ya. : 

Sir:  In  a letter  received  to-day  from  Col.  Jolin  S.  Preston,  whom  I 
had  assigned  to  the  duty  of  mustering  into  the  service  of  the  Confed- 
erate States  such  troops  as  might  offer  themselves  for  the  war  from  the 
State  of  South  Carolina  or  be  transferred  by  the  governor,  it  is  stated 
that  the  only  transfers  made  up  to  this  time  are  four  companies  for 
twelve-months’  service.  Even  for  twelve  months  the  recruiting  is  very 
languid ; for  the  war  not  one  company  has  yet  offered,  and  not  one  new 
regiment  will  be  organized  in  three  months.  The  entire  levy  will  be  for 
terms  less  than  the  war,  and  generally  for  twelve  months,  for  local  defense 
and  special  service.  I fear  that  there  will  be  great  delay  in  organizing 
even  such  a force  as  can  be  armed,  unless  some  measures  can  be  resorted 
to  to  procure  men. 

I have  received  an  application  from  J.  C.  B.  Mitchell,  IMontgoraery, 
Ala.,  to  furnish  arms  to  a regiment  of  that  State  on  my  own  terms,  and 
have  also  been  informed  that  Col.  Charles  C.  Lee,  Thirty -seventh  Kegi- 
ment  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  has  wriiten  to  Governor  Clark  to 
know  if  his  regiment  could  not  be  transferred  to  this  State  and  armed. 
I consider  that  the  arms  at  my  disposal  are  for  the  troops  of  Georgia 
and  South  Carolina. 

I yesterday  visited  Port  Eoyal  Sound,  with  the  view  of  organizing  a 
light  force  to  cut  off,  if  possible,  the  enemy’s  marauding  parties  on  the 
islands.  No  attempts  have  yet  been  made  on  the  main-land,  nor  could 
I discover  any  indication  of  any  movement.  The  fleet  in  large  force 
lay  extended  across  the  sound  from  Hilton  Head  to  Bay  Point,  perfectly 
quiescent,  and  no  troops  were  visible  except  a picket  at  Hilton  Head 
Ferry. 

General  Lawton  reports  that  the  enemy  has  evacuated  Tybee  Island. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


, Headquarters, 
Coosau'Jiatchie,  December  4,  1861. 

General  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding^  cfc..  Charleston^  8.  C. : 

General  : • Will  you  please  inform  me  whether  the  Marion  Artillery 
mentioned  in  your  letter  of  the  4th,*  now  preparing  for  field  service,  is 
the  battery  referred  to  in  General  Gist’s  communication,  of  which  you 
were  notified,  and  whether  the  Washington  Artillery  is  intended  by  the 
governor  to  be  attached  iiermanently  to  Stevens’  Legion,  or  for  general 
service  in  the  field  ^ 

Tour  plan  of  occupying  the  country  between  the  Edisto  and  Com- 
bahee  and  occupying  Edisto  Island  would  be  advantageous,  if  you  had 
sufficient  troops  and  guns  to  retain  such  an  extent  of  country  j but  unless 
you  can  make  the  line  sufficiently  strong,  or  at  least  have  the  means  of 
withdrawing  the  troops,  it  will,  I fear,  expose  them  to  be  taken  in  detail. 
If  all  the  force  was  concentrated  at  advantageous  points,  I think  the 
defense  of  the  approaches  would  be  more  effective.  I do  not  know 


Not  found. 


336  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

whether  you  intend  the  forts  at  Tar  Bluff,  Ehett’s  Bluff,  Edisto  Inlet, 
&c.,  to  be  temporary  and  for  the  protection  of  the  property  in  their  vicin- 
ity, or  permanent. 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


headquarters  Department  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston^  December  5,  1861. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

CoosaivhatcMe : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a letter 
from  the  commanding  general  of  the  4th,  and  one  from  yourself  of  the 
same  date.  I telegraphed  to  General  Gist  to  ask  him  what  battery  was 
intended  by  him,  and  received  the  answer  as  follows : 

De  Saussure  said  the  Marion  Light  Artillery  and  the  Germans  would  he  ready  hy  to- 
day. Call  upon  the  commanding  officer  Fourth  Brigade  South  Carolina  Militia. 

From  information  here  neither  the  Marion  nor  the  German  sections 
will  be  ready  for  two  or  three  days,  nor  do  I believe  they  will  be  ready 
for  a week.  The  Washington  Artillery  commenced  its  preparation  some 
time  ago  by  my  direction,  and  was  called  out.  Meantime,  while  absent, 
it  was  intended  to  attach  it  to  the  Stevens  Legion,  and  the  governor 
had  an  idea  of  also  attaching  Boyce’s  company  of  so-called  light  artillery. 
The  Washington  Artillery,  however,  have  not  mustered  into  Confeder- 
ate service,  and  I doubt  whether  they  will,  and  they  stand  now  as  a 
company  of  State  troops  temporarily  in  Confederate  service,  with  State 
guns  (six  pieces,  three  caissons,  battery  wagon,  and  forge),  and  horsed 
partly  by  State  and  partly  by  Confederate  horses.  Their  preference  is  to 
a regiment  of  militia  artillery  of  South  Carolina  *,  but  I should  have  no 
hesitation  in  making  them  perform  any  duty  they  are  capable  of. 

With  regard  to  tlie  intention,  if  more  troops  can  be  got,  to  hold  in 
advance  and  reoccupy  Edisto,  it  seems  to  me  as  far  forward  as  we  can 
go  with  safety  from  Charleston  the  better  we  are  for  its  defense.  Now, 
occupying  positions  to  defend  the  rivers  Ashepoo,  Paw  Paw,  and  Com- 
bahee  involves  taking  position  on  the  main  only.  The  rivers  will  be 
obstructed  above  the  batteries.  Paw  Paw  will  be  defended  by  two  24- 
pounders  recovered  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Black,  and  two  light  4-pound- 
ers. The  other  rivers  I had  intended  to  defend  with  two  12s  each,  and 
to  let  a section  of  light  artillery  be  with  each  battery,  and  to  have  such 
a supporting  force  of  infantry  and  cavalry  to  support  them  as  it  may 
be  possible  to  give  or  the  necessity  demands,  the  defense  to  be  made 
either  i)ermaneut  or  temporary,  as  circumstances  might  dictate,  and  to 
have  for  its  object  the  protection  of  that  section  of  country  from  which 
most  of  our  subsistence  must  be  drawn.  As  it  stands  now,  the  enemy 
can  run  up  to  the  railroad  at  any  moment  and  cut  our  communication 
at  once  in  his  barges,  ravage  the  plantations  on  either  side,  and  return. 
The  obstructions  will  detain  his  vessels,  it  is  true,  but,  unguarded,  will 
be  removed  speedily,  and  his  barges  can  come  at  any  time.  There  is 
not  even  the  show  of  a force  to  render  him  cautious,  and  it  has  been 
reported  to  me  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Black  that  the  enemy’s  officers 
have  made  several  pertinent  inquiries  from  negroes  with  whom  they 
have  had  intercourse  with  regard  to  our  armament  on  the  rivers.  Each 
of  the  positions  being  on  the  main,  retreat  to  the  railroad  is  easy,  over 
a low,  flat  country,  impracticable  in  many  places  except  by  the  roads. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


337 


and  these  tolerably  secure  so  long  as  the  defenders  have  a force  of  light 
artillery.  The  infantry  force,  unless  a large  quantity  [is]  at  our  disposal, 
need  be  no  larger  than  to  support  the  artillety  against  a sudden  attack 
and  give  confidence  to  the  i)opulation.  Moreover,  with  a small  force  in 
position,  the  enemy,  it  appears  to  me,  will  be  obliged  to  take  time  if  he 
wishes  to  cut  our  communication  and  land  in  strength. 

With  regard  to  Edisto,  with  the  three  rivers  held  as  proposed,  our 
inland  navigation  south  of  Jehossee  being  gone,  we  can  block  Dawho 
on  both  sides  of  the  Edisto  Ferry,  or  one  to  be  established  at  Pine- 
berry  or  vicinity.  The  obstructions  there  can  be  defended  by  riflemen, 
assisted  by  light  guns  from  Willstown  Blufi',  the  place  of  obstruction  on 
Paw  Paw.  If  it  be  possible  to  place  another  battery  on  Edisto  or  Sea- 
brook’s  Island,  if  an  enemy  passes  he  cannot  cut  off  the  troops  on 
Edisto,  who  can  gain  the  main  before  he  can  remove  the  obstructions. 
Not  many  are  wanted  there,  if  they  can,  under  a proper  officer,  be  made 
moveable  and  vigilant  to  i)rotect  property  and  to  retire. 

The  troops  on  John’s  Island,  should  the  enemy  attempt  to  run  by 
and  force  Church  Flats  battery,  can  fall  back  through  Wadmalaw  to  a 
church,  which  is  a fine  position  for  a battle  on  a small  scale,  and  where 
the  main  fight  should  be  on  John’s  Island.  If  Church  Flats  are  forced, 
they  can  cross  the  Stono  by  Legareville,  between  Stono  and  Battery 
Island;  or,  should  the  enemy  land  on  the  main  south  of  Church  Flats, 
the  communication  is  direct  to  the  lines  on  James  Island  or  the  city. 
Asa  defense  for  Clfarleston  it  seems  tome  that  the  farther  out  ouri)osts 
are,  so  long  as  our  force  is  not  too  small  here,  the  longer  the  enemy 
will  take  to  make  his  attack. 

I have  written  at  length,  as  I shall  not  probably  have  an  opportunity 
of  seeing  the  commanding  general  on  the  subject  soon.  But  we  want 
two  or  four  more  regiments  to  fulfill  these  objects,  and  I regret  to  state 
that  under  present  arrangements  they  are  coming  slowly. 

My  commission  as  brigadier-general  dates  August  15. 

I am,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dep’t  of  South  Carolina, 

Geor(^town^  December  6,  1861. 

Maj.  T.  A.  AVashinoton, 

Department  Adjutant- General : 

Major:  Yours  of  the  3d  received*  this  morning.  The  additional  150 
32  round  shot  was  received  yesterday. 

Not  having  had  any  authority  over  the  engineers  in  charge  of  works 
here  until  within  the  past  week,  although  for  two  months  in  charge  of 
the  district,  I have  been  unable,  until  authorized  as  above,  to  carry  out 
any  of  my  own  views  in  regard  to  the  defenses  of  coast  in  this  district. 
I had  already  directed  the  abandonment  of  the  work  at  North  Santee 
and  ordered  the  guns  there  removed.  They  will  be  temporarily  placed 
on  the  work  at  Cat  Island.  Should  I make  any  other  disposition  of  the 
guns,  I will  inform  you  of  it.  I would  place  them  higher  up  the  river, 
but  there  is  no  position  for  them  without  incurring  heavy  expense  in 
piling,  &c.,  the  land  being  all  swamp  or  rice  land  and  below  the  level  of 

*Not  found. 

22  R R- 


■VOL  VI 


338  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

the  daily  tides.  The  first  point  would  be  10  miles  above  the  present 
position,  leaving  many  plantations  below  it  entirely  exposed. 

I can  use  these  guns  to  greater  advantage  on  the  main  than  at  any 
point  on  the  banks  of  the  Santee.  At  present  my  entire  available  force 
is  emjfioyed  in  the  completion  of  the  south  and  Cat  Island  redoubt. 

I desire  to  call  the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  a matter, 
and  in  the  absence  of  any  instructions  on  the  subject  it  is  proper,  I be- 
lieve, that  I should  inform  him  that  I have  directed  the  ofiicers  under 
me  commanding  at  the  different  posts  in  this  district  immediately  on  the 
coast  that,  should  it  be  apparent  that  the  enemy  intend  to  make  an  effort 
in  force  to  occupy  an,y  portion  of  this  coast  and  it  be  evident  that  they 
will  succeed  in  establishing  themselves  or  actually  succeed  in  doing  so, 
they  direct  the  rice  planters  to  destroy  all  the  rice  and  provision 
crops  on  their  plantations ; and,  in  the  event  of  their  failing  so  to  do,  to 
cause  it  to  be  destroyed  themselves  as  a military  necessity  j the  negroes 
to  be  removed  also  by  force,  if  necessary. 

With  a view  to  this,  I sent  to  each  rice  planter  on  the  adjacent  rivers 
some  three,  weeks  since  a circular  recommending  that  provision  be  made 
with  as  little  delay  as  possible  for  the  probable  removal  of  their  negroes, 
with  subsistence  for  one  year,  to  different  points  inland,  not  less  than 
15  or  20  miles  from  the  coast,  the  plantation  flats  and  boats  with  which 
each  planter  is  sup])lied  readily  furnishing  the  transportation  by  the 
rivers,  beyond  the  reach  of  their  gunboats  and  vessels ; also  informing 
them  that  I would  endeavor  to  make  such  arrangements  that,  on  their 
requiring  it,  a military  force  would  be  furnished  them  to  insist  on  obe- 
dience on  the  part  of  the  slaves  to  their  masters’  orders. 

In  many  instances  these  suggestions  have  been  complied  with,  and 
such  arrangements  are  being  generally  made.  Over  two-thirds  of  the 
rice  crop  of  the  State  is  made  in  this  neighborhood,  and  as  the  entire 
crops  are  in  the  different  barn-yards,  it  would  be  disastrous  in  many 
ways  should  our  enemies  ever  succeed  in  possessing  themselves  of  so 
large  an  amount  of  provisions,  particularlj^  valuable  to  them  for  reasons^ 
too  numerous  to  mention  here. 

So  satisfied  am  I that  our  true  policy  is  to  destroy  all  we  cannot 
remove  or  hold,  that  unless  otherwise  directed  I shall  carry  out  the 
instructions  that  I previously  mention  having  given.  I do  not,  how- 
ever, intend  that  they  shall  take  possession  quietly  or  without  a struggle 
while  I have  the  means  of  opposing  them. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  M.  MANIGxlULT, 

Colonel  Tenth  Begimentj  Commanding  First  Military  District. 


Eichmond,  Decemher  7,  1861. 

Governor  Pickens, 

Columbia: 

I have  ordered  three  regiments — two  of  Tennesseeans  and  one  of  Vir- 
ginians— to  your  State.  Several  more  will  follow.  Two  batteries  of  fly- 
ing artillery  have  been  sent  and  one  more  will  follow,  and  one  regiment 
of  Mississipj)ians  have  been  ordered  to  Savannah.  You  are  kept  in  con- 
stant remembrance. 

J.  P.  BEYJAMIN, 

iSecreiary  of  War. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


339 


Headquarters, 
Coosaiohatchiej  December  7,  18G1. 

General  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding^  d'C.y  Charleston: 

General:  I have  read  with  attention  your  letter  of  the  5tli  instant. 
I regret  to  learn  that  the  Marion  Light  Artillery  is  not  yet  prepared  lor 
the  field.  When  it  is  ready  please  inform  me  whether  it  will  be  required 
in  the  vicinity  of  Gharleston. 

Unless  more  field  artillery  can  be  obtained,  it  will  be  almost  impos- 
sible to  make  head  against  the  enemy,  should  he  land  in  any  force.  I 
understand  from  your  letter  that  the  Washington  Artillery  is  only  tem- 
porarily in  Confederate  States  service,  and  supi)ose,  therefore,  cannot  be 
calculated  upon  for  general  service.  Being  partly  equipi)ed  by  the  State 
and  partly  by  the  Confederate  States  causes  embarrassment  in  supply- 
ing it  with  necessary  articles.  It  is  very  desirable  that  the  battery 
should  enter  the  Confederate  service  so  soon  as  to  be  rendered  as  effi- 
cient as  possible. 

The  defense  of  the  rivers  Ashepoo,  Paw  Paw,  and  Combahee,  for  the 
I)rotectidn  of  the  railroad,  is  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  I trust  may 
be  speedily  accomi)lished. 

As  the  positions  occupied  will  be  on  the  main,  the  withdrawal  of  the 
ti'oops,  in  case  of  necessity,  can  be  easily  eflected.  Moreover,  the  [)ro- 
tection  of  that  section  of  the  country,  upon  [which]  you  rely  for  subsist- 
ence, is  very  desirable.  The  only  difficulty  I see  to  the  measure  is  the 
want  of  troops  to  insure  successful  resistance  should  the  enemy  land 
in  force.  The  three  rivers  being  defended  as  proposed,  the  passage 
through  Dawho  and  at  Church  Flats  being  obstructed,  preclude  the 
enemy’s  approach  to  the  railroad.  It  would  be  also  desirable  to  pre- 
vent his  occupation  of  Edisto,  but  whether  fixed  batteries  can  now  be 
erected  of  sufficient  strength  I think  is  doubtful.  It  will  also,  I fear,  be 
impossible  to  obtain  the  regiments  which  you  think  necessary  for  the 
l)urpose.  I can  learn  of  no  regiments  in  South  Carolina  entering  the 
service.  Several  have  been  offered  to  me  from  other  States,  but  they  are 
all  unarmed,  and  J have  none  for  them. 

Very  respectfully,  E.  E.  LEE, 

General j Commanding, 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  4.  ) CoosaichatcMe,  IS.  C.,  December  7,  1861. 

I.  The  recent  inspection  by  the  medical  director  of  the  department 
discloses  the  existence  of  much  sickness  among  the  troops.  No  special 
means  can  be  devised  for  banishing  measles,  but  catarrhal  affections, 
pneumonia,  and  rheumatic  complaints  are  produced,  in  manj-  instances, 
by  bad  selection  of  sites  for  camps.  They  should  always  be  located  on 
high  and  dry  ground,  exposed  to  the  healthful  influences  of  the  sun. 
It  is  believed  that  typhoid  disease  is  developed  by  the  close  air  of  tents, 
the  want  of  personal  cleanliness,  the  neglect  of  proper  police,  and  the 
prolonged  occupation  of  the  same  ground  of  encampment-  Command- 
ing officers  are  particularly  desired  to  establish  proper  sinks,  remote 
from  the  tents,  and  to  cause  the  daily  removal  of  all  garbage  and  offal. 
The  tents  must  be  frequently  emptied  and  ventilated  and  the  bedding 
thoroughly  aired  and  cleansed.  A proper  attention  to  these  measures 
on  the  part  of  commanding  and  medical  officers  will  do  much  to  mitigate 
disease  and  i)romote  the  health  and  efficiency  of  the  men. 

II.  The  commanding  general  finds  it  necessary  to  urge  upon  the  offi- 


[Chap.  XV. 


340  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 

cers  in  every  department  tlie  practice  of  strict  economy  in  all  purchases 
and  expenditures.  Commanding  officers  will  see  that  the  regulations  in 
this  respect  are  rigidly  observed,  and  that  the  supplies  for  the  Armv  are 
properly  cared  for  and  used.  The  good  of  the  service  and  the  comfort 
of  the  troops  demand  strict  attention  to  this  subject. 

By  order  of  General  Lee  : 

W.  n.  TAYLOB, 

A sais taut  Adju tcm t- General, 


Columbia,  December  8,  1861. 

Hon.  Mr.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

I am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  the  regiments  promised  and  the  flying 
artillery  companies.  I began  to  fear  you  had  forgotten  us.  1 start 
twenty  companies  with  our  State  arms  in  the  morning  and  more  coming 
in.  The  fleet  at  Saint  Helena  cannot  be  counted.  Please  push  on  your 
troops,  for  by  Thursday  we  will  begin  to  feel  the  enemy. 

P.  W.  PICKENS. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  December  8,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  E.  Lee, 

Coosawhatchie,  S.  C.: 

Sir:  Your  letter  of  3d  instant  was  received  on  the  7th.  Since  its 
reception  I have  telegraphed,  announcing  that  measures  had  been  taken 
to  re-enforce  you  with  three  batteries  of  field  artillery  and  three  regi- 
ments of  infantry,  and  that  several  other  regiments  would  be  sent.  The 
three  on  the  way  to  you  are  Donelsoffis  brigade,  of  two  Tennessee  regi- 
ments, and  Starke’s  regiment.  They  were  all  ordered  to  re-enforce 
General  Floyd,  but  did  not  reach  him  in  time  to  prevent  his  retreat. 
His  whole  force  has  now  been  withdrawn  from  Western  Virginia,  and  I 
expect  further  to  send  you  Bussell’s  Mississippi  regiment,  Phillips’  Geor- 
gia regiment,  Waddili’s  Louisiana  battalion,  and  perhaps  some  others. 
Floyd’s  army  is  now  on  railroad  near  Wytheville,  and  as  soon  as  it  has 
been  inspected  and  furnished  with  its  necessary  supplies  of  tents,  camp 
equipage,  &c.,  say  in  about  five  or  six  days,  the  additional  troo[)s  just 
mentioned  will  be  sent  you,  unless  some  unforeseen  exigency  shall  render 
it  impossible.  I am  firm  in  my  purpose  not  to  give  a musket  to  a man 
enlisted  for  less  than  the  war  (or  three  years,  which  is  the  same  thing), 
and  therefore  I beg  that  you  will  inform  Governors  Pickens  and  Brown 
that  if  they  have  no  “war”  troops  ready  to  receive  the  arms  you  still 
retain  in  your  hands,  you  will  at  once  arm  the  other  regiments  mentioned 
in  your  letter,  and  if  they  are  unable  to  promise  the  troops  immediately, 
you  will  please  write  Colonel  Mitchell  that  you  are  authorized  by  tliis 
Department  to  arm  his  regiment,  and  to  order  it  to  Savannah  or  Charles- 
ton for  that  purpose.  I had  nearly  forgotten  to  say  Colonel  Dowd’s 
regiment  of  Mississippians,  unarmed,  has  been  ordered  to  Savannah  to 
receive  arms  from  you  if  Georgia  has  no  “war”  troops  to  receive  them, 
and  must  therefore  be  armed  before  Colonel  Mitchell’s  regiment.  Keep 
me  advised  of  your  wants,  that  I may  send  you  everything  our  means 
will  permit. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


341 


Garden’s  Corner,  December  8,  18G1 — 11.30  p.  m. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Coosawhatehie^  8.  C.: 

Captain  : Half  an  hour  ago  I received  information  from  Captain  Maffit 
that  a small  force  of  tLe  enemy  were  landing  at  Cunningliam  Point; 
tliat  with  my  company  from  Page’s  Point  he  would  attack  them.  Just 
now  I have  by  a courier  further  information  from  Captain  Mahit  that 
the  enemy  are  landing  in  force  at  Cunningham  Point,  lauding  contin- 
uously from  bojjts  and  flats.  Upon  conference  with  Colonel  Ounovant, 
who  is  now  in  my  quarters,  he  will  take  his  command  to  the  junction  of 
the  road  from  Cunningham  Point  with  the  main  road  from  i^ocotaligo 
to  this  point.  We  will  await  further  orders.  Shall  we  move  on  to  the 
attack  ])rovided  the  enemy  does  not  advance  to  the  road  occui)ied  by 
Colonel  Dunovant"?  Colonel  Dunovant  is  senior  colonel. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  JONES, 

Colonel  Fourteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 


Eichmond,  December  9,  1861. 

Col.  George  Deas, 

Dublin  Station^  Ya.: 

Hasten  forward  Donelson’s  Tennessee  brigade  and  Starke’s  regiment 
to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  as  already  ordered.  Auswer-by  telegraph. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 


Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee^  December  9,  1861. 

Hon.  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America : 

Sir  : For  some  time  before  his  death  General  Grayson  was  rendered 
non  compos  mentis  by  disease,  and  acted  upon  suggestions.  Satisfied  of 
this  fact,  and  with  the  view  so  far  as  was  possible  of  protecting  him  from 
imposition,  I requested  his  attendants  to  invite  my  attention  whenever 
he  should  be  called  upon  to  discharge  any  official  duty.  This,  however, 
was  not  at  all  times  practicable,  nor  perhaps  possible.  As  an  illustra- 
tion, upon  one  occasion  I was  called  upon  at  night  by  one  William  J. 
Turner,  of  the  vicinity  of  Tampa  Bay,  and  requested  to  commission  him 
and  others  as  officers  of  a cavalry  company.  I refused  to  do  so.  This 
Avas  about  10  o’clock  at  night.  In  half  an  hour  after  a dispatch  came, 
addressed  to  General  Grayson  and  myself,  bringing  information  that 
the  enemy  were  landing  near  Saint  Mark’s.  General  Grayson  was  con- 
fined to  his  bed  (which  he  never  left  alive),  and  before  2 o’clock  I left 
the  capital  by  railroad,  with  a company  of  light  artillery  and  one  of 
infantry,  with  the  aid  of  other  troops  near  the  place,  to  repel  the  in^m- 
sion.  The  enemy,  however,  not  landing,  I returned  to  the  capital,  and 
learned  that  Turner  had  departed  with  orders  from  General  Grayson 
under  which  his  company  has  since  been  mustered  into  the  Confederate 
service.  I am  now  informed,  by  men  of  high  respectability  and  un- 
doubted veracity  and  standing  in  the  country,  that  Turner  has  116  men 
mustered  into  the  service,  and  many  of  them  upon  horses  which  could 


342  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

not  stand  a day’s  marcli.  This  company  is  in  the  vicinity  of  Tampa  Bay, 
a region  of  country  wliere  cavalry  cannot  possibly  be  of  any  use.  That 
point  (and  indeed  all  others  in  Florida),  if  it  can  be  defended  from  in- 
vasion, will  be  by  artillery  and  infantry.  Also  that  the  quartermaster 
(McKay),  in  the  purchase  of  supplies  for  said  company,  is  paying  from 
$1.50  to  $2  per  bushel  for  com,  and  is  hauling  it  from  20  to  GO  miles,  in 
wagons  (with  the  teams)  hired  at  $7  per  day.  One  of  the  gentlemen 
who  gave  me  this  information  also  informed  me  that  his  own  wagon 
and  team  are  hired  at  that  price.  This  company  is  not  one  of  those 
recently  raised  by  W.  G.  M.  Davis,  but  is  an  additional  company,  author- 
ized by  the  order  of  General  Grayson,  obtained  at  a time  when  he  could 
not  have  been  resimnsible  for  any  act  that  he  might  have  done. 

This  is  but  one  fact  in  relation  to  the  abuse  which  cannot  but  grow 
out  of  the  presence  in  this  State  of  such  troops  in  the  Confederate  serv^- 
ice.  Doubtless  the  same< facts,  though  perhaps  not  to  the  same  extent, 
exist  in  the  supply  of  every  other  company  of  cavalry  recently  raised 
for  the  Confederate  service,  and  every  retlectiug  man  in  the  country  is 
becoming  alarmed  at  the  uncalled  for  waste  of  the  substance  of  the  laud 
at  the  very  time  when  it  should  be  husbanded  5 and  throughout  the 
State  the  people  are  becoming  indignant  that  such  bodies  of  unarmed 
men  and  idle  horses  should  be  reared  up  among  them,  with  no  prospect 
but  to  consume  the  means  of  supi)ortfor  the  women  and  children,  crip- 
ple the  usefuliress  of  the  armed  troops  for  defense  against  the  enemy, 
and  bring  ruin  upon  the  j^eople  and  disgrace  upon  the  Confederate 
Government. 

These  troops  have  been  raised  by  authority  of  the  War  Department 
in  disrespect  to  State  authority  and  in  disregard  of  State  rights  5 and,  in 
addition  to  the  fact  of  vital  ruin  they  are  bringing  upon  the  country, 
against  which  it  is  my  duty  to  and  I do  most  solemnly  protest,  the 
tendency  of  the  assumption  and  exercise  of  such  ])ower  by  (he  Confed- 
erate Government  is  to  sap  the  very  foundation  of  the  rights  of  the  States 
and  is  to  consolidation.  The  worst  feature  of  Black  Eepublicanisrn  was 
that  which  threatened  to  ignore  State  boundaries  and  the  rights  of 
States  as  free,  sovereign,  and  independent  parties  to  the  compact  known 
as  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  of  America.  The  sinuosities 
of  the  policy  of  that  party  were  not  seen  or  comiirehended,  and  the 
great  body  of  the  people,  in  tlieir  devotion- to  the  Union,  were  blind  to 
the  fact  that  inroads  were  constantly  but  quietly  being  made  upon  the 
guarantees  secured  by  the  Constitution.  Had  the  effort  been  made  by 
act  of  Congress  to  elect  the  President,  Eepresentativesin  Congress,  and 
Federal  officers  generally  by  the  people,  regardless  of  State  political 
organization,  the  attempt  Avould  have  been  so  open  and  glaring,  that 
every  man  of  intelligence  and  patriotism  throughout  the  country  would 
have  declared  it  a usurpation  of  power  and  a violation  of  constitutional 
authority.  That  would  have  been  so  palpable  as  not  to  have  escaped 
any  intelligent  mind.  Yet  the  effect  would  not  have  been  half  so  ruin- 
ous as  is  the  policy  pursued  by  the  War  Department  in  assuming  to  raise 
ui)  armed  bodies  of  men  within  the  limits  of  a State  in  disregard  of  the 
constituted  authorities  of  the  State.  And  why  ? The  answeris,  that  the 
first,  being  seen  and  comprehended  as  a flagrant  invasion  aiul  usurpa- 
tion, would  have  roused  the  people  in  resistance  throughout  the  length 
and  breadth  of  the  land ; the  last  is  so  insinuating  as  not  to  have  alarmed 
any  one,  and  hence  good  and  true  men  are  found  advocating  it,  without 
thought,  as  a right.  Well,  admit  and  exercise  it  as  a right,  and  let  it  be 
continued,  and  before  the  lapse  of  a century  such  bodies  of  men  will  be 


Chap.  XV.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  343 

reared  up  within  the  limits  of  the  States  by  some  able  and  ambitious 
Executive  of  the  Confederate  Government  as  to  enable  him  to  override 
the  constituted  authority  of  the  States  and  destroy  the  last  vestige  of 
human  libert3^  Is  this  an  unreasonable,  conclusion  ^ Is  it  half  so  un- 
reasonable as  the  facts  which  now  exist  in  the  United  States  ? ‘‘  Wlien 

we  see  a President  making  war  without  the  assent  of  Congress  ; when 
we  behold  judges  threatened  because  they  maintain  the  wait  of  hab(‘as 
corpus,  so  sacred  to  treemen;  when  we  see  justice  and  law  trampled 
under  the  armed  heel  of  military  authority,  and  upright  men  and  inno- 
cent women  dragged  to  distant  dungeons  upon  the  mere  edict  of  a 
despot ; when  we  find  all  this  tolerated  and  applauded  by  a people  who 
had  been  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  freedom  but  a few  months  ago,’^  we 
may  be  admonished  that  there  may,  in  time,  be  danger  to  us,  unless  we 
meet  with  our  opposition  at  the  very  threshold  every  invasion  of  the 
rights  of  the  States,  whether  that  invasion  be  intentional  or  not.  I have 
no  thought  that  a man  could  be  found  who  would  say  that  the  course 
pursued  by  the  War  Department  is  intended  as  a usurpation  or  in  dero- 
gation of  the  rights  of  the  States.  But  w’e  must  forget  the  teachings  of 
history  to  supx)ose  that  men  will  not  be  what  men  have  been.  Look  again 
at  the  peo|)le  of  the  United  States.  Once,  who  more  hrin  in  the  main- 
tenance of  chartered  guarantees  than  they  ? Who  more  wnitchful  of  their 
1‘ights  or  more  quick  to  resist  aggression  than  they  ? So  devoted  were 
they  to  the  sacred  cause  of  freedom,  that  a temi)le  in  one  of  their  chief 
cities  has  been  denominated  the  Cradle  of  Liberty.*^  And  yet  where 
are  they  now  ? Their  Constitution  openly  violated  ; their  laws  trampled 
under  foot  5 their  press  muzzled ; the  freedom  of  si^eech  a thing  of  the 
l)ast  and  they  applauding.  Would  they  hav^e  believed  this  if  they  had 
been  told  it  fifty  years  ago?  Had  they  been  as  watchful  in  this  as  in 
former  ages,  and  had  checked  aggression  at  its  incipiency,  they  w'ould 
not  now  have  been  as  they  are ; and  unless  we  shall  be  watchful  of  our 
rights,  we  may  in  an  age  to  come  be  as  (hey  are.  What  has  been  may 
again  be,  if  we  neglect  that  maxim  of  i>atriotism,  ^‘Eternal  vigilance  is 
the  plice  of  liberty.” 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  resi)ectfully, 

‘ jon:^^  MiLTOx. 


Headquarters, 
Coosawhatchie,  December  9,  1861. 

Col.  E.  G.  M.  Dunovant, 

Comm  a ndin //,  &c. : 

Colonel:  The  Thirteenth  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Col. 
O.  E.  Edwards,  has  been  ordered  to  take  the  road  towards  Garden’s 
Corner  and  to  halt  at  the  first  convenient  spot  beyond  Pocotaligo. 
This  is  intend<^d  as  a precautionary  movement,  and  should  you  need 
support,  you  will  call  u^jon  Colonel  Edwards  to  join  you.  In  the  event 
of  not  being  required,  Colonel  Edwards  is  ordered  to  return  to  his  camj) 
this  evening.  You  are  desired  to  use  all  the  force  under  your  command 
in  driving  the  enemy  from  the  main  whenever  he  may  land  within  your 
reach. 

I have  the  honor  to  be, 


E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


344  COASTS  OF  S,  C,,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Headquarters, 
Coosawhatchie,  December  9,  1861. 

Colonel  [E.  G.  M.J  Dunovant, 

CommanfUng,  dx. : 

Colonel:  A dispatch  has  just  been  received  from  Colonel  Jones, 
stating  that  the  enemy  was  landing  at  Cunningham  Point,  and  asking 
whether  you  should  move  to  the  attack,  provided  the  enemy  does  net 
advance  to  the  road  now  occupied  by  you. 

Tlie  general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that  if  the  enemy  attempts 
to  effect  a landing  on  this  side  you  will  attack  him  and  drive  him  back. 

W.  H.  TAYLOK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 
Coosawhatchiej  December  10,  1861. 

General  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District^  South  Carolina: 

General  : Captain  Ives  reports  that  the  obstruction  placed  in  the 
Combahee  Eiver,  even  should  it  stop  the  advance  of  an  enemy,  would 
arrest  him  within  miles  of  the  railroad,  and  unless  prevented  by  a 
strong  force  he  could  easily  reach  it  by  land.  There  is  no  defense  of 
this  corner  projected,  nor  could  one  be  advantageously  arranged.  The 
work,  however,  is  partially  completed,  and  is  therefore  of  some  benefit. 
Two  12-pounders  are  placed  at  Tar  Bluff,  with  a view  of  opposing  the 
ascent  of  the  river.  They  can  make  but  slight  resistance,  especially  as 
they  are  unprotected  by  defensive  works,  and  being  within  IJ  miles  of 
Field’s  Point,  a good  landing  place  for  the  enemy,  they  can  easily  be 
cai)tured. 

If  an  obstruction  can  be  placed  in  the  Combahee  below  the  bluff  it 
would  give  more  stability  to  the  battery,  and  perhaps  prevent  the 
enemy  from  attempting  the  ascent  of  the  river.  The  width  is  about  200 
yards  and  the  depth  at  least  40  feet.  It  would  therefore  require 'great 
labor  to  obstruct  it.  I understand,  however,  that  the  planters  inter- 
ested in  the  project  are  willing  to  furnish  labor  and  material,  and  the 
matter  is  left  to  your  discretion. 

Very  respectfully, 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  17.  f Coosawhatchiej  S.  0.,  December  10,  1861. 

I.  The  coast  of  South  Carolina  will  be  divided  into  five  military 
districts : 

The  First,  or  Eastern  District,  will  extend  from  Little  Eiver  Inlet  to 
the  South  Santee  Eiver,  under  the  command  of  Col.  A.  M.  Mauigault, 
headquarters  at  Georgetown. 

The  Second,  beginning  at  the  South  Santee,  will  extend  to  the  Stono 
Eiver  and  up  Eantowles  Ci'eek,  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  E.  S. 
Eipley,  headquarters  at  Charleston. 

The  Third  will  comprise  the  country  between  the  Stono  and  Ashepoo 
Eivers,  under  the  command  of , headquarters  at  Adams  Eun. 

The  Fourth  will  extend  from  the  Ashepoo  to  the  Port  Eoyal  entrance, 
thence  through  the  Colleton  Eiver  and  Ocella  Creek  to  Ferebeeville, 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  345 


under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  headquarters  at 
Coosa  whatchie. 

The  Fifth  will  embrace  the  country  between  the  last-named  boundary 
and  the  Savannah  liiver,  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  F. 
Drayton,  headquarters  at  Ilardeeville. 

*##**#* 


V.  The  Third  Military  District,  as  organized  in  Paragraph  I,  is  for 
the  present  attached  to  the  Second. 


By  order  of  General  Lee : 


W.  n.  TAYLOR, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


State  of  South  Carolina,  A.  and  I.  G.  O., 

Columbia^  8.  0.,  Dceember  12,  1861. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding  Southern  Department,  Coosawhatehie  : 

General:  Having  understood  from  unofficial  sources  that  you  feel 
somewhat  embarrassed  as  to  the  control  and  disposition  of  the  State 
troops  in  service,  in  consequence  of  conflict  of  orders,  I have  the  honor 
to  state  that  no  orders  have  been  issued  at  any  time  from  this  office 
which  can  in  the  slightest  degree  conflict  with  your  imjdied  or  expressed 
wishes.  In  fact,  1 know  of  no  orders  but  those  requiring  troops  of  the 
State  to  report  to  you  or  your  subalterns  for  duty  upon  requisitions  made. 
The  troops  of  the  State  are  entirely  without  any  reservation  under  your 
control,  and  the  only  iriegularity  attending  the  matter,  as  far  as  this 
office  is  concerned,  is  that  requisitions  for  troops  are  often  made  by 
subalterns  instead  of  coming  through  the  department  office. 

I would  assure  you  again  of  the  most  hearty  and  sincere  co-operation 
of  the  State  authorities  in  all  iiossible  matters ; of  their  earnest  desire 
to  carry  out  your  designs  and  wishes  when  made  known  to  them,  and 
their  readiness  to  respond  to  any  call  you  may  make  u})on  them  to  the 
utmost  extent  of  their  ability.  Permit  me  to  add  that  they  do  this  the 
more  cheerfully,  as  you  possess  their  entire  confidence. 

I have  just  read  this  letter  to  the  governor,  and  he  approves  and 
indorses  my  expressions  of  confidence  and  support. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a cojiy  of  ray  orders*  under  act  of  the  gen- 
eral assembly  of  the  State,  and  as  soon  as  the  militia  organizations  can 
be  relieved  and  their  places  supplied  by  volunteer  troops  I shall  no 
longer  have  any  distinct  State  troops  in  the  field,  but  all  will  have  taken 
Confederate  service. 

Allow  me  to  say  that  the  troops  now  being  sent  forward  are  sent  in 
accordance  with  the  instructions  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Preston,  assist- 
ant adjutant-general.  I have  given  orders  for  the  fitting  up  of  two 
additional  batteries  of  light  artillery,  making  five  State  batteries  in  all, 
and  have  written  to  ask  for  the  guns  of  our  battery  in  Virginia,  as  the 
term  of  service  of  the  men  who  are  with  it  expires  in  J anuary  next. 

Let  me  ask  of  you  to  inform  me  at  once  of  any  irregularity  that  can 
be  remedied  by  State  authority,  and  it  will  be  promptly  attended  to. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  GIST, 

Adjutant  and,  Inspector  General  of  South  Carolina. 


Not  found. 


346  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.  XV. 


Headquarters, 

Charleston^  S.  0.,  December  13,  1861. 

General  D.  -S.  Bonelson, 

Commanding  Third  Brigade  Tenn.  Yols.,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 
General  : The  general  commanding  directs  that  yon  should  proceed 
with  your  brigade  to  Coosa whatchie,  S.  C.,  as  soon  as  the  quartermaster 
at  this  place  (Maj.  H.  Lee)  can  furnish  you  with  the  necessary  trans- 
portation. Directions  have  already  been  given  to  him  to  that  effect. 
Very  respectfully,  <&c., 

T.  A.  WASHINGTOj^, 
Assistant  Adjutant  General, 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  16,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. : 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  8th  instant,  forwarded  from  Coosawhafchie, 
has  just  been  received.  Two  of  the  batteries  (Thorntoifs  and  Leake’s) 
and  two  of  the  regiments  (Fulton’s  and  Savage’s)  mentioned  in  your 
letter  have  arrived.  I hope  the  others  named  will  be  dispatched  with- 
out delay. 

I have  notified  Governors  Pickens  and  Brown  that  unless  they  had 
troops  from  their  States  ^^for  the  war”  ready  to  receive  the  arms  at 
my  disposal,  I should  issue  them  to  regiments  from  other  States  that 
have  offered  theiu selves  for  service  in  this  department.  On  being  in- 
formed by  General  Lawton  that  he  had  been  advised  by  Governor 
Brown  that  he  had  none  from  Georgia,  I directed  him  to  arm  the  Missis- 
sippi regiment  (Colonel  Dowd).  On  the  application  of  General  Trapier 
for  re-enforcements,  having  no  other  regiment  available,  I have  directed 
General  Lawton  to  send  the  Mississippi  regiment  to  Fernandina,  where 
they  have  only  1,300  men. 

- The  Mississippi  regiment,  with  some  Georgia  companies  that  have 
been  mustered  into  the  Confederate  States  service  for  the  war,  will 
absorb  all  the  arms  intended  for  Georgia  troops.  There  are  several 
companies  in  this  State  organized  for  the  war,  recently  raised,  and  un- 
armed, attached  to  Colonels  Orr’s  and  Dunovant’s  regiments,  that  will 
require  so  many  arms,  as  not  to  leave  more  than  sufficient  for  one  regi- 
ment. If  a regiment  is  not  furnished  by  South  Carolina,  I -will  receive 
either  Colonel  Mitchell’s  or  Col.  C.  C.  Lee’s  regiment  from  North  Caro- 
lina. The  latter  officer  is  a graduate  of  the  West  Point  Academy,  and 
I believe  before  his  recent  resignation  was  in  the  Ordnance  Corps.  He 
served  in  Virginia  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  Colonel  Hill’s  regiment. 
North  Carolina  Volunteers. 

Could  more  arms  be  had  for  the  troops  for  the  war,  as  I believe,  there 
would  be  no  difficulty  in  procuring  men.  There  is  great  need  of  more 
lieavy  guns,  but  knowing  the  constant  demand  in  every  section  of  the 
country  for  arms  and  ammunition,  hesitate  to  make  requisitions.  If, 
however,  twenty  could  be  spared  for  this  department  they  would  be  of 
great  benefit — 8 or  10  inch  guns,  42  and  32  pounders,  for  water  defense, 
and  8-inch  howitzers,  24-pounders  or  less,  for  land  defense. 

The  land  defenses  around  the  city,  commencing  on  the  coast  side  of 
James  Island,  extending  to  Wappoo  Creek,  thence  to  Ashley  Eiver, 
across  the  neck  between  Ashley  and  Cooper,  and  from  the  branch  through 
Christ  Church  Parish  to  the  sound,  are  in  good  state  of  progress,  and 


4 


Chap.  XV.] 


347 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

will  HOW  give  steadiness  and  security  to  our  troops  in  any  advaiH^e  of 
the  enemy  from  any  of  those  quarters,  and  afford  time  to  move  troo])S 
to  meet  them.  The  works  have  been  mostly  constructed  by  labor  fur- 
nished by  the  idanters.  I hope  tliey  will  l)e  completed  this  week.  The 
batteries  in  the  harbor. are  in  good  condition,  and  if  ])roi)erly  served 
should  arrest  the  ap])roach  by  the  channel.  Wai)i)oo  Creek  is  also 
provided  with  batteries  in  addition  to  those  ])reviously  constructed 
at  the  mouth  of  tlie  Stono,  which  shonld  stoj)  vessels  by  that  direction. 
They  form  part  of  the  lines  of  laud  defense  and  points  of  support  where 
they  touch  the  creek.  • 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 
General j ComniancUng, 


Charleston,  Deeemher  IG,  18G1. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Tennessee  regiments  arrived.  Want  what  can  be  spared  from  other 
points.  Eequire  heavy  guns,  if  available.  Land  defenses  around 
Charleston  progressing.  If  batteries  are  well  fought,  enemy  ought  not 
to  succeed  by  water  api)roaches.  Eighty  vessels  of  enemy  counted  at 
Port  Eoyal  on  the  12th. 

Pv.  E.  LEE. 


Eichmond,  I)ecemJ)er  IG,  18G1. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Charleston : 

I send  you  six  32-pounders,  with  barbette  carriages.  They  will 
leave  here  on  Wednesday.  Have  sent  you  WaddilPs  Louisiana  battal- 
ion and  Ector’s  Georgia  regiment.  Will  send  you  EusselPs  Mississi]>pi 
regiment  and  Phillips’  Georgia  Legion  in  a day  or  two.  Will  you  want 
any  more  heavy  guns? 

J.  P.  BENJAMI]^, 

Seeretary  of  War, 


CoosAWHATCHiE,  December  17,  18G1. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

In  addition  to  the  six  32-pound(:rs,  require  guns  and  howitzers  on 
traveling  carriages  for  land  defense.  Understand  they  can  be  had  at 
Eorfolk.  Have  written  on  the  subject. 

E.  E.  LEE. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  22.  f Coosaivliatcliie,  8.  0.,  Deeemher  18,  18G1. 

Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  C.  S.  Provisional  Army,  having  reported 
at  these  headquarters,  XRirsRant  to  instructions  from  the  Secretary  of 
War,  is  hereby  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Third  Military  District 
of  South  Carolina,  as  set  forth  in  Paragraph  I,  Special  Orders,  No. 
17,  current  series,  from  these  headquarters. 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General,  C.  8.  Army. 


348  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Heat  quarters, 

Goosatvhatchie,  S.  (7.,  December  20,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  Bar,  Richmond^  Va.: 

Sir  : I am  much  in  need  of  guns  for  land  defense  and  the  protection 
of  the  rivers  extending  into  the  country.  I have  understood  that  there 
are  carronades  at  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  unemployed.  Please,  if  prac- 
ticable, send  me  eight  42-pounder  corronades  on  chassis  carriages,  with 
a supply  of  shot,  grape,  shell,  and  primers,  implements,  &c.,  complete, 
with  as  little  delay  as  possible. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verj^  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 

[Indorsement.] 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Gorgas,  for  immediate  attention. 

J.  P.  B. 

On  the  17th  December  three  32-pounder  heavy  guns.  On  the  21st 
December  two  8-inch  columbiads  were  sent  to  General  Lee,  and  to-mor- 
row cue  8-inch  columbiad  and  one  24-pounder  siege  gun  will  be  sent. 

Very  respectfully, 

L.  GIBBON,  Captain, 
December  30,  1861. 

Eight  42-pounder  carronades  were  sent  from  Norfolk  navy -yard  to 
General  Lee  December  27,  as  i)er  invoice  received  from  Commodore 
Fairfax.  The  ammunition  will  be  sent  from  here  to-day. 

J.  GORGAS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Chief  of  Ordnance, 


Richmond,  December  20,  1861. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Charleston : 

I have  no  objections  to  your  giving  arms  to  any  companies  mustered 
for  the  war,  as  requested  l)y  Governor  Pickens,  It  is  not  necessary  to 
reserve  them  for  an  organized  regiment  unless  you  prefer  to  do  so. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  23.  1 Coosawhatchie,  December  20,  1861. 

* * # * * * * 

III.  The  following  regiments  and  battalion  of  South  Carolina  volun- 
teers, recently  mustered  into  the  service  of  the  Confederate  States,  are 
assigned  to  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  and  will  imme- 
diately proceed  to  such  destinations  as  that  officer  may  designate,  viz : 
Sixteenth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Col.  C.  J.  Elford;  Seventeenth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Col.  J.  H.  Means  j Laurens  battalion,  Maj. 
G.  S.  James. 

******* 

By  order  of  General  Lee : 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant  General, 


Chap.  XY.]  COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  349 

CoosAWHATCiiiE,  December  21,  ISGl. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin  : 

Have  already  stated,  after  arming  organized  corps  would  arm  com- 
panies for  the  war  if  arms  remained. 

B.  E.  LEE. 


Headquarters, 

' CoosawhatcMCj  December  23,  18G1. 

General  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding^  chc..  Charleston^  S.‘C.: 

General:  I am  gratified  to  learn  by  your  letter  of  the  21st  instant 
that  the  battery  at  Church  Flats  is  ready  for  action  and  tbe  obstruction 
prepared  for  closing  the  channel.  The  troops  that  you  have  advanced 
from  Charleston  into  the  Third  Military  District  must  remain  for  the 
present  under  the  command  of  General  Evans.  I hope  by  this  time 
that  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Eegiments  and  Laurens  battalion 
of  South  Carolina  Volunteers  have  reached  him.  As  soon  as  he  can  be 
properly  re-enforced,  the  regiments  that  it  may  be  desirable  to  have 
around  Charleston  can  be  recalled  into  your  district.  In  the  mean  time 
I request  that  you  will  furnish  the  necessary  sn])plies  to  the  troops, 
upon  proper  requisitions,  and  aid  General  Evans  in  every  way  in  your 
power  in  the  organization  of  his  district  and  by  furnishing  him  all  need- 
ful information  and  facilities  that  he  may  require. 

I wish  as  soon  as  possible  that  you  would  inform  me  of  the  number, 
&c.,  of  troops  present  in  the  Third  Military  District,  as  it  may  be  some 
time  before  General  Ev^ans  can  furnish  me  with  an  official  return. 

I agree  with  you  as  to  the  importance  of  holding  John’s  Island  and 
the  post  at  Church  Flats,  and  beg  that  you  will  re  enforce  General 
Evans,  if  necessary,  to  enable  him  to  do  so. 

I have  the  honor,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  24.  j Coosawhatchie,  8.  C\,  December  23,  18G1. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg,  C.  S.  Provisional  Army,  having  reported 
at  these  headquarters,  in  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  War 
Department,  will  report  to  Brig.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton  for  duty  with  the 
South  Carolina  troops  serving  in  the  Fourth  Military  District. 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  D.  S.  Donelson,  commanding  Tennessee  Brigade,  and 
Col.  W.  E.  Starke,  commanding  Sixtieth  Virginia  Volunteers,  will  re- 
port their  commands  to  Brigadier-General  Pemberton  for  duty  in  the 
Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 


* * * 
By  order  of  General  Lee: 


* * * * 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-Geyieral^  C.  8.  Army, 


COOSAWHATCHIE,  December  24, 1861. 

[Magrath]  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I have  just  received  your  note  announcing  the  meet- 
ing of  the  Convention  about  to  take  place  at  Columbia.  The  exposed 
condition  of  the  State  and  the  iiresence  of  a iiowerful  enemy  on  her  shores 


350  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

will  naturally  occupy  tlie  earnest  consideration  of  tliat  enlightened  hody. 
I do  not  think  that  any  suggestion  from  me  will  be  necessary  or  even 
useful,  as  I feel  certain  that -every  measure  requisite  for  the  i)rotection 
of  the  State  or  her  citizens  will  be  adopted,  lii  com])liaTice,  therefore, 
with  your  kind  request  to  make  to  you  any  suggestions  that  may  seem 
to  me  required  by  present  circumstances,  I think  it  only  necessary  to 
repeat  more  emphatically  than  perhaps  I have  been  able  to  do  in  person 
the  urgent  necessity  of  bringing  out  the  military  strength  of  the  State 
and  putting  it  under  the  best  and  most  ])ermanent  organization.  The 
troops,  in  my  opinion,  should  be/)rganized  for  the  war.  We  cannot  stop 
short  of  its  termination,  be  it  long  or  short.  No  one,  I presume,  would 
desire  to  do  so  ; no  one,  therefore,  will  continue  in  service  longer  than 
the  war  requires.  The  disbanding  and  reorganization  of  troops  in  time 
of  peace  is  attended  with  loss  and  expense ; what  must  it  be  in  time  of 
war,  when  it  may  occur  at  periods  that  might  otherwise  prove  highly 
disastrous  ? 

I tremble  to  think  of  the  consequences  that  may  befall  us  next  spring 
when  all  our  twelve-months’  men  may  claim  their  discharge.  At  tbe 
opening  of  the  campaign,  when  our  enemies  will  take  the  field  fresh  and 
vigorous,  after  a year’s  preparation  and  winter’s  repose,  we  shall  be  in 
all  the  anxiety,  excitement,  and  organization  of  new  armies.  In  what 
different  condition  will  be  the  opposing  armies  on  the  plains  of  Manas- 
sas at  the  resumption  of  active  operations!  I have  thought  that  Gen- 
eral McOJellan  was  waiting  to  seize  the  advantage  he  would  then  pos- 
sess. 

I beg  you  will  put  a stop  to  this  lamentable  state  of  affairs.  The  Con- 
federate States  have  now  but  one  great  object  in  view,  the  successful 
issue  of  their  war  of  independence.  Everything  worth  their  possessing 
depends  on  that.  Everything  should  yield  to  its  accomplishment. 

Tliere  is  another  point  to  which  I would  invite  your  attention.  The 
best  troops  are  ineffectual  without  good  officers.  Our  volunteers,  more 
than  any  others,  require  officers  whom  they  can  respect  and  trust.  The 
best  men  for  that  position  should  be  selected,  and  it  is  important  to 
consider  how  it  can  be  effected.  It  would  be  safe  to  trust  men  of  the 
intelligence  and  character  of  our  volunteers  to  elect  their  officers,  could 
they  at  the  time  of  election  realize  their  dependent  condition  in  the  day 
of  battle.  But  this  they  cannot  do,  and  I have  known  them  in  the  hour 
of  danger  repudiate  and  disown  officers  of  their  choice  and  beg  for 
others.  Is  it  right,  then,  for  a State  to  throw  upon  its  citizens  a re- 
sponsibility which  they  do  not  feel  and  cannot  properly  exercise?  The 
colonel  of  a regiment  has  an  important  trust,  and, is  a guardian  of  the 
honor  of  the  State  as  well  as  of  the  lives  of  the  citizens.  I think  it 
better  for  the  field  officers  of  the  regiment  in  the  State  service  to  be 
ap})ointed  by  the  governor,  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  its  legislature, 
and  those  in  the  Confederate  service  by  the  President  and  Congress. 
It  would  also,  in  my  opinion,  add  to  the  simplicity  and  economy  of  our 
military  establishment  to  conform  to  the  same  ])rinci})le  of  organization. 
That  a(lox)ted  by  Congress  is  formed  by  the  united  wisdom  of  the  State 
representatives,  and  is  followed  in  its  army.  It  would  be  well  for  the 
State  governments  to  adopt  it,  as  far  as  circumstances  will  permit. 
Special  corps  and  separate  commands  are  frequent  causes  of  embarrass- 
ment. 

It  is  useless  for  me  to  suggest  that  measures  be  taken  to  develop  the 
military  resources  of  the  State ; to  advance  the  fabrication  of  powder, 
arms,  and  all  the  necessaries  of  war,  as  well  as  the  production  of  boun- 
tiful supplies  for  her  troops  and  citizens.  The  strictest  economy  should 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  351 

be  enforced  in  ever^'  department  aiid  tlie  most  rigid  accountability  re- 
.(jnired  of  its  officers.  1 have  not  been  able  to  get  an  accurate  rcjjort  of 
the  troops  under  my  command  in  the  State.  I hope  it  may  be  as  large 
as  you  state,  but  I am  sure  those  for  duty  fall  far  short  of  it.  For  in- 
stance, De  Saussure’s  brigade  is  put  down  at  3,420  men.  When  last 
in  Charleston  (the  day  inquired)  I was  informed  that  in  one  regiment 
there  were  110  men  for  duty  in  camp  on  the  Race-Course  and  in  the 
other  about  200.  Colonel  Branch,  I am  told,  had  only  about  200  men 
with  him  at  Rockville,  though  I have  had  no  official  report  of  his  retrea  t 
from  there. 

The  companies  of  mounted  men  in  the  service  are  very  much  reduced. 
The  Charleston  Light  Dragoons  and  the  Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles  have 
about  45  men  each.  The  companies  of  Colonel  Martin’s  regiment  are 
very  small.  One  of  them — Captain  Fripp’s — reports  4 commissioned  offi- 
cers, 9 non-commissioned  officers,  and  10  privates.  It  is  very  expen- 
sive to  retain  in  service  companies  of  such  strength,  and  I think  all  had 
better  be  reorganized. 

I have  only  on  this  line  for  field  operations  Heyward’s,  De  Saussure’s, 
Dunovant’s,  Jones’,  and  Edwards’  regiments  from  South  Carolina  and 
Martin’s  cavalry.  General  Ripley  writes  that  Elford’s  and  Means’  regi- 
ments are  poorly  armed  and  equipped  and  at  i)reseut  inefiective,  and 
that  the  organization  of  the  troops  thrown  forward  on  James  Island  is 
so  brittle  that  he  fears  it  will  break.  The  garrisons  at  Moultrie,  Sum- 
ter, Johnson,  and  the  fixed  batteries — the  best  and  most  stable  of  our 
forces — cannot  be  removed  from  them ; neither  can  those  at  George- 
town, and  should  not  be  counted  among  those  for  operations  in  the  field. 

You  must  not  understand  that  this  is  written  in  a complaining  spirit. 
I know  the  difficulties  in  the  way,  and  wish  you  to  understand  them,  ex- 
plain them  to  the  governor,  and,  if  possible,  remove  them.  Our  enemy 
increases  in  strength  faster  than  we  do  and  is  more  enormous.  Where 
he  will  strike  I do  not  know,  but  the  blow  when  it  does  fall  will  be  hard. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE. 


Headquarters, 
Coosaivliatchie,  December  24,  1861. 

General  A.  R.  Lawton, 

Savannah,  Ga. : 

General:  Your  communication  of  23d  instant*  has  been  received. 
The  general  commanding  is  glad  to  learn  that  instructions  have  been 
given  to  .officers  commanding  batteries  to  withhold  their  fire  till  the 
enemy’s  vessels  are  within  efiective  range  of  the  guns,  and  trusts  that 
this  practice  will  in  all  cases  be  strictly  adhered  to.  The  general  hopes 
that  the  threatening  approach  of  the  enemy’s  boats  will  stimulate  the 
officers  and  the  troops  of  your  district  to  press  forward  the  projected 
earthworks  and  defenses  to  a speedy  completion.  As  no  further  re- 
enforcements can  be  spared  to  send  to  you,  it  will  be  necessary,  should 
your  command  require  strengthening,  to  call  upon  the  governor  of  the 
►State  of  Georgia. 

The  general  has  been  informed  that  three  32-pounders  are  on  their 
way  from  New  Orleans,  and  as  they  will  probably  be  sent  by  Augusta, 
he  is  desirous  that  you  should  make  arrangements  to  have  them  for- 
warded from  that  place  to  Savannah.  Two  of  them  will  be  sent  to  Gen- 


No  t found. 


352  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

eral  Trapier  at  Fernandina,  and  the  third  placed  at  such  point  as  may 
be,  in  your  judgment,  inost  necessary.  Should  the  guns  be  unju-ovided 
with  carriages,  Colonel  Gill  has  been  directed  to  supply  them. 

The  guns  for  General  Trapier  the  latter  has  made  a requisition  for, 
and  desires  to  have  forwarded  to  him  without  delay. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
Asnistant  Adjutant-  General, 


Richmond,  December  25,  1801. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Coosaivhazchie  : 

Yours  of  20th  received.  On  the  17th  sent  you  three  32-pouuders 
from  here,  and  ordered  three  more  sent  to  you  from  Rew  Orleans.  On 
the  21st  sent  you  two  8-inch  columbiads.  Will  send  you  to-morrow  one 
more  8-inch  columbiad  and  one  21-pounder  siege  gun. 

J.  P.  BE17JAMIR, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Hdqrs.  First  Military  District,  Dept,  of  S.  0., 

Georyetoivn^  Dece^nber  25,  1801. 

T.  A.  Washington, 

Asslsta7it  Adjutant- General : 

Major  : The  schooner  Prince  of  Wales,  from  Nassau,  loaded  with 
salt,  fruit,  &c.,  having  been  chased  by  a steamer  and  bark  of  the  Fed- 
eral Navy,  ran  into  North  Inlet,  one  of  the  harbors  of  this  district,  the 
enemy’s  vessels  not  being  able  to  follow  her,  and  she  getting  aground 
when  inside,  and  having  been  hulled  several  times  by  their  shot,  boats 
were  sent  in  to  take  her,  when  the  captain  fired  the  vessel  and  escaped 
with  his  crew.  The  enemy  proceeded  to  tow  her  out,  when  a mounted 
detachment  of  Captain  Tucker’s  company  arrived,  opened  fire  from  the 
north  side  of  the  inlet  upon  the  boats,  and  forced  them  to  abandon  their 
prize  and  return  to  their  shiijs. 

About  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  five  boats  filled  with  men  put  off  again 
from  the  vessel,  to  come  in  either  to  land  on  North  Island  or  again  take 
possession.  Lieutenant  Harllee,  .with  C men  (picket  guard).  Company 
D,  Tenth  Regiment,  as  soon  as  they  came  within  reach,  fired  upon  them 
and  continued  to  do  so,  eventually  driving  them  back  to  their  vessels. 
The  boats’  crews  in  both  instances  returned  the  fire  of  our  men.  No  one 
hurt  on  our  side.  Detachments  sent  to  support  the  picket  guards  did 
not  arrive  in  time  to  take  any  part  in  the  affair.  I regret  to ’state  that 
the  vessel  has  since  burned  to  the  water’s  line,  and  is,  with  her  cargo, 
a total  loss.  She  was  owned,  I believe,  by  the  house  of  John  Fraser  & 
Co.,  Charleston. 

I remain,  respectfully, 

A.  M.  MANIGAULT, 
Colonel^  Commanding  First  Military  District, 


Headquarters  Second  District  South  Carolina, 

Charleston,  December  25,  18G1. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a letter 
from  General  Lee,  of  the  23d  instant,  and  inclose  herewith  a memoran- 


€iiai>.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  353 

diiin  of  the  troops  in  General  Bvans^  district.*  I shall  do  everything  in 
niy  power  to  furnish  his  troops  and  give  him  every  information  and 
facility.  The  Laurens  battalion  moved  yesterday,  but  I fear  that  the 
Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Eegiments  will  not  be  ready  for  service  for 
some  days. 

Eeferring  to  a letter  of  former  date  from  General  Lee,  in  which  I am 
directed  to  give  my  attention  to  extended  operations  to  meet  the  preda- 
tory excursions  of  the  enemy  (supposing  the  Stono  fleet  to  have  dem- 
onstrated his  abandonment  of  an  attack  on  Charleston),  I beg  to  say 
that  I shall  do  so  to  the  utmost  of  my  ability.  The  enemy  will  hardly 
attempt  any  such  incursions  between  Charleston  and  Stono,  the  limit 
of  my  command,  and,  if  he  does,  the  locality  is  pretty  well  guarded. 
liTorthward  there  is  but  little  to  attract  for  plunder  until  he  gets  to 
BulFs  Bay;  thence  to  the  limits  north,  the  Santee  country,  it  is  very 
difficult  of  approach  on  account  of  the  intricate  navigation  ; it  is  rich, 
however,  and  invites  attack  on  that  account.  I have  there  only  the 
newly-raised  command  of  Maj.  Edward  Manigault.  I intend  to  re-en- 
force it  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore’s  battalion  (made  up  of  the  extra 
companies  of  Orr’s  regiment)  as  soon  as  it  is  armed  completely ; Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Moore  is  endeavoring  to  raise  his  battalion  to  a regiment, 
in  which  I hope  he  will  succeed. 

I also  inclose  a memorandum  of  the  troops  in  the  Second  Military 
District.*  The  force  is  nominally  large,  and  would  allow  re-enforce- 
ment of  other  points,  but  from  the  peculiar  position,  and  the  character 
of  the  country,  which  does  not  admit  of  celerity  of  movement  without 
an  almost  unprece<iented  amount  of  land  and  water  transportation. 
These  facilities  I shall  of  course  endeavor  to  improve,  but  with  the  crip- 
pled mechanical  resources  of  this  city  it  may  take  some  time.  Briga- 
dier-General Evans  Avrote  to  me  day  before  yesterday  requesting  that  I 
would  place  a steamer  at  his  disposal  for  the  ferry  at  John’s  Island ; 
I have  doue  so.  Meantime  I have  been  informed  that  there  is  a steam- 
flat  nearly  completed,  which  will  cost  about  $4,500.  I have  ordered 
her  inspected,  and  were  John’s  Island  in  my  command  should  have  her 
employed  as  a ferry-boat.  The  ferry  is  in  bad  order,  and  it  will  be 
difficult  to  make  a rope  ferry  of  it  on  account  of  the  diagonal  position 
of  the  landings. 

The  State  Troops  Eifle  and  Seventeenth  Eegiment  South  Carolina  we 
will  probably  break  up  as  soon  as  they  are  called  in,  and  we  shall  prob- 
ably get  one  respectable  well-armed  regiment  from  them.  It  would 
facilitate  its  formation  if  those  troops  could  be  relieved  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible after  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  South  Carolina  Volunteers 
take  the  field. 

The  lines  on  James  Island,  were  the  troops  in  readiness  to  occupy 
them,  might  be  considered  finished.  As  they  are  not,  50  or  100  hands 
for  three  or  four  days  will  be  necessary  to  put  the  works  in  a little  per- 
mancy.  The  lines  on  Christ  Church  will  be  done  in  the  course  of  three 
days,  and  will  be  quite  strong ; Lieutenant  Blake  has  carried  them  quite 
down  to  the  inland  navigation,  covering  the  landing.  One  company  of 
Hatch’s  regiment  has  been  ordered  to  take  post  as  a lookout  on  the 
islands  to  the  northward  of  the  city,  to  give  notice  of  the  approach  of  an 
enemy  and  protect,  as  far  as  possible  thereby,  the  rice-boats  coming 
from  Santee.  It  seems  to  me  important  to  get  as  much  of  rice  to  market 
as  may  be,  should  our  communication  be  in  danger  of  being  interrupted. 

The  lines  on  the  Eeck  are  progressing  but  slowly,  for  want  of  the 


23  R R — YOL  VI 


* Not  found. 


354  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

hands.  I trust,  however,  as  a law  has  been  passed  authorizing  impress- 
ment of  negro  labor,  that  as  soon  as  Christmas  is  over  we  shall  have  a 
considerable  force,  without  the  necessity  of  making  use  of  the  law. 

It  seems  that  there  will  be  a good  deal  of  difficulty  in  arming  and 
equipping  the  companies  of  light  artillery  in  Major  White’s  battalion 
and  of  Captain  Boyce.  Major  White  is  still  garrisoning  the  batteries  at 
Wappoo,  which  I shall  endeavor  to  increase  in  armament  with  the  two 
12-pounder  ship  guns  from  the  Theodora.  The  24-pounder  I think  of 
placing  on  Castle  Pinckney.  The  one-gun  battery  on  the  right  of  the 
James  Island  line  is  constructed,  and  will  be  armed  and  garrisoned 
with  one  of  White’s  companies  speedily;  but  for  guns,  caissons,  or  har- 
ness for  them  I am  utterly  at  a loss. 

From  such  observation  as  has  been  lately  made  the  sunken  fleet  is 
gradually  disappearing. 

I have  omitted  to  mention  that  the  Marion  Artillery  will  be  ready  for 
the  field,  with  four  pieces,  within  a day  or  so ; they  are  State  troops. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Adams  Bun,  December  26,  1861. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  your  information,  that  my 
express  has  just  arrived,  with  the  intelligence  that  the  enemy,  with  a 
force  of  ten  vessels,  are  advancing  up  Wadmalaw  Sound,  firing,  as  they 
advance,  both  upon  Edisto  Ferry  and  White  Point.  These  points,  it  is 
understood,  are  being  occupied  by  the  enemy.  Please  send  me  re-en- 
forcements ; my  force  is  only  250  strong. 

Truly,  yours, 

N.  G.  EYAXS, 
Brigadier- General,  G.  S.  A. 


Marianna,  December  26,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : Inclosed  is  a report  from  General  Floyd,  who  is  in  command  at 
Apalachicola ; also  a copy  of  a report  made  by  Lieut.  B.  Mickle,  who, 
at  my  request,  was  sent  by  General  Bragg  upon  an  application  for  a 
skillful  engineer  and  artillerist. 

Much  has  been  accomplished  by  the  forces  in  service  by  State  au- 
thority since  Colonel  Hopkins  was  ordered  from  and  left  there,  who  is 
in  Confederate  service;  and  immense  expense  has  been  saved,  which 
was  being,  to  say  the  least,  uselessly  incurred. 

If  the  Confederate  Government  will  become  definitely  responsible  for 
the  defense  of  Apalachicola  by  State  authority,  the  expense  will  be  less 
and  its  defense  more  certain.  The  forces  in  State  service  at  Apalachi- 
cola have  been  well  equipped  and  well  drilled,  and  are  generally  sub- 
stantial men  and  men  of  intelligence,  and  this  body  of  gallant  men 
cannot  enter  the  Confederate  service  without  breaking  up  the  most 
efficient  organization  of  State  troops  unless  they  will  be  received  in 
their  present  organizations.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  associate  forces 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


ODD 


in  tlie  service  of  tlie  Confederate  Governnient  and  those  serving  by 
State  authority  harmoniously.  If  it  can  be  done,  no  officer  is  better 
qualified  to  accomplish  it  than  General  Floyd.  Thrice  the  ex])ense  has 
been  incurred  and  thrice  the  force  assembled  for  the  defense  of  Fermni- 
dina,  and  yet  Apalachicola  is  decidedly  the  most  important  commercial 
city,  and,  in  a strategic  point  of  view,  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  would 
aflbrd  greater  facilities  for  injury  to  the  South.  Both  places  are  wortliy 
of  the  means  necessary  to  a successful  defense. 

These  matters  are  respectfully  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the 
Secretary  of  War  and  President,  provided  the  proposition  submitted  to 
establish  a military  department  in  parts  of  Georgia,  Florida,  and  Ala- 
bama shall  not  meet  with  a favorable  consideration.  1 am  now  engaged 
in  raising  a regiment  of  infantry  in  West  Florida  for  service  twelve 
months — Confederate  service — to  be  armed  and  equipped  by  the  State 
and  for  the  defense  of  Apalachicola.  There  should  be  at  least  one 
artillery  company  at  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  the  entrance  to  which  can  be 
successfully  defended  by  two  cannon,  42-pounders,  with  equipments. 

The  cavalry  companies  in  State  service  at  Apalachicola  I i:>ropose  to 
retire  from  the  service.  By  an  order  issued  by  General  Grayson,  if  I 
was  informed  correctly,  the  State  troops  have  been  supplied. 

I shall  return  to  the  capital  to-morrow,  when  I shall  be  pleased  to  hear 
from  you. 

Very  respectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON. 


[Inclosures.] 

Brigadier-General’s  Office, 
AjpalacMcola^  December  18,  1801. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Milton, 

Tallahassee^  Fla.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state  to  you  that  there  are  under  my 
immediate  command  at  this  post  but  612  men,  rank  and  file,  including 
the  two  dragoon  companies.  The  additional  troops  to  be  sent  here,  as 
mentioned  by  your  excellency,  have  not  arrived,  nor  do  I know  where 
they  are.  If  these  troops  are  to  come,  I would  respectfully  suggest 
that  it  should  be  at  an  early  day,  in  order  that  they  may  have  the  all- 
important  advantages  of  drill  to  prepare  them  for  battle  when  it  should 
come.  The  troops  here  are  improving  rapidly  under  regular  drill  and 
discipline  and  are  already  quite  efficient. 

From  reports  I received  I deemed  it  prudent  to  remove  from  Saint 
Vincent’s  Island  to  this  place  and  detain  them  one  white  man  ajid 
two  negroes  who  had  been  kept  there  to  butcher  for  this  market.  From 
certain  indications  since  I am  convinced  that  the  measure  was  correct, 
and  precludes  any  possibility  of  intercourse  between  them  and  the 
United  States  blockaders.  There  is  no  proof  that  such  intercourse  had 
existed,  but  some  strong  suspicions. 

I think  it  important  to  request  your  excellency  to  appoint  a chaplain 
to  this  regiment.  There  will  then  be  no  excuse  for  any  of  the  men 
leaving  camp  on  the  Sabbath  to  attend  church  in  the  city.  The  restric- 
tions I have  necessarily  placed  upon  them  in  this  respect  and  in  the 
absence  of  a regular  chaplain  produce  dissatisfaction,  although  no 
disobedience. 

I am  informed  by  Second  Lieutenant  Mickle,  who  was  sent  to  me  by 
General  Bragg  recently  as  an  engineer,  that  there  are  two  42-pounders 
at  Pensacola  not  in  use,  and  that  it  is  probable  they  might  be,  by 


356  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

])roper  application,  easily  procured  for  this  place.  He  also  informed 
me  that  they  can  be  readily  rifled  at  Mobile.  My  largest  guns  here  are 
32s.  If  your  excellency  sanctions  it,  will  it  not  be  advisable  to  procure 
these  guns  at  once,  have  them  rifled  at  Mobile,  and  forwarded  to  this 
post,  with  about  100  rounds,  (or  less)  of  balls  for  each  ? We  could  then 
hold  the  enemy  in  check  at  long  range. 

I beg  to  call  the  above  particularly  to  the  notice  of  your  excellency, 
and  trust  my  suggestion  will  meet  your  approval. 

The  batteries  here  are  all  so  forward  towards  completion  and  their 
construction  approved  by  Lieutenant  Mickle  (whose  report  upon  them 
I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith),  that  I send  him  back  to  Pensa- 
cola, having  no  further  occasion  for  his  services.  He  is  not  acquainted 
with  artillery  drill,  else  I would  have  retained  him  here. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  excellency's  very  obedient  servant, 

E.  F.  FLOYD, 

Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 

Apalachicola,  Fla.,  December  14,  1861. 
General  Eichard  F.  Floyd, 

Commanding  Troops  at  Apalachicola: 

General  : In  company  with  Mr.  Benezet,  who  has  the  supervison  of 
the  works,  and  to  whom,  by  the  way,  I am  indebted  for  his  kindness  in 
showing  me  the  batteries  and  their  bearings  on  the  approaches  to  the 
city,  I to-day  visited  the  defenses  of  Apalachicola. 

Presuming  that  I have  but  little  experience  in  military  engineering,  I 
proceed  without  further  apology  to  give  you,  in  compliance  with  your 
request,  a brief  report  as  to  the  efficiency  of  your  batteries. 

To  my  astonishment  I found  that,  though  built  by  men  of  little  or  no 
experience,  they  diflier  but  little  from  those  around  the  harbor  of  Pensa- 
cola, and  that,  too,  on  points  involving  mere  convenience,  or  which  from 
surrounding  circumstances  require  a difference.  Your  magazines  are 
built  farther  from  the  guns  than  those  in  the  batteries  at  Pensacola, 
and  are  therefore  not  so  convenient ; and  the  parapets  are  not  so  high  in 
your  batteries  as  in  those  at  Pensacola,  but  from  the  nature  of  the  ap- 
proaches that  is  to  a great  extent  necessary. 

Except  a suggestion  to  young  gunners  to  practice  at  a target  placed 
where  the  attacking  force  would  probably  be  stationed,  I know  of  no 
other  that  I can  make  which  would  be  practicable. 

From  my  limited  knowledge  of  your  harbor  and  the  enemy^s  fleet,  I 
am  unable  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the  armament  he  may  bring  against 
you,  but  think  I hazard  nothing  in  saying  it  must  be  sufficiently  heavy 
to  destroy  your  city  at  the  distance  of  2 miles  or  he  must  adopt  another 
plan  of  attack. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  MICKLE, 

Second  Lieutenant.^  C.  S,  A, 


Headquarters, 
Coosawhatchie,  December  27,  1861. 
His  Excellency  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  South  Carolina,  Columbia  : 

Governor  : I had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  20th  inst.* 
In  a previous  [letter]  I endeavored  to  express  to  your  excellency  my 


'Not  found. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  o57 

entire  willingness  to  arm  certain  companies  of  regiments  already  in  the 
service  named  by  you,  provided  any  arms  remained  after  arming  the 
regiments  being  organized  for  the  war,  but  I cannot  issue  the  arms  before 
the  arming  of  the  regiments  is  completed. 

If  the  companies  of  Captain  Blair,  McCord,  and  Elves,  which  I 
understand  are  for  the  war,  and  attached  by  you  to  Stevens’  Legion, 
were  assigned  to  the  battalion  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore, 
which  embraces  the  six  companies  attached  to  Orr’s  regiment,  this  bat- 
talion would  only  require  one  more  company  for  the  formation  of  a regi- 
ment, and  might  then  be  armed  with  Enheld  rifles.  My  object  is  to  make 
the  arms  available  for  the  defense  of  the  State  as  soon  as  possible,  and 
I hope  your  excellency  will  aid  me  in  this. 

Major  James’  battaiion  has  been  ordered  to  report  to  General  Evans, 
who  is  in  great  need  of  troops.  General  Eipley  informs  me  that  Colonels 
Elford’s  and  Means’  regiments  will  not  be  able  to  take  the  field  for  some 
days.  In  the  mean  time  he  has  sent  forward  Colonel  Stevens’  Legion  to 
re-enforce  General  Evans. 

The  enemy  is  making  demonstrations  against  Wadmalaw  Island,  and 
our  force  there  is  not  strong  enough  to  resist  him.  Since  your  letter 
authorizing  me  to  take  command  of  the  State  troops  in  the  field,  I have 
felt  no  hesitation  in  doing  so.  Previously,  although  aware  that  certain 
forces  were  called  into  service  and  placed  under  the  command  of  Gen- 
eral Eipley,  I did  not  know  when  or  how  it  was  designed  to  use  them. 
According  to  the  last  returns  received  the  number  of  troops  mustered 
in  Confederate  service  from  South  Carolina  within  the  department  pres- 
ent for  duty  is  10,036,  including  officers,  non-commissioned  officers,  and 
privates.  The  strength  of  the  Fourth  Brigade  South  Carolina  Militia 
(De  Saussure’s),  present  for  duty,  including  officers,  non-commissioned 
officers,  and  privates,  is  reported  to  be  1,531.  Its  total  strength  present 
and  absent  is  2,021,  and  differs  from  the  number  stated  in  your  excel- 
lency’s letter,  which  is  3,420. 

The  strength  of  Colonel  Martin’s  regiment  in  the  field,  by  the  last 
returns,  is  628  j the  number  reported  for  duty,  including  officers,  non- 
commissioned officers,  and  privates,  is  567.  The  number  of  troops  in 
Confederate  States  service,  as  stated  above,  10,036,  does  not  include  the 
regiments  of  Colonels  Elford  and  Means,  the  Laurens  battalion,  and  the 
other  companies  mentioned  in  your  letter,  which  have  arrived  since  the 
returns  were  made.  In  addition  to  this  force  there  are  two  regiments 
from  North  Carolina,  two  from  Tennessee,  and  one  from  Yirginia,  and 
four  field  batteries. 

My  object  is  to  inform  your  excellency  of  the  amount  of  the  force  for 
actual  service  in  the  State.  You  must,  however,  bear  in  mind  that  the 
garrisons  for  the  forts  at  Georgetown,  of  Fort  Moultrie,  Forts  Sumter, 
Johnson,  Castle  Pinckney,  and  the  field  works  for  the  defense  of  the 
approaches  through  Stono,  Wappoo,  «&c.,  which  embrace  the  best  and 
steadiest  of  our  troops,  cannot  be  removed  from  their  posts,  and  must 
not  therefore  be  included  in  the  force  for  operations  in  the  field. 

The  strength  of  the  enemy,  as  far  as  I am  able  to  judge,  exceeds  the 
whole  force  that!  we  have  in  the  State.  It  can  be  thrown  with  great 
celerity  against  any  point,  and  far  outnumbers  any  force  we  can  bring 
against  it  in  the  field. 

I am,  &c., 


E.  E.  LEE, 
Genera  1,  Command ing. 


358  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Headquarters, 
CoosawhatchiCj  December  27,  1861. 

General  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding j Charleston: 

General:  I liave  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  25th 
instant,  inclosing  a memorandum  of  the  troops  under  General  Evans, 
and  desire  to  express  my  gratification  at  the  steps  taken  to  re-enforce 
and  support  that  officer. 

Should  you  find  that  the  enemy  intends  a movement  against  Charles- 
ton through  the  Stono  approaches,  I desire  that  you  will  resist  him 
with  all  your  available  force  and  support  General  Evans  should  he  be 
compelled  to  retire  upon  you.  In  the  event  of  the  two  commands  unit- 
ing on  duty,  as  the  senior  officer  of  course  you  will  direct  the  operations 
of  the  whole.  General  Evans  has  been  directed  in  case  of  necessity 
to  close  the  avenue  through  Church  Flats ; I request  you  to  afford  him 
every  facility  in  completely  obstructing  it  at  the  proper  time. 

Please  inform  me  whether  Maj.  Edward  Manigault’s  battalion  has 
entered  the  Confederate  service  for  twelve  months  or  for  the  war.  If 
for  the  latter  period,  it  might  be  united  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore’s 
battalion,  and,  by  the  addition  of  the  two  companies  reported  by  Colonel 
Preston  to  have  been  mustered  in  for  the  war  by  him,  would  form  a 
regiment  for  the  war.  In  that  event  I should  apply  to  the  President 
for  the  appointment  of  a colonel  for  the  regiment.  Should  Manigault’s 
battalion  be  not  enlisted  for  the  war,  could  you  not  attach  companies 
raised  for  the  war,  which  I learn  from  the  governor  have  been  sent  to 
Stevens’  Legion,  so  as  to  form  a regiment?  All  the  companies  could 
then  be  armed  with  the  Enfield  rifles  by  Colonel  Preston,  and  placed 
under  the  command  of  Col.  Carter  L.  Stevenson  (formerly  of  the  old 
service),  or  such  other  officer  as  the  President  might  think  proper. 
Should  detached  companies  be  sent  to  you  by  Colonel  Preston,  mustered 
into  the  Confederate  service  either  for  twelve  months  or  for  the  war,  I 
desire  3^011  to  collect  them  into  battalions  and  regiments  according  to 
tlieir  period  of  service,  and  jilace  them  under  the  command  of  such  field 
officers  as  are  at  your  disposal  until  their  regular  field  officers  are 
appointed.  According  to  1113'  understanding  of  the  act  of  the  legisla- 
liire  of  South  Carolina  of  December  7,  1861,  the  First  Eegiaient  Eifles 
South  Carolina  Militia,  Colonel  Branch,  and  the  Seventeenth  Eegiment 
South  Carolina  Militia,  Colonel  De  Treville,  being  part  of  the  Fourth 
Brigade,  will  not  be  disbanded  on  being  relieved  from  service.  I do  not 
see,  therefore,  how  the  formation  of  a regiment  can  be  facilitated  b3’ 
relieving  them,  as  3^011  propose,  after  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers  take  the  field.  As  the  aggregate  strength 
of  the  two  regiments  as  reported  by  3^011  will  01113"  make  one  regiment, 
namely,  854,  should  you  be  able  to  unite  them  you  are  authorized  to  re- 
lieve them  from  duty  for  that  purpose  when  their  services  can  be  spared. 

The  measures  taken  b3^  3"ou  to  secure  the  deliveiy  of  the  rice  crops 
are  judicious,  and  I hope  you  will  do  the  same  to  insure  supplies  of 
other  provisions,  corn,  provender,  &c. 

I beg  you  to  use  every  exertion  to  complete  tbe  line  of  defenses  around 
the  cit3",  and  hope  you  will  get  a sufficiency  of  hands  as  soon  as  the 
Christmas  holidays  are  over,  and  desire  that  you  will  take  the  necessaiy 
steps  for  this  purpose. 

I will  write  to  the  Ordnance  Department  to  see  if  nothing  can  be  done 
in  supplying  Major  White’s  battalion  with  artiller3".  As  soon  as  the 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  359 

Marion  Artillery  can  be  got  ready  for  the  field,  assign  it  to  such  station 
as  you  think  fit. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commandhig, 


Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Ada^ns  Run^  December  27,  1861. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  CoosawhatcJde,  S. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy  commenced  firing 
on  my  pickets  at  White  Point  yesterday  at  about  12  o’clock.  He  then 
proceeded  up  the  Wadmalaw  Sound  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Tugaloo 
Creek,  and  shelled  the  house  of  Mr.  James  King  for  four  hours,  throw- 
ing 10-inch  shells,  but  without  effect. 

The  enemy  at  the  same  time  made  a demonstration  at  Edisto  Ferry 
on  land,  though  but  few  were  seen.  Their  drums  were  distinctly  heard 
by  my  vedettes  at  the  ferry. 

The  gunboat  that  proceeded  up  the  sound  was  accompanied  by  a 
number  of  row-boats  and  a barge.  From  an  elevated  point  I could  dis- 
tinguish the  troops  aboard.  They  seemed  about  500  on  the  gunboat  to 
White  Point.  The  enemy  sent  a few  men  ashore,  and  burnt  the  summer 
house  of  Col.  James  Lezau,  which  was  situated  immediately  on  the  water. 

As  soon  as  I learned  the  enemy  would  attem^it  to  land  I ordered 
Major  James’  battalion,  of  250  strong,  and  a cavalry  force  of  30  men  to 
take  a concealed  position  on  Slann’s  Island.  I also  ordered  Captain 
Walter  to  bring  his  battery  to  these  headquarters  as  soon  as  possible, 
whence  I detached  a section  to  the  support  of  Major  James.  They 
arrived  in  their  position  about  4 o’clock.  The  enemy  retired  about  sun- 
down towards  their  large  vessels  now  in  Edisto  Inlet.  As  it  was  now 
Xirobable  he  would  land,  and  my  only  available  force  being  the  above- 
mentioned  troops,  I wrote  to  Brigadier-General  Eipley  for  re-enforce- 
ments, which  he  readily  granted. 

I will  here  report  that,  having  heard  the  enemy  was  seen  some  two  or 
three  days  since  near  Eockville,  I ordered  Colonel  De  Treville  to  cross 
over  to  John’s  Island  with  his  battalion  and  a cavalry  force  and  recon- 
noiter  the  enemy,  and  attack  him  should  he  find  himself  able  to  make 
a successful  stand.  I have  made  arrangements  for  the  return  of  this 
force  at  Church  Flats  by  a bridge  of  boats. 

Colonels  Means  and  Elford  have  reported  in  person,  and  report  their 
regiments  as  not  yet  armed  or  equipped.  They  are  now  encamped  near 
Charleston. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Third  Military  District, 


Hdqrs.  First  Military  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C., 

Georgetown,  December  27,  1861. 

T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Coosawhatchie  : 

Major  : I have  never  seen  or  received  General  Order,  No.  1,  from 
General  Lee’s  headquarters,  although  I have  written  for  said  missing 


360  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cuap.  XV. 

number.  I have  since  heard,  however,  that  my  reports,  returns,  &c.^ 
are  to  be  made  to  yourself.  This  will  account  for  my  seeming  negligence^ 
as  I have  been  reporting  regularly  to  the  headquarters  of  General  Eip- 
ley,  in  Charleston.  It  is  i)roper  (not  having  [been]  informed  of  any  gen- 
eral officer  having  been  appointed  to  the  command  of  this  district),  being 
responsible  for  this  section  of  country,  that  I should  inform  you  that  a 
great  portion  of  my  force  here,  consisting  of  650  men  of  Harllee’s  Legion, 
will,  under  the  late  act  of  the  legislature,  be  disbanded  within  a week. 
Also  that  Captain  Walker’s  company  of  horse,  Black’s  battalion,  under 
orders  from  General  Lee’s  headquarters,  has  been  ordered  to  report  to 
Colonel  Black,  and  is  now  on  the  road  to  join  him.  This  will  leave  me 
with  but  my  own  regiment  (the  Tenth)  not  more  than  800  strong,  as  the 
measles  and  mumps  have  broken  out  amongst  them  j two  small  compa- 
nies of  State  cavalry  (volunteers),  together  numbering  70  men  j one  sec- 
tion of  artillery,  30  men,  badly  horsed,  and  20  mounted  riflemen. 

With  the  long  line  of  coast  to  be  watched  and  guarded,  the  force  that 
will  be  left  me  on  the  1st  January  wiU  scarcely  be  adequate.  I am  aware 
that  there  are  other  more  exposed  and  more  important  districts,  requir- 
ing all  the  available  force  for  its  defense,  and  it  may  not  be  i)ossible  to 
re-enforce  me.  I do,  however,  desire  it  known  of  what  my  means  of 
defense  consist,  so  that  more  may  not  be  expected  of  me  than  my  force 
woul(I  warrant.  It  would  be  well  if  I could  get  another  company  of 
cavalry  j a battery  of  artillery  also.  There  is  a State  battery  here,  four 
iron  6-pounders,  old  carriages,  but  in  good  order,  with  harness  and  am- 
munition. Were  I furnished  with  horses  I could  make  good  use  of 
them. 


Effective  force  of  First  Military  District  after  the  disbandment  of  Earl- 

lee’s  Legion, 


loth  Regiment 800 

Two  companies  cavalry 70 

One  section  artillery 35 

Detachment  Mounted  Rifles 20 


Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  M.  MANIGAULT, 

Colonel^  Commanding  First  Military  Dist.^  Dept,  of  S. 


92.5 


G. 


Hdqrs.  Second  District  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston.)  December  27,  1861. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Coosawhatehie : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a letter  from 
General  Lee  of  the  date  of  December  24*.  In  answer  to  the  inquiries 
concerning  Elford’s  and  Means’  regiments,  I have  the  honor  to  inclose 
letters  from  both  of  those  colonels,  showing  the  state  of  those  regiments. 
Other  information  respecting  them,  as  well  as  any  knowledge  of  their 
or  other  troops  reporting  here,  I generally  get  from  inquiry  after  their 
arrival. 

I duly  received  the  dispatch  from  General  Lee  concerning  General 
Evans.  Previously  General  Evans  had  sent  to  me,  and  I ordered  the 
Holcombe  Legion,  about  650  strong,  and  the  best  of  the  new  troops,  to 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  361 

move  at  once.  It  is  at  Adams  Eun  before  this.  I also  directed  Elford’s 
to  be  in  readiness  to  move  this  morning,  but  received  the  report  inclosed. 
This  and  Colonel  Means’  letter  show  it  to  be  impossible  to  depend  on 
either  for  any  .support  to  General  Evans  for  a week  at  least. 

By  a reference  to  the  memorandum  inclosed  yesterday  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  only  disposable  troops  would  be  the  remainder  of  Orr’s  regi- 
ment, and  that  would  leave  Sullivan’s  Island  with  only  Dunovant’s 
regiment,  acting  as  artillery,  for  the  defense  of  that  point.  It  would^ 
I think,  be  manifestly  improper  to  take  a man  from  Stono,  as  the  enemy 
are  in  front  of  it  sounding  and  making  other  demonstrations  5 I do  not 
think  with  a view  to  attack,  unless  they  should  find  the  point  unde- 
fended. I shall*,  however,  do  the  best  I can,  and  if  General  Evans  calls 
upon  me,  shall  support  him  with  as  efiicient  a force  as  I can  muster, 
even  at  the  hazard  of  weakening  the  garrisons  in  the  harbor.  It  appears 
to  me  that  the  importance  of  defeating  our  enemy  once  well  on  this 
coast  is  worth  a great  deal  of  risk. 

I have  directed  a telegraph  station  to  be  put  in  operation  at  Adams 
Eun,  which  will  save  General  Evans’  cavalry  and  afford  information  on 
both  points. 

Upon  Colonel  Preston’s  requisition  I have  ordered  Mr.  Lowndes,  vol- 
unteer aide-de-camp,  to  proceed  to  Mars  Bluff,  and  muster  in  the  Pedee 
Legion.  Authority  to  employ  volunteer  aides-de-camp  on  this  service 
was  given  by  General  Cooper,  and  thus  far  has  not  been  revoked.  Mr. 
Lowndes  has  already  mustered  in  several  corps. 

At  Stono  yesterday  a gunboat,  recon noitering,  threw  a shell  at  the 
light-draught  steamer  supplying  the  post.  The  batteries  returned  it, 
contrary  to  instructions,  at  long  range,  and  the  two  continued  to  waste 
shots  for  half  an  hour.  I have  sent  to  forbid  any  more  practice  of  that 
kind. 

It  would  materially  assist  in  the  continuance  of  our  works  if  Captain 
Ives  could  be  spared  for  a few  days,  as  his  office  is,  I learn,  now  in  funds, 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


flnclosures.] 

Camp  Moore, 

Charleston.,  S.  C.,  December  26,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley,  C.  S.  A.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  my  regiment  is  not  in  a 
position  to  move  with  efficiency  immediately.  One  of  our  companies  is 
unarmed.  Of  the  remaining  arms,  about  100  have  proved  defective  and 
are  in  the  hands  of  the  armorer  for  repair.  We  have  not  a bayonet- 
belt,  or  scabbard,  or  cartridge-box  in  the  regiment.  Major  Eason,  the 
ordnance  officer,  informed  me  to-day  that  these  could  be  procured  in 
eight  or  ten  days.  We  have  about  three  rounds  of  cartridges  and  caps, 
but  I understand  that  ammunition  can  be  obtained.  I have  been  press- 
ing our  requisition  for  accouterments  continually  since  we  have  been 
here,  but  hitherto  without  success.  So  soon  as  we  can  procure  these  we 
are  ready  and  anxious  to  march  to  the  point  of  duty. 

• Eespectfullv. 

C.  J.  ELFOED, 

Colonel  Sixteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 


362  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  fCHAP.  XV. 

Camp  Lee,  December  26,  1861. 

Brigadier-General  Eipley  ; 

General  : In  obedience  to  verbal  orders  received  through  your  aide, 
I have  the  honor  to  report  my  regiment  as  organized  but  not  full. 
Seven  companies  are  here  encamped,  comprising  in  the  aggregate  547 
officers  and  men.  I have  75  good  muskets  (percussion)  and  415  flint-and- 
steel  muskets  utterly  unfit  for  service ; no  transportation,  but  have  been 
authorized  by  the  quartermaster  to  purchase  it,  and  will  send  agents 
to-morrow  to  do  so.  No  knapsacks  j 75  cartridge-boxes  and  bayonet 
scabbards ; no  ammunition.  I hope  to  have  my  regiment  full  in  the 
course  of  a week  or  ten  days.  I am  under  orders  for  General  Evans  to 
march  as  soon  as  ready  to  Adams  Eun. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  MEANS, 

Colonel  Seventeenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  of  State  Forces, 

Savannah^  Ga.^  December  28,  1861. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Commander-in-  Chief : 

General:  I have  assumed  command  of  a division  of  State  troops 
actually  in  the  field.  This,  for  reasons  personal  to  myself,  I had  re- 
frained from  doing  until  a question  as  to  their  willingness  to  be  trans- 
ferred to  the  Confederate  service,  submitted  to  them  by  act  of  the  legis- 
lature, had  been  decided.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that,  although 
in  the  immediate  service  of  the  State  for  State  defense,  I hold  myself 
subject  to  your  directions  in  all  military  operations  looking  to  that  end, 
and  will  make  such  reports,  at  such  times,  and  to  such  quarters  as  you 
may  be  pleased  to  designate. 

From  conversations  with  my  friend  General  Lawton  I learn  that  the 
necessity  of  this  auxiliary  force,  in  the  character  of  a reserve,  is  fully 
recognized.  I shall  labor  to  render  it  efficient. 

I am  happy  to  add  that  my  personal  relations  with  General  Lawton 
are  of  such  a character  as  to  insure  between  us  the  most  cordial  of  feel- 
ings and  a perfect  harmony  of  action. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  E.  JACKSON, 

Major-General^  Commanding  State  Forces. 


Department  of  Georgia,  C.  S.  A., 
Ordnance  Office^  Sec’d  Mil.  Dist.,  Brunswiclc^  Dec.  30,  1861. 
Capt.  E.  M.  CUYLER, 

Ordnance  Office,  Savannah : 

Dear  Sir  : By  General  Mercer’s  direction  I write  to  urge  upon  you 
the  necessity  of  sending  us  more  powder.  It  is  his  belief,  in  which  all 
who  have  seen  the  batteries  concur,  that  we  can  whip  off  the  fleet  upon 
the  first  attack ; but  that  if  it  is  renewed  the  next  day,  as  in  all  proba- 
bility it  would  be,  our  powder  woivld  be  exhausted,  and  they  could  pass 
us  without  our  being  able  to  fire  a gun.  Officers  and  men  are  all  confi- 
dent of  success  and  anxious  to  redeem  the  Port  Eoyal  disgrace,  for  so 
they  all  consider  it,  and  I think  they  will  if  the  powder  does  not  give 


CirAP.  XV.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  363 

out.  You  must  be  able  to  afford  us  some  by  this  time,  and  we  will  put 
it  to  good  use  and  see  that  none  is  wasted.  I want  20  barrels  large 
grain  and  30  barrels  fine  grain,  in  all  5,000  pounds,  cannon  powder.  I 
know  you  will  do  all  you  can. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  D.  HAKDENT, 

Ordnance  Officer. 

General  Mercer  requests  me  to  add  that  Eernandina  is  vastly  better 
supplied  with  guns  and  ammunition  than  we  are. 


State  of  South  Carolina, 
Headquarters,  December  31,  1861. 

General  Lee, 

Commanding : 

Sir:  I have  received  yours  of  the  27th  and  29th  instant.*  In  the  for- 
mer you  make  the  number  of  troops  mustered  into  Confederate  service 
from  this  State  under  your  command  10,036.  I inclose  with  this  a cor- 
rect copy  f of  the  exact  number  mustered  in  whose  rolls  are  in  theadju- 
tant-generars  office,  which  is  correct  from  the  record.  You  say  in  yours 
you  do  not  include  the  regiments  of  Colonels  Means  and  Elford  nor  the 
companies  mentioned  in  mine.  From  your  remark  in  relation  to  the 
garrisons  at  Cole’s  Island  and  Sumter  and  Moultrie  not  being  con- 
sidered troops  for  field  service,  I suiipose  you  exclude  them  also,  and 
perhaps  the  troops  at  or  near  Georgetown.  If  I am  right  in  this  con- 
struction of  your  letter,  then  the  estimates,  according  to  the  rolls  in  the 
adjutant-general’s  office,  making  17,000,  vary  but  little  from  yours  of 
10,036,  but  if  these  are  added  it  would  make  about  the  same.  If  this 
is  not  the  case,  and  I do  not  understand  you  right,  then  the  officers  in 
command  of  your  different  districts  have  not  sent  you  in  a full  report  of 
the  troops  mustered  in. 

As  to  the  suggestion  you  make  in  relation  to  a cavalry  regiment,  I 
will  cordially  unite  with  you  to  raise  the  other  four  companies,  and  we 
have  a company  now  which  General  Gist  is  trying  to  get  in  for  the  war 
unconditionally.  There  are  many  offering,  and  we  will  try  to  get  enough 
for  the  regiment  and  report  to  you,  so  that  the  President  may  send  an 
officer  to  command  them. 

I regret  to  hear  and  to  know  of  the  unpleasant  feeling  amongst  the 
officers  under  General  Eipley,  particularly  of  the  junior  officer  in  the 
artillery.  Appointments  cannot  be  made  to  please  all,  and  none  have 
been  made  but  with  an  eye  single  to  the  strength  of  the  service.  Fer- 
guson and  Beauregard  were  appointed  suiiposing  they  had  a company 
read}"  to  bring  right  into  the  battalion  of  artillery,  and  their  commis- 
sions are  not  to  be  presented  unless  this  is  done  first.  There  is  great 
difficulty  in  enlisting  regulars  now,  and  as  a large  portion  of  a company 
was  already  enlisted  for  young  Beauregard  in  New  Orleans,  I thought  it 
was  well  to  secure  a company  for  our  service,  arid  besides  I thought  it 
would  be  very  agreeable  to  all  to  appoint  a son  of  General  Beauregard. 
The  appointment  of  Kemper  as  second  lieutenant  was  because  he  was  a 
brother  of  the  gallant  commander  of  the  battery  from  Alexandria,  who 
was  with  one  of  our  regiments  in  service,  and  because  this  Mr.  Kemper 
whom  I appointed  had  settled  in  Beaufort  and  was  ruined  by  the  inva- 


Of  29 til  uot  found. 


t Not  found. 


[Chap.  XV. 


364  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 

sion  there.  Why  these'  appointments  should  create  such  excitement 
among  the  junior  officers  in  Fort  Sumter  I am  at  a loss  to  understand. 
With  great  respect  and  esteem,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  nOKEN^S. 


Headquarters, 

GoosawJiatchiej  December  31,  1861. 

General  S.  E.  Gist, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  South  Carolina: 

General  : General  Eipley,  commanding  in  Charleston,  reports  that 
the  line  of  intrenchments  for  the  defense  of  that  city  may  be  considered 
as  completed  except  those  between  the  Cooper  and  Ashley  Eivers.  He 
also  reports  that  he  is  entirely  without  troops  to  defend  them,  those  not 
required  at  the  forts  and  batteries  being  advanced  on  James  Island  and 
beyond  the  Stono  to  check  the  approach  and  marauding  i)arties  of  the 
enemy. 

The  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Eegiments  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
as  soon  as  equipped  for  the  field,  will  be  sent  to  General  Evans  for 
similar  service.  Will  you  be  kind  enough  to  inform  me  when  you  can 
place  in  the  field  the  other  regiments  of  the  State  you  have  called  into 
service? 

It  will  give  me  pleasure  to  meet  you  in  Charleston,  as  proposed  in 
your  dispatch  of  yesterday,  after  my  return  from  Savannah,  where  I 
shall  go  to-day. 

E.  E.  LEE. 


Abstract  from  monthly  report  of  the  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida,  commanded 
by  Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Trapier,  for  December,  1861. 


Troops. 


Ist  Honda  Special  Battalion  Infantry 

3rd  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers 

4th  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers • 

24th  Regiment  Mississippi  Volunteers 

Coast-^uard  on  board  steamer  General  Grayson 

Battalion  of  cavalry 

Hopkins’  independent  troop 

Owens’  independent  troop 

Pickett’s  independent  troop 

Tumor’s  independent  troop I 

Baya’s  company  of  artillery 

Martin’s  light  battery 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

23 

886 

455 

511 

44 

800 

889 

950 

39 

664 

823 

881 

40 

409 

614 

932 

45 

45 

28 

628 

674 

701 

4 

61 

68 

80 

3 

93 

105 

116 

3 

70 

73 

74 

4 

90 

95 

95 

4 

62 

66 

06 

3 

60 

65 

76 

195 

3, 323 

3,  972 

4,  527 

Headquarters, 

Goosaiohatchie^  S.  C.,  January  2,  1862.  , 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding^  c&c.,  Fernandina: 

General  : I have  not  yet  been  informed  whether  you  have  deter- 
mined to  remove  the  guns  from  the  south  end  of  Cumberland  Island. 
The  battery  at  that  point,  in  conjunction  with  the  fire  of  Fort  Clinch, 


Chav.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  365 

would  add  greatly  in  my  opinion  to  the  defense  of  the  harbor.  Its  fire 
would  reach  a ship  after  it  had  passed  beyond  the  range  of  the  guns  of 
the  fort,  and  the  position,  if  not  occupied,  might  be  used  by  the  enemy. 
I hope,  therefore,  you  will  be  able  to  make  arrangements  to  get  suffi- 
cient troops  from  the  State  of  Florida  to  support  the  battery ; and,  if  I 
recollect  aright,  works  could  be  easily  thrown  up  to  defend  its  rear. 
Respectfully,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters, 

Coosaivkatchie,  S.  (7.,  January  2,  1862. 
His  Excellency  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  South  Carolina^  Columbia: 

Governor:  I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  communication  of 
the  29th  ultimo,*  inclosing  a copy  of  the  resolution  adopted  by  the  gen- 
eral assembly  at  its  recent  meeting  relative  to  the  employment  of  slaves 
on  works  for  military  defense,  i have  given  instructions  to  General 
Ripley  to  make  with  your  excellency  the  necessary  arrangements  and 
to  urge  forward  the  works  around  Charleston  as  rapidly  as  possible.  I 
hope  that  your  excellency  will  see  that  his  wants  in  the  matter  of  labor- 
ers are  complied  with. 

I beg  leave  again  to  submit  to  your  excellency  the  great  need  of  troops 
to  defend  this  line,  and  would  respectfully  ask  that  you  urge  forward 
their  organization  with  all  possible  dispatch. 

I am,  &c., 

^ R.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters, 
Coosawhatchie,  January  3,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  R.  Jackson, 

Commanding  First  Division  Georgia  Troops^  Savannah: 

General:  I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letters  of  the  28th 
ultimo  and  2d  instant,  t I am  much  gratified  to  learn  that  the  division 
under  your  command  is  ready  for  the  defense  of  the  State  of  Georgia 
and  is  placed  at  my  disposal  for  that  purpose.  The  troops  in  the  Con- 
federate service  under  General  Lawton  have  already  been  distributed 
with  a view  to  the  protection  of  the  most  exposed  points,  and  particu- 
larly to  guard  the  approaches  to  Savannah.  There  is  no  point  at  which 
re-enforcements  may  not  be  required.  I will  direct  General  Lawton  to 
indicate  to  you  where  your  troops  can  be  of  most  service,  and  to  desig- 
nate such  points  as  you  may  take  under  your  exclusive  charge.  At 
present,  or  until  called  upon  by  General  Lawton,  I beg  that  you  will  see 
that  the  preparation  of  your  command  for  service  in  the  field  be  per- 
fected as  far  as  possible.  The  camp  and  garrison  equipage  and  baggage 
of  every  sort  should  be  curtailed  to  the  regulation  allowance.  Trans- 
portation ought  to  be  provided  and  a supply  of  ammunition  for  field 
service.  I need  not  suggest  to  you  the  necessity  for  instituting  disci- 
pline and  a regular  and  thorough  course  of  instruction  for  officers  and 
men  ; your  own  experience  will  show  you  its  propriety  and  benefit. 


Not  found. 


t Of  2d  instant  not  found. 


366  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

I shall  be  glad  to  receive  from  you  a return  of  the  strength  of  your 
troops  and  a report  of  the  condition  of  their  arms,  equipments,  &c. 

I am,  &c., 


El.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding. 


State  of  South  Carolina, 
Headquarters,  Columbia,  January  7,  1801L 

President  Davis: 

My  Dear  Sir:  I have  been  informed  from  pretty  high  authority 
that  the  telegraph  operator  at  Wilmington,  0.,  and  perhaps  at  Peters- 
burg, Ya.,  were  not  true  to  us,  and  perhaps  they  use  their  position  to 
suppress  or  delay  matters  , of  importance.  I inention  this,  and  would 
most  respectfully  suggest  that  a secret  detective  be  appointed  to  ascer- 
tain the  facts,  not  only  there,  but  anywhere  else  that  there  may  be  sus- 
picion about. 

I do  not  know  if  it  prevails  elsewhere  in  the  Army,  but  1 take  the 
liberty  to  inform  you  that  I fear  the  feeling  of  General  Eipley  towards 
General  Lee  may  do  injury  to  the  public  service.  His  habit  is  to  say 
extreme  things  even  before  junior  officers,  and  this  is  well  calculated  to 
do  great  injury  to  General  Lee^s  command.  I do  not  think  General 
Eipley  means  half  what  he  says  in  his  energetic  way,  but  others  con- 
strue it  differently. 

From  a copy  of  the  report  of  forces  sent  to  General  Lee  by  General 
Eipley,  ui)  to  December  1,  I find  many  very  important  omissions.  I 
suppose  it  must  be  from  inadvertence,  for  I do  not  think  Eipley  at  all 
exact  in  relation  to  infantry.  I have  sent  General  Lee  a correct  return. 
General  Lee  is  a perfect  head,  quiet  and  retiring.  His  reserve  is  con- 
strued disadvantageously.  I find  him  all  that  a gentleman  should  be, 
and  all  that  ought  be  expected  of  a thorough  and  scientific  officer.  The 
two  are  in  contrast. 

I have  sent  forward  lately  from  this  camp  five  new  regiments,  not  yet 
reported  to  Lee  by  Eipley. 

The  enemy  are  only  feeliug  the  different  iioints  at  present.  It  will 
be  difficult  to  approach  Charleston  with  less  than  50,000  menj  and  that 
will  be  through  North  Edisto,  over  John’s  Island  or  Stono  and  over 
James’  Island.  They  will  endeavor  to  reach  the  Ashley  about  1 mile 
above  Fort  Johnson. 

If  the  strength  of  the  forces  under  General  Pemberton  were  nearer 
Adams  Eun  it  would  be  safer  for  Charleston,  for  if  they  should  hap- 
pen to  cut  off*  the  railroad  at  Pocotaligo,  it  would  cut  off  10,000  of  our 
most  efficient  forces  so  they  could  not  apiiroach  to  defend  the  city.  JMy 
private  opinion  is  that  they  will  hardly  attack  Charleston,  at  least  until 
towards  spring.  Savannah  may  be  attacked  sooner,  but  they  will  have 
to  increase  their  forces  first  before  any  serious  move  can  be  made  against 
either  place. 

It  will  be  more  difficult  to  re-enforce  with  the  feeling  rising  in  the 
North  as  to  the  danger  of  collision  with  Great  Britain.  If  I could  be 
certain  of  3,000  arms  from  any  quarter,  I could  send  forward  3,000  more 
troops.  I have  given  out  State  arms  in  the  last  two  weeks  to  4,900  men. 
These  arms  I got  from  disbanded  companies  in  the  State,  with  1,000 
sent  from  Virginia. 

With  great  respect,  and  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  PICKENS. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


367 


Savannah,  January  8,  18G2. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General^  Richmond^  Va.: 

General  : Fi  om  a paragraph  in  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  jour- 
nals, to  which  my  attention  has  been  called,  I fear  I may  have  inadver- 
tently misled  the  Department  as  to  my  opinion  of  the  strength  of  the 
defenses  of  those  cities  and  of  my  ability  to  prevent  the  enemy  from 
penetrating  into  the  interior  of  the  country.  In  my  letters  describing 
the  works  and  batteries  in  progress  of  construction,  to  which  I cannot 
now  refer,  I intended  to  express  the  hope  rather  than  the  confident  assur- 
ance that  when  completed,  armed,  and  manned,  if  properly  fought,  the 
enemy’s  approach  ought  to  be  successfully  resisted.  I am  aware  tliat 
we  must  fight  against  great  odds,  and  I always  trust  that  the  spirit  of 
our  soldiers  will  be  an  overmatch  to  the  numbers  of  our  opponents. 

Our  works  are  not  yet  finished ; their  i)rogress  is  slow ; guns  are  re- 
quired for  their  armament,  and  I have  not  received  as  many  troops 
from  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  as  I at  first  expected.  The  forces  of 
the  enemy  are  accumulating,  and  apparently  increase  faster  than  ours. 
I have  feared,  if  handled  with  proportionate  ability  with  his  means  of 
speedy  transportation  and  concentration,  it  would  be  impossible  to 
gather  troops  necessarily  posted  over  a long  line  in  sufficient  strength 
to  oppose  sudden  movements. 

Wherever  his  fleet  can  be  brought  no  opposition  to  his  landing  can  be 
made  except  within  range  of  our  fixed  batteries.  We  have  nothing 
to  oppose  to  its  heavy  guns,  which  sweep  over  the  low  banks  of  this 
country  with  irresistible  force.  The  farther  he  can  be  withdrawn  from 
his  floating  batteries  the  weaker  he  will  become,  and  lines  of  defense, 
covering  objects  of  attack,  have  been  selected  with  this  view. 

I have  thought  his  purpose  would  be  to  seize  upon  the  Charleston  and 
Savannah  Eailroad  near  the  head  of  Broad  Eiver,  sever  the  line  of  com- 
munication between  those  cities  with  one  of  his  columns  of  land  troo^is, 
and  with  his  other  two  and  his  fleet  by  water  envelop  alternately  each 
of  those  cities.  This  would  be  a difficult  combination  for  us  successfullj" 
to  resist.  I have  been  preparing  to  meet  it  with  all  the  means  in  my 
power,  and  shall  continue  to  the  end.  Any  troops  or  guns  that  can  be 
withdrawn  from  other  points  will  greatly  aid  in  this  result. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  January  15,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  OrdnancCj  Richmond^  Ya. : 

Colonel  : During  my  recent  visit  to  Eernandina  I learned  from  Cap- 
tain McBlair,  C.  S.  Navy,  that  two  8-inch  columbiads  were  en  route  for 
that  place  in  addition  to  the  two  that  reached  there  on  the  11th.  Caj)- 
tain  Cuyler,  ordnance  officer  at  this  place,  informs  me  by  a dispatch 
from  your  office  he  is  informed  that  four  8-iuch  columbiads  are  on  the 
way  to  Eernandina,  for  which  he  is  prex)aring  carriages. 

I am  glad  to  find  that  you  can  supply  these  guns,  for  they  will  aid 
materially  in  the  defense  of  Cumberland  Harbor,  and  I hope  that  you 
may  be  able  to  furnish  others  for  this  point.  If  you  could  send  one  or 
two  columbiads  to  Savannah  and  give  me  six  guns,  24-pounders,  32- 
pounders,  or  heavier,  for  Brunswick,  I should  feel  much  better  satisfied 


368  COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

of  the  strength  of  this  coast.  I also  request  that  you  will  inform  me 
when  you  send  guns  or  munitions  upon  the  requisitions  of  others  within 
this  department,  that  I may  know  their  destination  and  application.  I 
had  not  been  informed  of  your  intention  to  send  the  six  columbiads  to 
Fernandina. 

I have  the  honor,  &c., 

ft.  Fi.  XiFjEi, 
Oeneralj  Commanding, 

P.  S. — There  is  a want  of  cannon  powder  at  Fernandina.  Captain 
Cuyler  will  send  2,000  pounds,  received  from  Augusta,  for  immediate  use. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  January  15,  1862. 
Commanding  Officer,  Fernandina^  Fla,: 

Sir  : In  reference  to  the  deficiency  of  accouterments  for  the  troops 
on  Amelia  Island,  to  which  my  attention  was  called  during  my  recent 
visit,  I find  that,  in  compliance  with  my  previous  orders,  500  sets,  on  the 
21st  ultimo,  were  sent  by  Captain  Cuyler,  of  the  ordnance,  to  Maj.  John 
G.  Barnwell,  Fernandina ; 500  sets  Enfield  accouterments,  on  the  28th 
ultimo,  by  Lieutenant  Harden,  from  Brunswick,  to  Major  Barnwell ; that 
on  the  31st  ultimo  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gill  wrote  from  Augusta  that  he 
would  send  “300  infantry  accouterments  to  Major  Barnwell,  Fernan- 
dina, in  charge  of  a special  messenger.” 

If  these  accouterments  have  been  received  there  is  no  reason  for  the 
deficiency  complained  of,  and  I request  you  will  report  the  fact  to  my 
headquarters. 

I have  directed  300  pairs  of  shoes  to  be  sent  from  this  place  to  the 
brigade  quartermaster  at  Fernandina  and  some  clothing  from  Columbus, 
which  I understand  is  at  that  place.  Captain  Cuyler  will  send  some 
cannon  powder  from  here  to  Captain  McBlair  (2,000  pounds),  which  will 
increase  his  supply  for  the  8-inch  guns.  I also  directed  when  at  Bruns- 
wick 500  pounds  of  lead  to  be  sent  to  Fernandina,  to  enable  the  colonel 
of  the  Mississippi  regiment  to  make  additional  cartridges  for  his  regi- 
ment. I understood  he  had  powder. 

By  a dispatch  from  Richmond  I learn  that  four  8-inch  guns  are  on 
their  way  to  Fernandina.  Carriages  have  been  ordered  for  them  here, 
but  only  one  is  now  completed.  I understand  that  these  are  in  addition 
to  the  two  which  reached  Fernandina  on  the  11th  instant.  Should  this 
be  the  case,  I think  one  or  two  of  them  had  better  be  mounted  on  the 
south  end  of  Cumberland  Island. 

I request  this  letter  to  be  forwarded  to  General  Trapier. 

I have  the  honor,  &c. 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


Savannah,  January  17,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Richmond^  Ya, : 

General  : By  a communication  from  the  commandant  of  Saint  Si- 
mon’s Island  I am  informed  that  the  port  of  Brunswick  is  continually 
blockaded  by  a heavy  side-wheel  steamer,  and  that  the  enemy’s  gun- 
boats have  been  cruising  inside  of  Sapello  and  the  adjacent  inlets. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


3G9 


I apprise  you  of  the  fact  in  view  of  the  shipments  expected  over  from 
Kassau,  some  of  which  may  perhaps  have  been  ordered  to  seek  access 
into  the  ports  named. 

My  letter  to  the  Department  of  the  15th  December  reported  the  coast 
clear  at  those  points  ; since  then  the  Federals  seem  to  be  on  the  alert. 

The  entrance  to  Warsaw  is  effectually  sealed  j a vessel  is  permanently 
anchored  inside. 

Yery  respectfully, 

ED.  C.  ANDERSON, 

Major ^ Artillery, 


Headquarters, 
CoosawhatcMe,  January  17,  1862. 

Hon.  C.  M.  Furman, 

Commissioner,  &c.,  City  of  Charleston: 

Sir  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  16th  instant  * 
in  reference  to  an  ordinance  of  the  State  Convention  to  provide  for  the 
removal  of  property  from  portions  of  the  State  which  may  be  invaded 
by  the  enemy  and  to  certain  resolutions  intended  to  carry  its  provisions 
into  effect.  Copies  of  the  ordinance  and  resolutions  have  been  furnished 
me,  and  I shall  take  great  pleasure  in  doing  all  in  my  power  to  aid  the 
commissioners  in  the  performance  of  the  duties  required  of  them. 

As  regards  the  probability  of  the  occurrence  of  the  contingencies  in 
which  you  will  be  called  to  act,  and  of  which  you  ask  my  opinion,  I 
can  only  say  that,  seeing  no  reason  now  for  apprehension,  I think  it  an 
act  of  prudence  to  make  provision  in  time  of  security  for  what  would 
be  required  in  time  of  danger,  and  that  steps  should  be  taken  for  the 
formation  of  depots,  &c.  - Every  arrangement  made  in  anticipation  of 
events  which,  should  they  happen,  would  mitigate  their  evil  conse- 
quences. 

As  regards  the  information  which  you  may  require  from  time  to  time 
to  govern  your  action  in  relation  to  the  city  of  Charleston,  I suggest 
that  you  apply  to  the  Confederate  officer  commanding  in  the  city,  should 
it  not  be  convenient  to  refer  to  the  commanding  general  of  the  depart- 
ment, as  by  so  doing  valuable  time  may  be  saved.  I shall  certainly 
apprise  you  of  any  danger  I can  foresee. 

With  great  respect, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters, 

Coosawhatchie,  S,  C.,  January  47,  1862. 

General  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District  S,  C,,  Charleston : 
General  ; In  reply  to  your  letter  of  this  date,*  relative  to  the  iiroposed 
operations  against  the  enemy  at  North  Edisto,  I wish  to  state  that  when 
my  approval  to  Captain  Ives  was  given  to  make  the  attempt,  I did  not 
sufficiently  understand  the  plan  to  be  able  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the 
practicability  of  its  accomplishing  the  object.  Of  this  you  must  judge 
and  of  the  means  to  effect  it. 

General  Evans  has  been  apprised  of  the  projected  expedition,  and 


24  R R 


■VOL  VI 


Not  found. 


370  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

wishes  to  be  informed  of  the  time,  place,  &c.,  so  as  to  prevent  any  col- 
lision of  our  troops. 

In  a conversation  had  with  General  Evans  to-day  he  fears  from  dem- 
onstrations of  the  enemy  that  he  may  be  preparing  to  land  on  Bohicket 
Creek,  near  West  Seabrook^s,  and  push  forward  to  the  Stono,  east  of 
Eantowles  Creek,  or  to  Legareville.  His  troops  only  extend  to  Dr. 
Whitridge’s,  on  the  west  bank  of  Bohicket  Creek.  In  the  former  case 
they  would  turn  left,  and  your  right.  In  the  latter,  with  the  assistance 
of  his  floating  batteries,  he  would  endeavor  to  silence  your  batteries  on 
Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands,  and  thus  ascend  the  Stono.  The  paucity  of 
troops  in  General  Evans’  district  prevents  his  guarding  this  route. 
Can  you  not  forward  from  the  regiments  ordered  to  him,  or  others  that 
may  have  reported  since,  a sufficient  detachment  for  this  purpose? 
Should  this  not  be  practicable,  I suggest  that  you  hold  Orr’s  regiment 
in  readiness,  or  advance  it  to  some  convenient  point,  to  move  at  a mo- 
ment’s notice. 

I have  the  honor,  &c., 

E.  E.  BEE, 
General,  Commanding. 


COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C., 

January  17,  1862. 

General  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding  in  Florida: 

General:  Arrangements  have  been  made  for  running  into  Musquito 
Inlet,  on  the  east  coast  of  Florida,  arms  and  ammunition,  by  means  of 
small  fast  steamers.  The  department  considers  it  necessary  that  at 
least  two  moderate  sized  guns  be  placed  at  Xew  Smyrna,  to  protect  the 
landing  in  the  event  of  our  steamers  being  chased  by  the  enemy’s  gun- 
boats. You  are  therefore  desired  to  send  temporarily  to  iSTew  Smyrna 
some  defense  of  this  kind  as  soon  as  possible.  The  cargoes  of  the 
steamers  are  so  valuable  and  so  vitally  important,  that  no  precaution 
should  be  omitted.  It  will  also  be  necessary  to  act  very  promptly,  as  it 
is  hoped  the  steamers  (two)  will  arrive  within  ten  or  fifteen  days. 

There  are  two  Parrott  guns  at  Fernandina,  if  nothmg  better  and  more 
available  are  at  hand,  that  could  be  sent  to  the  waters  of  the  Saint 
John’s,  and  thence  as  near  the  desired  point  as  practicable,  with  ammu- 
nition, &c.,  under  an  active  officer,  with  their  complement  of  men,  &c. 
But  the  guns,  way,  and  means  are  left  to  your  better  knowledge  and 
judgment. 

I have  the  honor,  &c., 

E.  E.  BEE, 
General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Charleston,  January  22,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District,  &c.,  Charleston,  S.  C.: 
General  : The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  inform  you  that 
he  has  just  received  a dispatch  containing  an  extract  from  a letter  dated 
the  19th  instant,  stating  that  an  officer  of  the  Confederate  service,  who 
had  been  a prisoner  at  Boston,  had  reached  Norfolk  and  said  that  it  vyas 


Chap.  XV.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETa CONFEDERATE. 


371 


understood  at  the  North  that  two  persons,  prompted  by  heavy  bribes, 
had  left  there  to  burn  the  principal  bridges  on  the  Wilmington  and 
Charleston  Eailroad ; that  the  Burnside  expedition  is  to  take  that  road, 
and  that  the  other  fleet,  acting  in  concert,  will  take  the  road  from 
Charleston  to  Savannah,  thus  isolating  Charleston. 

The  general  is  of  opinion  that  this  may  be  reliable,  and  desires  that 
you  take  such  precautionary  measures  as  may  be  in  your  power  to  insure 
the  safety  of  the  railroad  from  any  incendiary  attempts  within  the  limits 
of  your  district. 

Eespectfully,  &c., 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Eiohmond,  January  30,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Savannah : 

I send  you  to-morrow  three  heavy  guns,  two  of  them  10-inch  and  one 
8-inch,  equipped  complete.  Will  send  three  more  in  three  or  four  days. 
They  are  all  we  can  give  you.  We  have  no  iron  carriages,  and  send 
wooden  carriages. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


distract  from  monthly  report  of  the  Department  of  Middle  and  Ea^t  Florida,  commanded  hy 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier,  for  January,  1862. 


Troops. 

Pi 

Infantry. 

•esent  for  duty. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

Aggregate  present. 

-A-ggregate  present  and 
absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

4tli  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers 

37 

474 

721 

777 

3d  Raiment  Georgia  Volunteers 

28 

551 

655 

823 

24th  Regiment  Mississippi  Volunteers 

39 

443 

787 

895 

Bailey’s  company  of  infantry 

4 

74 

78 

78 

R vans’  company  of  infantry 

3 

80 

83 

84 

Simmons’  coast-guard  

4 

41 

45 

45 

1st  Florida  Special  Battalion 

18 

331 

502 

577 

1st  Florida  Cavalry  

35 

761 

827 

867 

Hopkins’  independent  troop 

3 

76 

81 

82 

Owens’  independent  troop 

2 

75 

99 

120 

Pickett’s  independent  troop 

2 

68 

74 

74 

Turner’s  independent  troop 

4 

100 

115 

115 

Baya’s  company  of  artillery 

3 

29 

34 

67 

Martin’s  light  battery 

3 

60 

65 

76 

Grand  total 

133 

1, 994 

46 

1,  080 

6 

89 

4,166 

4,  680 

[February  2,  1862. — Eequisitions  made  by  the  Confederate  Govern- 
ment for  two  and  a half  war  regiments  from  Florida,  twelve  from  Geor- 
gia, and  five  from  South  Carolina.*] 

^Requisition  will  be  found  in  Series  IV,  Vol.  I. 


372  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

State  of  South  Carolina, 
Headquarters^  February  3,  18G2. 

President  Davis  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  My  aide,  Colonel  Duryea,  has  just  returned,  and  I 
regret  that  you  should  have  thought  anything  of  my  sending  on  to  claim 
the  arms  that  belonged  to  our  regiments,  if  out  of  use.  I said  that  they 
belonged  to  the  State,  with  the  equipments,  for  I sent  on  all  our  regi- 
ments without  charging  for  them. 

I had  been  informed  by  the  Ordnance  Officer  of  North  Carolina  that 
that  State  had  a claim  of  $2,000,000  for  what  she  had  sent  on,  and  in- 
quired of  me  what  course  I intended  to  pursue.  I wrote  back  I had 
made  no  such  charges  at  all.  Of  course  I calculated,  when  the  regiments 
had  served  their  time  out  and  were  discharged,  they  would  bring  back 
their  arms,  for  their  field  officers  have  all  given  bonds  to  the  State  for 
their  return  or  to  be  accounted  for.  If  the  war  were  to  end,  of  course 
I take  it  for  granted  the  arms  would  be  ours.  The  arms  received  from 
the  old  United  States  arsenal  were  accounted  for  by  General  Jamison 
at  Montgomery,  and  settled  in  the  transfer  he  then  made  of  everything 
taken  by  us  as  a State  before  any  other  State  had  acted  and  before  any 
Confederate  Union  had  been  formed  at  all. 

I did  not  mean  to  make  any  unusual  claim  as  long  as  the  arms  were 
in  actual  service,  but  only  if  they  were  not'in  use,  and  I only  wanted  to 
state  the  general  principle  upon  which  our  claims  to  the  arms  rest. 

When  Colonel  Gregg’s  regiment  was  discharged  his  arms  were,  under 
my  orders,  brought  to  Richmond,  to  be  brought  home,  and  he  asked  the 
privilege  to  reorganize  his  regiment  in  Virginia,  and  asked  to  retain  his 
arms  there  and  to  receive  companies  commissioned  by  you,  &c.  I refused, 
because  I could  not  do  so  in  good  faith  to  the  State.  We  had  companies 
of  our  own  citizens  who  were  eager  to  go  into  service,  and  as  the  arms 
were  public  property,  I had  no  right  to  assign  them  to  companies  from 
other  States,  and  if  I did  so,  it  would  produce  great  excitement  and  dis- 
couragement amongst  our  own  people. 

Mr.  Memminger  then  interceded,  and  also  the  then  Secretary  of  War, 
and  joined  in  an  urgent  appeal  to  me  to  allow  Gregg  to  retain  the  arms 
in  Virginia,  and  then  Gregg  pledged  himself  to  give  them  alone  to  com- 
panies from  our  own  State.  Upon  this  I agreed  to  their  wishes,  but  a 
claim  that  the  arms  did  not  belong  to  the  State  I never  heard  of  or  im- 
agined at  that  time. 

So,  too,  with  our  six  pieces  of  flying  artillery,  sent  on  with  Company  A, 
under  Calhoun,  with  the  harness,  caissons,  &c.  I wrote  the  Secretary 
of  War  to  send  them  back,  if  possible  to  spare  them,  as  we  needed  them 
much  on  our  o\yn  coast,  and  as  the  company  had  not  been  re-enlisted. 
He  declined,  because  it  would  produce  a bad  effect  for  South  Carolina 
troops  to  be  sent  back  at  that  time  from  the  Potomac  line.  I acquiesced 
in  it,  because,  upon  reflection,  I thought  the  reason  was  sound  and  wise, 
but  I never  heard  of  any  claim  made  that  the  guns,  &c.,  were  not  ours. 
I hope  now  that  I am  mistaken  in  the  impression  that  any  claim  of  that 
kind  is  to  be  set  up.  But  I am  informed  by  Colonel  Duryea  that  the 
Secretary  of  War  told  him  that  my  true  way  was  to  charge  the  Confed- 
erate Government  for  the  arms  and  equipments  sent  on  with  our  troops, 
and  that  this  would  be  the  proper  course,  and  that  it  would  be  recog- 
nized, and  the  arms,  &c.,  would  then  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the 
Confederate  Government  and  not  to  the  States. 

I was  not  aware  that  the  States  had  taken  this  course,  but  I would  be 
very  glad  to  be  informed  if  Colonel  Duryea  has  understood  the  Secretary 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  373 

aright,  and  if  so,  I will  be  most  h^ppy  to  try  and  conform  to  what  has 
been  done  by  other  States  and  to  what  is  most  agreeable  to  the  Confed- 
erate Government  in  the  general  policy  you  may  direct. 

I have  no  object  but  to  do  justice  to  the  State,  and  surely  should  never 
have  made  any  demand  at  all  for  the  arms  until  the  war  was  closed  if 
our  own  State  had  not  been  invaded  and  our  arms  absolutely  needed  to 
put  into  the  hands  of  regiments  now  actually  mustered  into  Confederate 
service.  Having  been  informed  that  we  had  arms  out  of  use  now,  I 
thought  it  nothing  but  right  to  send  for  them. 

Be  so  good  as  to  let  me  know  if  I am  right  as  to  the  general  informa- 
tion I have  received  through  Colonel  Duryea. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  yours,  truly, 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Headquarters  Fifth  Military  District, 

Sardeeville,  February  3,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Headquarters^  Savannah^  Ga.: 

Sir  ; I have  the  honor  of  acknowledging  the  receipt  of  your  letter  ul 
the  31st  ultimo,  asking  the  cause  of  the  ^‘withdrawal  of  the  guns  and 
forces  from  Bed  Bluff.’^ 

I evacuated  Bed  Bluff,  as  already  communicated  to  headquarters  at 
Coosawhatchie,  on  the  1st  instant,*  because  I regarded  it  as  indefensible 
against  gunboats  armed  with  heavy  pieces. 

With  the  two  24-pounders  and  the  two  short  howitzers,  aided  by  the 
obstructions  I had  placed  1,000  feet  below  the  fort,  any  attack  from  open 
boats  could  probably  have  been  repulsed. 

As  long  as  I was  in  expectation  of  receiving  a large  gun  for  the  single 
gun  battery  marked  D on  sketch*,  I felt  disposed  to  risk  keeping  the 
troops  at  Bed  Bluff  j but  when  the  general  of  the  department  told  me  in 
the  cars  the  other  day  that  the  cannon  he  had  intended  for  me  must 
under  the  threatened  attack  upon  Savannah  be  sent  there,  I concluded 
to  fall  back  with  the  whole  command  to  such  a point  about  4 miles  dis- 
tant as  would  not  only  permit  a jirompt  resumption  of  the  post  when- 
ever an  8-inch  howitzer  or  columbiad  could  be  obtained,  but  at  the  same 
time  occupy  a position  near  Savannah  [and]  adjacent  plantations  as 
would  overcome  the  negroes,  who  had  just  given  some  evidence  of 
insubordination. 

By  reference  to  the  sketch  accompanying  this,  the  comnianding  gen- 
eral will  observe  a sector  of  fire.  A,  B,  1,000  yards  off  from  the  fort,  from 
whence  the  gunboats  might  fire  into  the  embrasures  without  receiving 
a single  shot  in  return.  The  two  batteries  are  connected  by  a covered 
way.  While  I now  write,  four  steamers  and  gunboats  are  close  up  to 
the  chain  obstruction  below  the  fort,  throwing  shells  into  it.  The  guns, 
ammunition,  and  public  property  of  all  kinds  have  been  removed  to  a 
place  of  safety  and  are  now  with  Captain  Elliott^s  command  at  Hardee^s, 
in  which  direction  I am  now  going. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  F.  DBAYTON, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


Not  found. 


374  ^ .COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Hardeeville,  February  3,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

The  enemy  have  shelled  and  burnt  Box^s  and  Lawton’s  houses,  on 
New  Elver.  The  obstruction  near  Eed  Bluff  removed,  and  the  sailors 
are  sounding  above  it.  No  soldiers  on  board  gunboats.  One  company 
cavalry  and  three  of  infantry  close  by,  watching  them,  ready  to  attack 
in  case  they  leave  edge  of  water.  The  shells  from  guns  of  steamers 
picked  up  3 miles  off. 

THOS.  F.  DRAYTON, 

Brigadier-General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  South  Carolina, 

February  4,  1862. 

General  Thomas  F.  Drayton, 

Commanding^  &c.,  Hardeeville,  8.  G. : 

General:  Mr.  T.  A.  Reynolds,  overseer  of  Capt.  John  Screven, 
reports  that  on  last  Saturday  night  a party  of  Federal  troops  visited 
Captain  Screven’s  Proctor  plantation,  and  that  on  Sunday  they  made 
their  appearance  with  negroes.  After  taking  a view  of  Fort  Jackson, 
&c.,  they  retired,  without  disturbing  anything  on  the  plantation.  They 
reached  Proctor’s  by  the  way  of  Wright’s  Cut,  which  leads  through 
the  marsh  from  Savannah  River  to  Wright  River.  This  information  is 
derived  from  the  watchman  (negro)  on  the  plantation,  and  is  believed 
by  Mr.  Reynolds. 

You  are  desired  to  advance  a company,  mounted  or  on  foot,  convenient 
to  throw  out  pickets  to  observe  the  approaches  to  the  Savannah  River, 
and  to  endeavor  to  catch  or  intercept  reconnoitering  parties  of  the  enemy. 
I would  suggest  that  they  keep  themselves  concealed  by  day  and  take 
positions  by  night  to  accomplish  their  object  effectually.  Select  a bold 
and  intelligent  officer  for  the  service. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Savannah^  Ga.y  February  4,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton, 

Commanding^  &c.^  Hardeeville,  8.  G.: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  3d  instant  has  been  received,  and  your 
withdrawal  of  the  guns  from  Red  Bluff  is  approved.  It  will  be  necessary 
for  you  to  take  a line  removed  from  New  River,  so  as  to  prevent  the 
advance  of  a land  force  of  the  enemy,  should  one  be  attempted  from  New 
River  to  Savannah  River,  sufficiently  distant  from  the  former  not  to 
be  affected  by  the  enemy’s  gunboats. 

You  will  strengthen  this  line  by  artificial  defenses,  breastwotks, 
abattis,  &c.,  as  you  best  can,  and  have  a sufficient  force  at  hand  to 
attack  and  drive  back  an  advancing  foe.  Should  this  be  impracticable, 
you  will  hang  upon  his  flank  and  rear  to  retard  his  progress  until  re- 
onforceraents  can  reach  you.  Should  a force  be  landed  with  which  you 
may  consider  yourself  unable  to  cope,  you  will  notify  General  Pemberton, 
who  is  ordered  to  march  to  your  relief.  Should  you  require  additional 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  375 

artillery,  I can  send  you  two  42-pounder  carronades  on  siege  carriages, 
but  have  neither  harness  nor  horses  for  them.  These  you  must  endeavor 
to  procure,  if  wanted. 

K.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c.. 

Savannah.,  Ga.^  February  4,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding^  &c.j  PocotaligOj  S.  C. : 

General  : It  has  been  reported  to  me  by  General  Drayton  that  two 
of  the  enemy’s  gunboats,  accompanied  by  two  steamers,  ascended  New 
Eiver  yesterday,  and  burnt  the  houses  of  Mr.  Box  and  Mr.  Lawton.  The 
obstruction  near  Red  [Bluff?]  was  removed,  and  I have  learned  that  one 
of  the  enemy’s  steamers  has  passed  above  it.  The  guns  had  been  pre- 
viously removed  from  the  battery  at  that  place.  I have  also  heard  that 
a party  of  the  enemy  visited  Captain  Screven’s  Proctor  plantation,  on 
the  Savannah  River,  and  that  three  appeared  there  on  Sunday,  accom- 
panied by  negroes,  who,  after  viewing  Fort  Jackson,  &c.,  retired.  The 
party  of  the  enemy  came  by  Wright’s  Cut,  which  leads  through  the 
marshes  from  Savannah  River  to  Wright  River. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  enemy  is  meditating  an  advance  fi?om  Hew 
River  to  the  banks  of  the  Savannah,  and  General  Drayton  has  been 
directed  to  take  up  a line  removed  beyond  the  reach  [of]  the  gunboats 
on  Hew  River  to  intercept  him ; should  the  enemy  land  too  large  a force 
for  him  to  cope  with,  he  has  been  directed  to  notify  you.  In  that  event 
you  are  desired  to  send  to  his  support  such  of  your  available  force  as 
may  be  necessary,  and  to  march  with  it,  should  you  deem  it  requisite, 
and  to  take  command  of  the  whole  operation.  With  this  view  it  is  sug- 
gested that  you  repair  to  Hardeeville,  visit  the  field  of  operation,  and 
concert  with  him  a plan  of  operations.  Should  you  not  be  able  to  drive 
him  back  under  cover  of  his  boats,  you  will  attack  him  in  his  flank  and 
rear,  so  as  to  prevent  his  approach  to  the  Savannah  River. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  ^outh  Carolina,  &c.. 

Savannah,  Ga.,  February  5,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  Goroas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance  Department,  Richmond,  Ya.: 

Colonel  : I have  just  received  your  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo,  advis- 
ing me  that  two  10-inch  and  one  8-inch  columbiads  would  be  forwarded 
to  me  the  next  day.  I hope  that  the  others  required  are  also  on  their 
way,  and  if  it  would  be  any  relief  to  the  department,  as  it  will  avoid  the 
cost  of  transportation,  the  shot  and  shell  can  be  procured  here.  I there- 
fore desire  to  be  informed  of  the  caliber  of  the  guns,  that  I may  provide 
them.  Please  send  an  agent  with  the  guns  to  hasten  their  transporta- 
tion, and  it  has  occurred  to  me  that  this  might  be  expedited  by  sending 
them  through  Charlotte  to  Augusta,  as  the  connection  of  the  roads  at 
Augusta  is  better  than  at  Charleston,  and  much  time  will  therefore  be 
saved.  I require  nine  heavy  guns  in  addition  to  the  three  sent. 

Captain  Cuyler,  ordnance  officer  at  this  post,  has  just  stated  to  me 


376  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

that  O.  G.  Parsley  & Co.,  of  Wilmington,  IsT.  0.,  have  bought  the  whole 
stock  of  iron  of  Weed,  Connell  & Co.,  the  principal  importers  and  holders 
of  iron  in  this  city,  at  the  market  price  at  which  it  has  been  sold  to  the 
Government.  He  has  left  the  iron  here,  with  directions  that  it  be  sold 
at  double  the  former  price,  12  and  Ki  cents  per  pound.  I have  directed 
that  all  iron  required  by  the  Government  should  be  taken  and  paid  for 
at  the  original  price.  This  seemed  to  be  such  a palpable  act  of  specula- 
tion, that  it  ought  to  be  stopped. 

I report  the  facts,  that  you  may  bring  the  matter  to  the  notice  of  the 
Secretary  of  War,  as  the  practice  may  be  extended  to  other  points. 

I am^  &c»  E.  E.  LEE, 

General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department,  &c., 

/ Savannah^  Ga.^  February  6,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond: 

Sir  : The  replacing  the  troops  in  the  Confederate  service  in  this  State 
is  a matter  of  serious  consideration.  The  period  of  service  of  several 
companies  serving  the  batteries  for  the  defense  of  the  city  of  Savannah 
is  about  to  expire.  One  that  was  mustered  out  of  service  a few  days 
since  at  Fort  Pulaski  declines  to  re-enter  the  service,  and  it  is  supposed 
that  others  will  be  equally  averse.  The  loss  of  these  companies  at  this 
time  win  be  a serious  injury  to  the  defense  of  the  city,  as  artillerists 
cannot  be  made  on  the  eve  of  a battle.  But  the  prospective  injury  to 
the  service,  I fear,  will  be  equally  great,  as  neither  the  sentiment  of  the 
people  nor  the  policy  of  the  State  seems  to  favor  the  organization  of 
troops  for  Confederate  service.  I have  thought  it  probable  that  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Department  might  be  able  to  avert  the  evil  I apprehend. 

I have  been  very  anxious  to  assign  another  general  officer  to  duty 
with  the  troops  in  the  State  of  Georgia.  At  the  time  the  officers  of  that 
grade  reported  to  me  an  attack  on  the  Carolina  coast  seemed  so  immi- 
nent and  it  was  so  unprovided  that  all  re-enforcements  were  assigned  to 
its  defense  and  every  effort  made  to  prepare  the  troops  for  their  duty. 
The  movements  of  the  enemy  for  the  last  week  indicate  Savannah  as  the 
threatened  point  of  attack,  but  I do  not  think  it  safe  to  withdraw  troops 
from  Carolina.  I have  no  one  to  place  in  charge  of  the  body  of  troops 
guarding  the  approaches  from  the  Ogeechee  to  Savannah.  The  troops 
are  fresh,  officers  new  in  the  service,  and  all  require  instruction.  If  some 
instructed  officer  could  be  spared  me  I should  be  greatly  relieved.  I 
have  already  mentioned  General  Heth  and  Colonel  Stevenson,  but  have 
been  informed  they  were  wanted  elsewhere,  and  I can  name  no  one  not 
disposed  of.  I therefore  leave  the  matter  to  the  Department. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


Eiohmond,  February  7,  1862. 

General  Braxton  Bragg, 

Pensacola : 

General  Lee  says  he  understands  there  are  twenty  heavy  guns  at  Pen- 
sacola that  could  be  spared.  If  this  is  true,  send  him  any  you  can  spare 
to  Savannah. 

. J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


377 


Mobile,  Ala.,  February  8,  18G2. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

iNot  a gun  to  spare  liere  or  at  Pensacola,  and  we  need  eight  or  ten 
heavy  shell  guns  here  now.  See  my  requisition  on  Ordnance  Office. 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


Executive  Department, 

Milledgeville,  February  8,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee  i 

General;  I have  learned  from  General  Wayne  the  substance  of 
the  conversation  in  your  interview  with  him  relative  to  the  removal  of 
the  troops  from  Brunswick  to  Savannah.  I have  a great  desire  to  see 
Brunswick  remain  in  the  possession  of  our  troops,  and  should  be  very 
reluctant  to  see  it  abandoned  to  the  enemy.  If,  however,  it  is  not  rea- 
sonably certain  that  you  can  with  the  force  at  your  command,  including 
the  State  troops,  hold  both  Brunswick  and  Savannah,  I do  not  hesitate 
to  say  that  it  is  important  that  the  whole  force  be  at  once  concentrated 
at  Savannah.  It  is  the  key  to  the  State,  and  if  it  falls  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemy  Brunswick  and  the  balance  of  the  coast  must  of  course  be 
under  their  control. 

All  the  indications  are  that  Savannah  is  to  be  the  point  of  attack,  and 
we  must  repel  the  attack  at  any  cost  and  at  every  hazard.  If  my  home 
were  in  the  city  I would  light  for  it  as  long  as  possible,  and  if  driven 
from  it  by  overpowering  force,  I would  never  permit  its  roof  to  shelter 
the  enemy,  but  would  leave  it  in  smoking  ruins  when  driven  from  it. 

The  troops  at  Brunswick  are  under  your  command,  and  you  are  the 
best  judge  of  the  military  necessities  by  which  we  are  surrounded.  Ex- 
ercise your  own  judgment,  in  which  I have  the  highest  confidence,  and  I 
shall  be  content  with  and  shall  do  all  in  my  power  to  sustain  your  action, 
as  I have  no  doubt  you  wiU  so  act  as  will  best  promote  the  highest  in- 
terest of  the  people  of  the  whole  State. 

Should  you  determine  to  withdraw  the  troops  from  Brunswick,  I wish 
aU  the  assistance  afforded  the  inhabitants  which  is  in  your  power  for  the 
removal  of  such  property  as  they  wish  to  carry  into  the  interior  j to  this 
end  you  are  at  liberty  to  use  the  Brunswick  Railroad,  now  in  the  military 
possession  of  the  State.  When  all  is  removed  that  can  be,  let  the  en- 
gines and  cars  be  brought  to  the  junction  of  that  road  with  the  Savan- 
nah, Albany  and  Gulf  road.  I have  directed  General  Jackson  to  call 
out  such  of  the  militia  force  of  Savannah  as  he  can  arm  for  immediate 
service  in  addition  to  the  State  troops  now  in  the  field,  and  hope  the 
order  will  meet  your  approval. 

Very  respectfully, 

JOSEPH  E.  BROWN. 


Richmond,  February  9,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Savanr^ah : 

General  Bragg  says  he  has  not  a gun  to  spare.  I will  send  you  this 
week  five  8-inch  columbiads  and  one  24-pounder  howitzer.  I have  ordered 
1,000  Enfield  rifies  sent  to  you  and  20,000  pounds  of  cannon  powder, 
besides  the  fixed  ammunition  for  the  rifles. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


378  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


General  Lee, 

Savannah : 


Eichmond,  February  9,  1862. 


Send  10,000  pounds  cannon  i^owder  to  Norfolk  immediately,  and  you 
will  receive  20,000  pounds  of  the  powder  just  received  by  the  Kate. 
Send  it  from  Charleston,  if  possible.  Urgent. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Apalachicola,  Fla.,  February  10,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjaahn, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sm : The  foregoing  [following]  copy  of  a letter  addressed  to  me  by 
General  Floyd,  commanding  post,  is  respectfully  commended  to  your 
consideration. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  MILTON, 
Governor  of  Florida. 

[Inclosure.] 

Brigade  Headquarters,  • 
Apalachicola^  February  9,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Milton, 

Commander-in-Ghief  at  Apalachicola,  Fla.: 

Sir  : Tour  suggestion  this  morning,  that  I should  freely  express  my 
views  to  you  respecting  the  future  action  to  be  taken  for  the  defense  of 
this  place,  I beg  here  respectfully  to  submit  them. 

If,  in  accordance  with  a decree  of  the  late  Convention,  the  State  troops 
here  are  to  be  disbanded  by  the  10th  of  March  ensuing,  unless  in  the 
mean  time  they  should  enlist  in  the  Confederate  service,  the  defense  of 
this  place  seems  at  present  to  rest  entirely  upon  that  contingency. 

My  opinion  is  that  the  companies  will  not  enlist  in  the  Confederate 
service  until  they  shall  have  been  discharged  in  March,  and  even  if  they 
will  then  do  so,  an  entirely  new  organization  will  have  to  be  effected. 
This,  in  my  opinion,  will  not  be  done  until  they  have  enjoyed  the  privi- 
lege of  going  home,  which  seems  to  have  been  accorded  j and  even 
though  they  should  enlist  before  doing  so,  they  will  still  consider  a 
thirty-days’  furlough  as  their  right.  Unless  in  the  mean  time  other 
troops  are  sent  here  to  fill  their  place,  the  absence  of  even  half  of  the 
present  force  would  leave  the  place  comparatively  defenseless. 

Supposing  that  the  10th  of  March  arrives,  and  that  other  troops  are 
not  sent  here  to  supply  the  place  of  those  who  will  be  mustered  out  of 
service  on  that  day,  it  would  be  highly  improper  to  leave  the  cannon 
and  ordnance  stores  here  at  the  disposal  of  any  gunboat  and  crew  which 
the  enemy  might  send  here  to  capture  them. 

If  such  a state  of  things  as  I have  supposed  should  occur,  in  the 
absence  of  orders  relating  to  them  I should  feel  it  incumbent  upon  me 
to  dismantle  the  batteries  and  remove  the  guns  and  ordnance  stores 
to  a place  of  security  up  the  river  before  the  men  were  disbanded  or  by 
that  time,  as  I think  it  questionable,  under  the  cifcumstances,  whether 
I could  detain  them  after  that  date. 

Taking  the  above  view  of  this  matter,  I would  respectfully  suggest 
to  your  excellency,  that  every  effort  be  made  to  get  a force  here  for  the 
defense  of  the  place  before  the  10th  of  March,  and  not  to  depend  upon 
a reorganization  of  the  force  now  here  until  after  that  time, 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


379 


It  would  seem  that  General  Trapier,  upon  an  application ' to  him, 
would  send  a regiment  of  Confederate  troops  perhaps  from  Fernandina; 
or  the  Secretary  of  War  might  be  induced  to  do  so  in  case  General 
Trapier  does  not  possess  the  authority  j that  at  least  the  property  of  the 
Confederate  Government  might  be  protected,  obviating  the  necessity  of 
removing  it  from  this  post. 

From  all  I can  discover,  it  is  my  firm  impression  that  but  compara- 
tively few  of  the  troops  now  here  will  enlist  in  the  service  of  the  Con- 
federacy j and  even  though  the  majority  of  them  were  disposed  to  do  so, 
I fear  there  would  be  much  confusion  in  their  reorganization  into  com- 
panies, owing  to  the  ambition  of  officers  to  get  higher  rank  than  they 
now  enjoy. 

I know  of  nothing  more  that  I could  now  say  on  this  subject,  and 
have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

E.  F.  FLOYD, 

Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c.. 

Savannah j Ga.,  February  10,  1862. 

Hon.  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Governor  of  Georgia^  Milledgeville,  Ga. : 

Sir  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  8th  instant  in 
reference  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  batteries  from  Saint  Simoffiff  and 
Jekyl  Islands.  Eo  one  can  regret  the  apparent  necessity  of  such  a 
measure  more  than  I do,  and  so  great  is  my  repugnance  to  yield  any 
point  of  our  territory  to  our  enemies,  that  I have  endeavored  from  the 
time  of  my  arrival  to  give  strength  to  the  defences  of  Brunswick.  I 
find  it  impossible  to  obtain  guns  to  secure  it  as  I desire,  and  now  every- 
thing is  required  to  fortify  this  city.  I have  therefore  given  General 
Mercer  discretionary  authority  to  withdraw  the  troops  and  guns  from 
the  islands  to  the  main  [land],  should  he,  upon  a reconsideration  of  the 
subject,  hold  to  his  opinion  as  to  the  inability  of  the  batteries  to  con- 
tend with  the  enemy’s  fleet. 

I have  sent  Maj.  Edward  C.  Anderson  to  assist  in  removing  the  guns, 
&c.,  and  as  soon  as  I know  his  determination  will  inform  you.  With 
the  exception  of  the  fact  of  opening  another  harbor  on  the  coast  to  the 
enemy  and  receding  from  a point  we  have  occupied,  I do  not  know  that 
any  material  interest  is  sacrificed.  As  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands  and 
of  Brunswick  have  removed  their  families  and  property,  there  is  no 
trade  or  commerce  with  Brunswick,  and  no  immediate  back  country  to 
be  injuriously  affected. 

I am,  &c.,  E.  E.  LEE, 

General j Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c.. 

Savannah.,  Ga..,  February  10,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War.,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

Sir  : From  the  reports  of  General  Mercer  as  to  the  inability  of  the 
batteries  on  Saint  Simon’s  and  Jekyl  Islands  to  withstand  the  attack 
of  the  enemy’s  fleet,  the  isolated  condition  of  those  islands,  and  the  im- 
possibility of  my  re-enforcing  him  with  guns  or  men,  I have  given  him 
authority,  should  he  retain  that  opinion  uj)on  a calm  review  of  the  whole 


380  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XY. 

subject,  to  act  according  to  his  discretion ; and,  if  deemed  advisable  by 
him,  to  withdraw  to  the  main-land,  and  take  there  a defensible  position 
for  the  protection  of  the  country.  Should  he  adopt  this  course,  the 
heavy  guns  at  those  batteries  will  be  sent  here  for  the  defense  of  Savan- 
nah Eiver,  where  they  are  much  needed  and  cannot  otherwise  be  obtained. 
The  channel  between  Saint  Simon’s  and  Jekyl  Islands  leads  into 
Brunswick  Harbor. 

Brunswick  is  a summer  resort  for  certain  planters,  and  is  the  terminus 
of  a railroad  extending  about  60  miles  into  the  interior,  where  it  inter- 
sects the  Savannah,  Albany  and  Gulf  Eailroad.  There  are  no  inhabit- 
ants now  in  Brunswick,  and  the  planters  on  the  islands  have  removed 
their  property  to  the  interior;  nor  is  there  any  population  in  the  vicin- 
ity of  Brunswick  that  would  seem  to  warrant  jeopardizing  the  men  and 
guns  necessary  elsewhere.  I would  not,  therefore,  originally  have  occu- 
pied Saint  Simon’s  or  Jekyl,  but  the  batteries,  though  small,  are  well 
placed,  and  the  guns  well  distributed,  and  I think  would  defend  the 
channel  against  ordinary  attacks,  and  I exceedingly  dislike  to  yield  an 
inch  of  territory  to  our  enemies.  They  are,  however,  able  to  bring  such 
large  and  powerful  batteries  to  whatever  point  they  please,  that  it  be- 
comes necessary  for  us  to  concentrate  our  strength.  As  this  point  may 
be  selected  by  some  of  our  forward-bound  vessels  to  run  the  blockade, 
I think  proper  to  give  you  the  earliest  information  of  its  probable  relin- 
quishment. 

^ I am,  &c.,  E.  E.  LEE, 

General^  Commanding. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  February  13,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Savannah : 

The  order  of  Colonel  Myers  .was  only  meant  to  hurry  on  the  cannon 
powder  without  waiting  for  anything  else.  Twenty  thousand  pounds 
of  it  are  to  be  retained  by  you,  and  remainder  sent  here  as  quickly  as 
possible. 

J.  P.  BEI^JAMII!!, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqes.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

SavannahyGa.,  February  14,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding^  &c.^  Tallahassee^  Fla. : 

General  ; In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  5th  instant,  in  relation  to 
the  defenses  of  Saint  John’s  Eiver,  I am  directed  by  the  commanding 
general  to  say  that  he  has  directed  four  32-pounders  to  be  sent  to  you 
at  Fernandina,  if  practicable,  to  strengthen  that  point,  unless  you  think 
it  more  advisable  to  place  them  elsewhere.  He  has  been  obliged  to 
withdraw  the  troops  from  Saint  Simon’s  and  Jekyl  Islands  to  obtain 
means  for  defense  of  this  city,  and  he  deems  it  advisable  to  strengthen 
Fernandina  as  far  as  in  his  power.  He  also  desires  you  to  relieve  as 
soon  as  possible  Captain  Blain’s  company  at  Cumberland  Island,  and  to 
order  it  to  rejoin  its  regiment. 

As  regards  the  defense  of  the  Saint  John’s,  he  suggests  to  you,  if 
possible,  to  place  the  guns  that  may  be  available  for  that  purpose  at 
one  point  rather  than  at  two,  distant  or  out  of  support  of  each  other. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


*381 


as  united  they  might  withstand  the  attack  of  the  enemy,  which,  [while?] 
if  distant,  each  might  be  suppressed  separately.  Not  knowing  the 
ground,  he  leaves  the  matter  to  your  better  judgment. 

I am,  &c., 

[W.  H.  TAYLOE,] 

A.  A.  O. 


State  of  Georgia,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 
Milledgeville^  Ga.,  February  14,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  Lee,  0.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Southern  Military  District,  Savannah : 

General  : By  direction  of  the  governor  I send  you  herewith  two  com- 
munications relative  to  the  defenseless  condition  of  the  city  of  Augusta, 
in  this  State — one  written  by  the  mayor  of  that  city,  the  other  by  a highly 
respectable  citizen  of  it,  and  holding  the  commission  of  colonel  in  the 
militia  of  the  State.  These  letters  express  fully  the  weakness  of  the 
city  and  the  interests  there  to  be  protected,  and  entering  heartily  into 
the  views  of  the  writers,  the  governor  directs  me  to  commend  them  to 
your  earnest  consideration. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  O.  WAYNE, 
Adjutant  and  Dissector  General, 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Mayor’s  Office, 
Augusta^  February  11,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Governor,  (&c. : 

Dear  Sir  : I desire  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  now 
exists  among  a portion  of  our  citizens  considerable  apprehension  that  an 
attempt  may  be  made  before  long  by  the  Federal  forces  near  Savannah 
to  ascend  the  Savannah  Eiver  to  Augusta.  Whether  this  apprehension 
is  well  grounded  or  not,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  the  enemy  are  placed 
in  a position  to  enable  them  to  do  so,  great  exertion  will  be  made  to  reach 
Augusta,  as  it  must  be  generally  known  that  we  have  a large  quantity 
of  cotton  stored  and  that  manufactories  of  arms  and  powder  are  being 
erected  near  our  city.  It  is  suggested  that  it  may  become  necessary  to 
obstruct  the  Savannah  Eiver.  I address  your  excellency  for  the  pur- 
pose of  bringing  the  matter  to  your  notice,  and  thus  enabling  you  to  give 
such  directions  as  you  may  think  required  by  the  circumstances.  Should 
it  be  deemed  important  to  obstruct  the  river,  and  you  have  no  engineer 
whom  you  can  direct  to  the  duty,  I will  cheerfully  undertake  any  service 
connected  with  the  matter  which  you  may  think  proper  to  designate. 

With  sentiments  of  highest  esteem,  I am,  very  respectfully,  your 
obedient  servant, 

EOBT.  H.  MAY, 

Mayor  of  City  of  Augusta, 


[Inclosure  No.  2.J 

Augusta,  February  11,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Governor  State  of  Georgia: 

Sir  : Some  apprehension  is  felt  in  this  city  that  the  enemy  will  en- 
deavor to  take  it,  provided  they  succeed  at  Savannah.  In  the  event  of 


382  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai*.  XV. 

their  success  there  (which  Heaven  forbid),  and  they  make  the  attempt, 
we  are  entirely  at  their  mercy,  for  we  have  neither  artillery  nor  arms  for 
infantry  5 in  fact,  the  city  is  for  effective  service  totally  defenseless,  and 
no  matter  how  willing  we  all  might  be  to  fight  to  the  last,  we  could  do 
no  good  unless  we  have  arms. 

It  has  been  suggested  to  me  to  write  to  you  on  this  subject.  There  is 
now  82,000  bales  of  cotton  here,  besides  the  powder-mills,  factories,  &c., 
which  should  be  protected.  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  an  effi- 
cient battery  of  twelve  or  fifteen  guns  of  suitable  caliber  should  be  at  once 
placed  at  Silver  Bluff,  on  the  Carolina  side,  about  2 to  5 miles  below  the 
city,  and  also  that  rafts  or  old  boats  and  other  material  suitable  for  the 
purpose  should  be  used  to  barricade  the  river,  which  could  be  effectu- 
ally done  ali  Matthew^s  Bluff,  about  90  miles  below  the  city.  It  is  the 
opinion  of  well-informed  men  as  well  as  myself  that  this  should  be  done 
immediately. 

I hope  your  excellency  will  excuse  me  for  mentioning  this  important 
matter  to  you,  and  I hope  it  will  meet  with  a favorable  consideration. 
And,  further,  let  me  assure  you  that  any  service  I can  do  you  and  my 
State  in  this  war  [illegible]  or  any  other  business  will  be  cheerfully  done 
to  the  best  of  my  ability,  without  fear  or  reward. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  B.  GRIFFIN, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Tenth  Begiment  Georgia  Militia, 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Savannah,  Ga.,  February  14,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding,  &g..  Charleston : 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  general  commanding  to  say  that 
General  Evans  has  reported  that  the  enemy  have  landed  in  consider- 
able force  on  Edisto  and  driven  his  pickets  from  Jehossee,  and  has 
requested  that  his  force  be  increased  as  soon  as  possible.  He  therefore 
desires  you  to  send  as  soon  as  possible  the  four  companies  intended  for 
the  battalion  under  Messrs.  Nelson  and  Aiken,  and  to  request  General 
Gist  to  hasten  the  organization  of  the  two  regiments  lately  withdrawn 
from  the  Third  Military  District  South  Carolina.  In  the  mean  time, 
should  there  be  one  of  the  new  regiments  ready  to  take  the  field,  he 
desires  you  to  order  it  to  report  to  General  Evans  and  to  notify  him 
accordingly. 

I am,  &c., 

[W.  H.  TAYLOR,] 

A.  A.  G. 


Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Adams  Bun,  February  15,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Savannah,  Ga.: 

Captain:  Inclosed  please  find  charges  and  specifications  against 
Capt.  J.  H.  Rion,  Lieutenants  Harrison,  Kennedy,  and  Isbell,  of  the 
Lyles  Rifles.  These  officers  have  positively  refused  to  obej^  my  order. 
I have  arrested  them,  and  placed  an  officer  of  another  company  in  com- 
mand of  the  Lyles  Rifles. 


Chap.  XV. J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


383 


I would  respectfully  request  that  a court-uiartial  be  ordered  as  soon 
as  possible  for  their  trial,  and  that  the  court  consist  of  as  many  oilicers 
of  experience  as  the  good  of  the  service  wiU  admit. 

I beg  leave  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  general  command- 
ing, that  I have  now  but  1,305  men  for  duty  on  the  main-land,  at  least 
half  of  whom  are  raw  militia,  composed  of  the  new  companies  joining 
battalions  and  men  returned  from  sick  furloughs.  The  troops  1 have 
distributed  as  follows  : 

The  Holcombe  Legion,  Colonel  Stevens,  492  strong,  between  Togodo 
and  Willstown,  opposite  Jehossee  Island  j Laurens  battalion.  Major 
James,  281  strong,  in  rear  of  the  intrenchments  at  Slann^s  Island  Cause- 
way;  a section  of  light  artillery  is  also  stationed  here;  Colonel  Elford, 
Sixteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  is  stationed  at  a cen- 
tral position  on  the  Willstown  road,  between  this  place  and  Church  Flats, 
guarding  the  approach  of  the  enemy  up  the  Wad  mala  w.  The  enemy 
have  occupied  Edisto  Island  in  considerable  force  and  have  thrown  pick- 
ets as  far  out  as  Jehossee  Island,  and  from  observation  I am  convinced 
are  making  preparation  for  an  early  attack. 

With  my  present  forces  I find  myself  entirely  unable  to  strengthen  my 
position  in  front  of  Jehossee  Island,  as  the  forces  on  John’s  and  Wadma- 
law  Islands,  now  not  adequate  to  their  positions,  could  not  be  with- 
drawn without  exposing  an  open  way  to  the  railroad  for  the  enemy. 
With  reference  to  the  disposition  of  the  troops  on  the  islands,  please 
see  letter  inclosed  from  Colonel  He  Treville,  commanding.  It  will 
then  be  readily  perceived  by  the  general  commanding  that  should  the 
enemy  occupy  Jehossee  Island  (which  he  can  whenever  he  pleases)  and 
erect  batteries  on  the  island  out  of  range  of  our  guns  (24-pounders),  he 
could,  with  the  assistance  of  his  gunboats,  take  our  batteries,  overpower 
my  small  force,  and  make  his  way  to  the  railroad.  I would  therefore 
request,  if  possible,  an  additional  force  be  sent  to  this  district. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

NT.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier-General^  Commanding, 

[InclosaTe.J 

Wadmajlaw  Island,  February  6,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Evans, 

Adams  Bun: 

Dear  General  : In  accordance  with  your  orders  we  will  leave  to- 
day for  Charleston. 

Colonel  Moore’s  battalion,  with  the  exception  of  three  detached  com- 
panies, moved  to  Bear’s  Bluff  yesterday.  Colonel  Means’  regiment  will 
move  to  our  camping  ground  as  soon  as  we  move.  The  two  pieces  of 
light  artillery  from  Bear’s  Bluff  I have  stationed  near  Rockville. 

Though  this  ends  my  connection  with  the  military,  perhaps  forever,  I 
cannot  but  remark  again  upon  the  undefended  condition  of  these  islands. 
There  is  now  no  guard  at  Church  Bridge  and  nothing  on  the  road  from 
the  Haulover  to  Legareville  but  two  companies  from  Colonel  Moore’s 
battalion  and  Nesbitt’s  cavalry.  If  the  enemy  intend,  as  the  Herald  says 
they  intend  to  do  and  as  I think  very  probable,  to  make  North  Edisto 
their  base  of  operations  against  Charleston,  they  can  with  perfect  impu- 
nity land  any  number  of  troops  on  that  island  and  at  any  moment  trans- 
port them  to  Haulover,  Rockville,  and  Bear’s  Blufi:,  and  advance  in  these 
directions  to  the  ferry  or  to  Legareville.  We  are  totally  unprepared  to 
meet  them,  but  of  this  your  own  personal  observation  has  made  you  fully 


384  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

aware.  With  less  than  three  more  good  regiments,  well  drilled,  if  the 
duty  of  defending  these  islands  is  still  on  you,  you  ought  not  to  be  con- 
tent. 

I forgot  to  mention  that  General  Ripley  has  relieved  Captain  Pinck- 
ney’s company  at  the  ferry  by  one  of  the  regulars  of  Colonel  Dunovant’s 
regiment;  so  there  is  now  no  picket  on  the  John’s  Island  side  of  the 
ferry.  The  ship  went  reconnoitering  on  Tuesday  morning  towards 
Bear’s  Bluff,  and  approached,  as  we  thought,  within  the  range  of  your 
guns  at  White  Point.  We  expected  you  to  fire  on  the  enemy  before 
they  fired  on  our  pickets  and  damaged  some  of  the  houses  at  Rockville. 

Wishing  you  a prosperous  and  brilliant  campaign  and  that  you  may 
add  to  your  Leesburg  laurels,  I remain,  dear  general,  yours,  truly, 

RICHARD  De  TREVILLE. 


Hdqes.  Second  Military  District  South  Carolina, 

Charleston,  February  15, 1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Savannah,  Oa. : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  order  con- 
cerning mechanics,  &c.  I have  taken  the  necessary  steps  for  obtaining 
the  reports  required. 

General  Evans  telegraphs,  date  of  15th : 

Enemy  landed  one  regiment  on  Edisto  yesterday.  A spy  taken  this  morning  says 
he  will  ascend  the  Wadmalaw  and  land  at  Simon’s  Landing.  Please  send  me  two 
heavy  guns ; if  none  other,  8-inch  howitzers. 

I have  not  a gun  to  send  him,  the  number  of  guns  here  belonging  to 
the  State  being  held  for  our  lines.  Am  preparing  to  support  him  with 
infantry,  but  regret  to  add  that  the  regiments  are  not  what  I could 
wish.  Moragn^’s  and  Gadberry’s  are  still  down  with  measles,  and  Keitt’s 
not  armed  yet. 

Although  I think  the  movement  here  is  rather  demonstrative  than 
positive,  so  long  as  the  enemy  threatens  Savannah  so  seriously  there  is 
no  doubt  that  Simon’s  Landing  is  a very  important  point,  and  if  possi- 
ble would  like  to  arm  and  hold  it.  I do  not  see  how  I can  assist  General 
Evans,  except  by  infantry  such  as  I have. 

The  store  of  powder  in  Fort  Sumter  has  been  very  much  diminished, 
and  I should  like  much  to  have  it  replaced  as  soon  as  possible.  The  fur- 
ther supplies  for  the  lines,  I suppose,  will  have  to  come  from  that  fort, 
and  it  would  be  well  to  keep  it  in  full  condition. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General: 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c.. 

Savannah,  February  15,  1862. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gill, 

Commanding  Arsenal  at  Augusta : 

Colonel  : I wrote  yesterday  to  Major  Rains  in  reference  to  the 
advisability  of  obstructing  the  navigation  of  the  Savannah  River  below 
Augusta,  for  which  he  had  suggested  a plan.  As  he  informed  me  he 
should  be  absent  on  official  business  for  some  time,  I find  it  necessary 
to  apply  to  you  for  information.  I desire  to  know  whether  any  exam- 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  385 

illation  of  tlic  river  lias  been  made  with  a view  to  the  selection  of  the 
most  eligible  iioint,  and  whether  any  guns  can  be  had  to  arm  a battery 
for  tlie  protection  of  the  river  obstructions.  In  that  event  the  point 
selected,  besides  being  favorable  to  the  work,  should  be  contiguous  to  a 
position  where  a battery  could  be  jilaced  to  prevent  its  removal.  If  no 
guns  (ian  be  procured,  then  l ifle-pits  should  be  dug,  where  good  marks- 
men could  drive  olf  working  parties  of  the  enemy.  The  position  of  the 
obstruction  should  be  below  the  bluff,  from  which  it  could  be  protected. 
If  no  examination  has  been  made  and  you  are  not  able  to  do  so  yourself, 
could  you  select  a person  for  the  service  and  make  arrangements  for  the 
conduct  of  the  work,  should  Major  Kains  not  return  in  time?  The  nav- 
igation of  the  river  should  be  retained  until  it  becomes  necessary  to  close 
it,  and  for  this  pur^iose  an  outlet  for  the  boats  should  be  loft. 

The  work,  in  my  opinion,  should  be  undertaken  at  once  as  a purely 
prudential  measure,  and  as  soon  as  the  jilan  is  matured  should  be  pushed 
forward  with  vigor. 

From  the  tenor  of  Major  Eains’  letter,  I inferred  that  the  citizens  of 
Augusta  would  provide  the  necessary  labor,  &c.,  and  that  Col.  Uenry 
Cummings  would  superintend  the  work. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Savannah^  Ga.j  February  15,  1862. 

General  Henry  C.  Wayne, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  State  of  Georgia: 

General:  I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  14th 
instant,  inclosing  communications  from  the  mayor  of  Augusta  and  Colo- 
nel Griffin  to  his  excellency  Governor  Brown,  in  reference  to  the  iiro- 
Iiriety  of  obstructing  the  navigation  of  the  Savannah  Eiver. 

This  subject  had  already  attracted  my  attention,  and,  in  addition  to 
measures  contemiilated  for  closing  the  river  above  this  city,  I have  au- 
thorized the  adoption  of  a plan,  suggested  by  Major  Eai ns,  for  arresting 
its  navigation  below  Augusta.  To  jirevent  the  removal  of  obstacles, 
however,  placed  in  the  bed  of  the  stream,  there  should  be  a battery  con- 
tiguous. For  this  I have  no  guns,  and'cannot  possibly  obtain  more  than 
necessary  for  the  defenses  of  Savannah.  I was,  therefore,  on  the  point 
of  requesting  the  Governor  to  permit  me  to  apply  any  belongiog  to 
the  State  to  the  defense  of  the  upiier  river,  and  am  glad  that  the  subject 
has  been  brought  to  his  notice.  May  I ask  you  to  inform  me  whetlier 
there  are  any  State  guns  available  for  this  purpose,  whether  they  can 
be  procured,  their  caliber,  &c.? 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Savannah  Ga.,  February  15,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding^  cffo.,  Charleston : 

General  : There  are  abundant  indications  of  the  presence  of  the 
enemy  iu  lorce,  both  on  land  aud  water,  in  this  viciuity  3 but  as  far  as  I 
25  R R VOL  VI 


386  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

can  judge  from  tbe  character  of  the  vessels  and  the  position  of  their 
troopSj  I see  no  indications  of  an  immediate  attack.  They  may  be  wait- 
ing for  re-enforcements,  or  intend  to  deceive  by  demonstrations  here 
while  preparing  for  an  attack  on  the  coast  elsewhere.  I desire  to  know 
whether  you  can  detect  any  indication  of  a movement  against  Charles- 
ton, and  whether,  should  the  attack  be  made  against  this  city,  you  could 
detach  two  or  more  good  artillery  companies,  skilled  in  the  management 
of  heavy  guns,  for  service  in  the  open  batteries  on  Savannah  Eiver. 
These  companies  of  course  are  only  intended  for  temporary  service  and 
to  provide  against  the  impracticability  of  obtaining  good  artillerists  from 
the  new  troops  in  this  State. 

1 am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Savannah,  Ga.,  February  15,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  hT.  G.  Evans, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Adams  Bun: 

General  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  this  day^s 
date,  and  have  directed  that  a court-martial  be  convened  at  Adams  Eun 
for  the  trial  of  the  officers  of  the  Lyles  Eifles. 

As  regards  the  re-enforcements  that  you  request,  I wrote  you  yester- 
day on  the  subject,  which  is  all,  under  the  circumstances,  that  can  be 
done.  It  will  be  impossible  to  find  sufficient  troops  to  gairison  the  whole 
line  of  the  coast,  and  all  that  can  be  done  is  to  ascertain  the  points  of 
attack,  concentrate  the  troops  in  the  district  to  meet  the  advance  of  the 
enemy,  and,  if  unable  to  drive  him,  to  hold  him  in  check  until  re-enforce- 
ments  can  be  forwarded  from  other  districts. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Military  District,  Dept,  of  Georgia, 

Brunswich,  February  16,  1862. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  General 
Lee,  that  the  guns  have  all  been  removed  from  the  islands  and  brought 
to  this  place,  with  the  exception  of  one  32-pounder,  which  1 expect  up 
in  the  course  of  the  day.  One  42-pounder  and  eight  32-pounders  have 
been  shipped  to  Savannah  by  rail,  and  I hope  to  get  ofi*  to-day  and  to- 
morrow the  columbiads  and  the  remaining  32s,  reserving  four  32s  to 
be  sent  to  Eernandiiia.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lamar’s  battalion  is  now 
encamped  at  this  place,  and  Colonel  Styles’  cQmmand,  it  is  hoped,  will  all 
be  withdrawn  before  to-morrow  night,  though  the  weather  is  now.  very 
unfavorable,  especially  for  the  removal  of  his  horse  company  and  light 
artillery. 

Before  finally  evacuating  this  position  I beg  to  bring  to  the  consid- 
eration of  the  general  the  question  of  burning  the  town  of  Brunswick. 
For  the  moral  efiVct  it  would  produce  upon  the  enemy,  as  evidencing  our 
determination  to  continue  the  present  contest  with  unconquerable  de- 
termination and  at  every  sacrifice,  and  for  other  obvious  reasons,  which 


Chip  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


387 


you  will  think  it  needless  for  me  to  recite,  I would  respectfully  urge  that 
1 he  furnished  wiih  precise  orders  to  destroy  all  the  hiiildings  that  can 
afi'ord  shelter  and  comfort  to  the  enemy.  I desire  also  again  to  request 
of  the  general  that  I may  be  allowed  to  bring  back  Blaiifs  company  from 
Cumbeiigjnd.  The  captain  and  colonel  are  both  anxious  that  this  com- 
pany should  not  be  withdrawn  from  my  command,  and  its  anomalous 
position  will  be  fruitful  of  embarrassments,  without,  as  it  appears  to 
me,  any  corresponding  benefit.  In  this  connection  I would  resi)ectfully 
submit  that  General  Trapier  is  much  better  able  to  suiiply  a garrison  for 
Cumberland  than  I am  to  spare  a good  company  from  this  military 
district. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  MERCER, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Second  Military  District  South  Carolina, 

Charleston^  February  16,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General^  Savannah^  Ga. : 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication of  the  14th,  relating  to  the  re-enforcement  of  General  Evans. 

I have  taken  steps  to  re-enforce  him  with  all  I can  muster  on  short 
notice.  Nelson’s  battalion  will  be  sent  out  as  soon  as  possible,  but  I 
regret  to  state  that  Captain  De  Russ’  or  De  Pass’  company  has  not  yet 
filled,  and  that  the  rest  are  suffering  from  disease. 

On  the  other  hand,  Gadberry’s  andMoragne’s  and  Keitt’s  people  are 
rapidly  recovering.  Keitt  received  arms  yesterday.  Clement  Stevens’ 
regiment  is  filling  up,  and  General  Gist  is  using  every  exertion  to  re- 
organize the  troops  of  the  city.  He  has  three  companies  of  cavalry 
here,  which  I shall  endeavor  to  have  equipped  and  make  use  of.  Two 
companies  of  Black’s  cavalry  have  also  reported  lately,  which  will  join 
the  headquarters  of  the  regiment  as  soon  as  they  can  be  equipped. 

I have  respectfully  to  request  that  Captain  Childs  may  be  authorized 
to  issue  or  purchase  arms  for  the  troops  for  the  war  upon  my  requisition. 
There  may  be  one  or  two  more  cavalry  corps  offering  for  the  war,  and 
there  are  a good  quantity  of  Colt’s  pistols  and  rifies  still  for  sale  in  dif- 
ferent hands.  Capt.  Ap  C.  Jones,  of  Black’s  regiment,  has  found  about 
20  army  revolvers  and  some  10  Enfield  rifles,  which  have  been  in  the 
hands  of  merchants  and  gun-dealers  for  some  time.  He  has  purchased 
them,  trusting  to  have  his  purchase  authorized. 

I yesterday  sent  Captain  Walker,  assistant  adjutant-general,  to  con- 
fer with  General  Evans.  He  brought  back  with  him  the  man  reported 
as  a spy.  I inclose  his  stateunent,  and  although  by  no  means  a man 
of  unimpeachable  veracity,  1 think  he  told  nearly  all  he  knew.  As  he 
is  not  entirely  reliable,  however,  and  it  has  occurred  to  General  Evans 
that  he  may  have  been  set  at  liberty  in  order  to  act  as  a spy  and  gain  , 
information  for  the  enemy,  I have  to  request  instructions  as  to  whether 
I shall  hold  him  confined  or  release  him.  The  works  on  the  lines  are 
nearly’  completed,  but  require  dressing. 

I am  employing  a force  on  the  inundation  in  Saint  Andrew’s,  which 
will  be  done  in  a few'  days.  Have  also  started  to  place  a fixed  battery  on 
the  middle  ground  between  Castle  Pinckney  and  Port  Johnson.  The 
water  is  but  about  8 feet  deep,  and  the  timbercaissons  can  be  ballasted 
with  the  rubbish  of  the  late  fire.  The  idea  was  suggested  by  the  neces- 


388  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

sity  of  putting  more  traverses  in  Fort  Moultrie  if  that  place  is  to  be 
bombarded.  Not  wishing  to  lose  the  fire  of  the  guns  and  having  no 
place  for  them  on  tlie  forts,  it  seemed  to  me  that  if  it  can  be  done  in 
time  it  will  be  a strong  additional  defense  to  the  city.  Before  removing 
the  guns,  however,  will  see  that  it  is  not  going  to  take  too  long. 

I inclose  copy  of  the  pass  given  by  Captain  Am  men,  of  the  Seneca 
gunboat,  to  Black,  the  party  alluded  to  in  a former  paragraph. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  S.  EIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  Gejieral, 


[Inclosure.] 

Statement  of  Thomas  Blade, 

Black  left  Charleston  on  the  IGth  December,  with  aflat  and  two  hands, 
for  Edisto  Island,  to  obtain  his  own  and  Major  Whaley’s  furniture,  hav- 
ing first  obtained  a pass  from  the  mayor.  Arrived  on  Edisto  on  the  19th. 
On  the  night  of  his  arrival  his  flat  was  stolen  by  negroes.  Whilst  hunt- 
ing for  his  flat  the  next  day  he  was  taken  by  negroes,  who  were  armed 
with  guns  and  pistols  and  bayonets  on  sticks } there  were  between  30 
and  50  negToes ; drew  their  weapons  and  threatened  to  shoot  him  if  he 
offered  resistance.  Black  was  carried  on  board  gunboat  Penguin,  where 
he  was  kept  two  weeks,  and  then  transferred  to  the  Seneca,  and  sent  to 
Hilton  Head,  and  then  transferred  to  the  Wabash. 

He  was  kept  on  board  for  a week,  and  sent  back  by  the  Seneca  to 
North  Edisto.  Flag  Officer  DuPont,  upon  reading  the  letter  of  the 
captain  of  the  Penguin,  said  he  did  not  consider  Black  a prisoner  of  war, 
as  he  was  taken  by  negroes,  and  was  sorry  the  captain  gave  him  the 
trouble  of  being  sent  to  Hilton  Head.  Whilst  on  Hilton  Head  he  heard 
that  there  were  about  8,000  troops  on  the  island.  Heard  them  speak  of 
attacking  Savannah  and  Charleston,  but  most  of  attacking  Charleston. 
From  what  he  heard,  thought  they  were  going  to  attack  Charleston  by 
way  of  Wadmalaw  Island  and  Simon’s  Bluff*.  They  spoke  of  burning 
Eockville  yesterday. 

He  heard  the  steward  of  the  Ben  DeFord  say  that  he  had  heard  the 
officers  say  that  a portion  of  the  Burnside  fleet  would  be  in  North 
Edisto  soon.  Heard  the  provost-marshal  of  Hilton  Head  say  that  he 
had  been  in  Savannah  about  two  weeks  since. 

Was  sent  back,  after  first  having  been  returned  to  North  Edisto  by 
Flag-Officer  DuPont  to  Hilton  Head,  and  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Boutelle 
was  sent  back  again  to  North  Edisto  in  the  Ben  DeFord. 

One  regiment  of  troops,  about  GOO  strong,  landed  at  Edisto;  they 
had  two  transportation  wagons  and  mules;  had  commenced  to  remove 
everything  that  was  valuable  in  the  way  of  furniture  from  the  island. 

Heard  Boutelle  say  that  he  had  received  a Charleston  paper  of  the 
10th  on  the  11th.  Was  landed  at  White  Point  by  Mr.  Boutelle,  under 
a flag  of  truce.  The  flag  was  not  received  by  any  one,  and  Black  walked 
* on  until  he  met  the  pickets. 

I'he  negroes  go  up  from  Edisto  to  White  Point  continually,  and  Black 
thinks  they  get  information  by  communicating  with  the  negroes  on  the 
main. 

Thinks  they  have  given  up  the  attack  on  Savannah,  as  we  have  too 
many  troops  there.  They  have  a machine  for  cutting  off  pile  obstruc- 
tions close  to  the  bottom,  &c. 

P.  S. — Captain  Eogers,  of  General  Evans’  staff,  saw  the  boat  with  the 
flag  when  it  was  coming  ashore. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  389 

Headquarters  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

J:^avannahj  Ga.^  February  17,  1802. 

Col.  C.  H.  Olmstead, 

Commanding^  d;c.,  Fort  Pulasld: 

Colonel  : From  tbe  position  the  enemy  has  taken  in  the  Savannah 
Eiver,  it  becomes  necessary  that  you  look  to  your  defense  in  that  direc- 
tion. I therefore  recommend  that,  if  necessary  for  that  purpose,  you 
shift  some  of  your  barbette  i^uns  to  the  gorge’  of  the  work,  and  the 
casemates  in  the  northwest  angle,  which  bear  up  the  river,  be  pro- 
vided with  guns.  I would  also  recommend  that  the  parapets  of  the 
mortar  batteries  be  carried  all  around,  so  that  the  mortars  can  be  pro- 
tected from  the  fire  up  the  river  as  well  as  from  Tybee  Island,  and  that 
everything  be  done  to  strengthen  the  defenses  of  your  work  in  the  rear. 
As  far  as  it  is  possible  your  safety  will  be  anxiously  cared  for,  and  for 
the  present  your  communication  with  the  city  will  have  to  be  by  light 
boats  over  the  marsh  and  through  Wilmington  Narrows  to  Causton’s 
Bluff,  or  by  any  other  mode  by  which  you  can  better  accomplish  it. 

I am,  sir, 

E.  H.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Second  Military  District, 

Charleston,  February  17,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Savannah,  Ga.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  letter  of 
General  Lee  of  the  15th. 

The  only  indications  of  an  attack  on  Charleston  are  those  reported 
by  General  Evans  and  such  information  as  was  derived  from  Mr.  Black, 
the  prisoner  who  was  at  Hilton  Head.  I consider  these  vague,  and  were 
it  not  for  the  bitter  animosity  against  this  city  by  the  enemy  should  not 
be  much  alarmed.  As  for  the  artillery  companies.  General  Lee  will  agree 
with  me  that  properly  they  cannot  be  spared,  but  I think  a certain 
number  might  be  sent  with  a comparatively  small  risk.  I should  send 
them  from  Lamai^’s  and  White’s  battalions,  which,  although  not  by  any 
means  perfect,  have  had  some  little  practice. 

Fort  Sumter  has  now  but  four  well-instructed  companies  in  garrison, 
the  others  being  recruits.  Castle  Pinckney  is  garrisoned  by  one  com- 
pany, which  relieved  the  State  volunteer  company  under  Captain  Chi- 
chester. Colonel  Hagood  requires  an  additional  force  of  artillery  men 
at  Stono,  and  General  Evans  calls  on  me  for  guns  and  men,  which  I 
have  been  unable  to  furnish. 

The  troops  are  holding  themselves  in  readiness  to  march  at  a moment’s 
notice,  but  are  suffering  from  disease,  as  I have  informed  you. 

If  the  general  thinks  the  necessity  absolute,  I will  endeavor  to  send 
the  troops  required  with  as  little  risk  as  possible.  Meanwhile  the  people 
here  are  under  a little  excitement  and  fear  an  attack.  I am  not  going 
to  allay  it,  hoping  they  may  volunteer  at  once. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 

> Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


390  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  February  18,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Savannah : 

Order  the  cavalry  regiment  of  Colonel  Davis  from  Florida  to  Chat- 
tanooga immediately^,  to  report  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston.  Withdraw 
all  forces  from  the  islands  in  your  department  to  the  main-land,  taking 
proper  measures  to  save  the  artillerv  and  munitions  of  war. 

‘ J.  P.  BENJAMINT, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  18,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General^  Richmond^  Ya,: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  tbe 
honorable  Secretary  of  War,  that  the  guns  have  been  withdrawn  from 
the  batteries  on  Saint  Simon’s  and  JekyFs  Islands  and  the  troops 
removed  to  Brunswick.  The  former  are  now  in  progress  of  transpor- 
tation to  this  place,  to  be  used  in  the  defense  of  the  city  of  Savannah, 
and  the  latter  directed  to  occupy  a position,  to  command  the  railroad 
and  protect  the  back  country.  The  nature  of  the  ground  prevents  the 
possibility  of  holding  the  town  of  Brunswick,  as  the  gunboats  of  the 
enemy  can  unmolested  ascend  the  river  within  4 miles  of  the  railroad  at 
Waynesville  and  about  25  miles  in  the  rear  of  Brunswick.  Brunswick 
would  prove  a convenient  and  healthy  position,  if  occupied  by  the 
enemy,  affording  shelter  and  comfortable  quarters  for  the  troops  and 
hospitals  for  the  sick.  It  is  used  as  a summer  resort,  and  at  this  time 
mostly  uninhabited.  Should  it  fall  into  the  possession  of  the  enemy,  its 
convenient  harbor,  salubrious  climate,  and  comfortable  buildings  might 
tempt  him  to  hold  it  for  the  continuance  of  the  war,  and,  rather  than  it 
should  fall  into  his  hands,  I propose  to  destroy  it. 

Before  issuing  orders  to  this  effect,  I desire  that  my  views  be  known 
to  the  Secretary,  so  that  if  not  approved  by  him  I may  be  informed. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


Savannah,  February  18,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding^,  Charleston: 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  commanding  general  [Lee]  to  acknow- 
ledge the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  16th  instant  to-day  ; that  he  hopes 
you  will  use  every  effort  to  organize  the  Carolina  troops  and  to  get  them 
into  the  field.  The  three  cavalry  companies  that  you  are  equipping  can 
be  retained  for  service  in  your  district  if  you  desire  it.  Captain  Childs 
Avill  be  authorized  to  issue  arms  to  the  cavalry  companies  mustered 
into  the  Confederate  service  for  the  war  upon  your  requisition,  but  the 
Enfield  rifles  must  be  reserved  for  the  infantry.  As  regards  Thomas 
Black,  who  has  been  released  by  the  enemy,  you  must  judge  from  his 
character  and  antecedents  whether  he  can  be  trusted  at  large;  if  you 
feel  satisfied,  you  can  release  him  and  keep  him* under  surveillance.  If 
not,  he  had  better  be  sent  to  Colonel  Preston,  at  Columbia,  to  be  re- 
tained in  close  custody  or  within  prescribed  limits  on  parole. 

In  reference  to  the  fixed  battery  you  propose  on  the  middle  ground. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


391 


if  adopted  he  would  recommend  that  it  be  casern ated,  using  heavy  timber 
and  railroad  iron  lor  the  purpose.  Similar  protection  should  be  given 
to  our  other  water  batteries,  where  practicable,  if  time  permits,  and, 
indeed,  every  preparation  made  to  shelter  the  men  from  the  bombard- 
ment of  the  enemy’s  fleet. 

1 am,  &c., 


Savannah,  February  18,  18G2. 

His  Excellency  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Gover  nor  of  Georgia^  Milledgeville : 

Governor:  I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  information  of  your 
excellency  that  the  guns  have  been  removed  from  the  islands  of  Saint 
Simon’s  and  Jekyl,  and  the  troops  withdrawn  to  the  main  land;  the 
former  are  in  process  of  transportation  to  this  city,  and  the  latter  or- 
dered to  take  a position  to  command  the  railroad  and  to  protect  the 
back  country. 

In  giving  final  orders  for  the  defense  of  that  portion  of  the  State,  I 
wish  to  give  directions  in  reference  to  the  town  of  Brunswick,  provided 
the  enemy  attempt  to  possess.  Besides  the  moral  effect  of  showing  our 
determination  to  defend  the  country  at  any  sacrifice,  its  destruction 
would  deprive  the  enemy  of  comfortable  quarters  in  a healthy  position, 
which  they  might  otherwise  be  tempted  to  occupy  during  the  contin- 
uance of  the  war,  the  present  buildings  saving  them  much  labor  and 
expense,  and  the  hotel  serving  as  a hospital  for  their  sick.  As  there 
are  other  considerations  besides  those,  purely  military,  involved  in  this 
question,  I am  unwilling  to  order  the  destruction  of  the  town  without 
the  knowledge  and  approbation  of  your  excellency. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General j Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Second  Military  District  South  Carolina, 

Charleston^  February  18,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Savannah,,  Ga.: 

Captain  : In  view  of  the  reported  recent  successes  of  the  enemy  at 
Fort  Donelson,  which,  although  not  entirely  reliable,  will  probably  lead 
to  renewed  activity  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  I beg  leave  respectfully 
to  suggest  the  following  for  the  consideration  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral. We  may,  I opine,  consider  it  as  certain  that  the  enemy  will  soon 
attack  Savannah  or  Charleston,  directly  or  by  the  shortest  land  a])- 
proach,  especially  if  their  generals  have  a proper  appreciation  of  a moral 
effect  of  a victory. 

With  this  letter  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  the  weekly 
return  of  the  troops  in  this  district.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  aggregate 
‘‘  present  and  absent”  is  7,754,  while  the  number  of  effectives,  sabers 
and  bayonets  and  artillery-men,  is  but  4,569,  including  sergeants  and 
corporals. 

General  Evans  has  nominally  from  2,800  to  3,000,  probably  1,500, 
effectives. 

The  commands  to  the  south  and  west  are,  I doubt  not,  proportionally 
weak,  according  to  the  extent  of  their  lines. 


392  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

I do  uot  know  tlie  force  in  Savannah,  but,  with  over  200  miles  from 
the  North  Carolina  to  the  Georgia  line,  it  seems  to  me  that  we  have  not 
more  than  20,000  effectives,  and  probably  that  estimate  is  too  large. 
The  greater  portion  of  this  force  is  between  this  point  and  Savannah, 
guarding  our  line  of  communications  between  the  two  cities,  and  from 
circumstances  of  topography  it  is  weak  and  liable  to  be  cut. 

Free  communication  between  the  cities  is  of  great  importance,  and  so 
long  as  there  were  any  hopes  of  a speedy  termination  df  the  war  the 
defense  of  the  rich  plantations  on  Paw  Paw,  Ashepoo,  and  Combahee  of 
little,  less.  But  if  the  news  of  our  disaster  in  Tennessee  be  correct,  the 
war  may  last  long  indeed.  The  Santee,  Pedee,  and  W accamaw  countries 
are  comparatively  undefended,  except  by  nature,  which  has  provided  a 
strong  defense  in  the  shoals  and  bars  at  the  mouths  of  the  rivers.  Never- 
theless, should  the  enemy  be  successful  in  an  attack  upon  either  of  our 
cities,  we  must  expect  to  be  attacked  there.  If,  however,  we  hold  the 
cities  and  the  Santee  and  Georgetown  districts,  the  Ashley  and  Cooper 
being  within  the  limits  of  Charleston,  with  the  resources  of  the  interior 
at  command,  we  shall  have  the  principal  part  of  the  grain  country  within 
' our  hands.  I take  it  for  granted  that  it  will  be  out  of  the  question  to 
get  a crop  from  either  Combahee,  Ashepoo,  or  Paw  Paw. 

Our  weakest  points  between  this  city  and  Savannah  are  this  side  Paw 
Paw,  and  near  Charleston.  North  Edisto  affords  a safe  harbor  for 
vessels  of  from  14  to  10  feet  of  water,  and  thence  they  can  come  to 
White  Point  or  Simon’s  Landing  in  force.  They  are  from  5 to  8 miles 
of  the  railroad,  a short  half  day’s  march. 

General  Evans’  force,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  divided,  a consider- 
able portion  being  on  John’s  Island.  I shall  certainly  support  him  with 
all  the  means  at  my  disposal,  but  out  of  my  effectives  it  would  be  hard  to 
get  1,500  movable  troops.  This  would  hardly  suffice  to  make  a success- 
ful stand. 

Now,  if  a disposition  is  made  which  would  strengthen  the  points  near 
to  Charleston  by  drawing  troops  from  the  vicinity  of  Pocotaligo,  this 
side  of  Paw  Paw,  strong  guards  being  at  or  in  advance  of  the  railroad 
bridges  on  Ashepoo  and  Combahee,  while  the  obstructions  in  the  Coosa- 
whatchie  is  held  as  a strong  advanceel  post  by  the  troops  defending  the 
Carolina  shore  of  the  Savannah,  General  Evans’  force  closing  in  on  the 
landings  on  the  Wadmalaw  and  Stono,  the  a[)proach  to  Charleston  from 
that  vicinity  would  be  comparativel3'  secure.  Troops  here  and  to  be 
raised  could  be  thrown  in  readiness  to  support  the  advance  as  soon  as 
they  convalesced,  and  anjr  surplus  we  may  have  can  be  placed  north- 
waid  to  defend  the  countr^^  in  that  direction. 

This  it  ma^^  be  said  would  leave  a very  rich  section  of  the  country 
undefended.  But  no  crop  comes  from  that  country  this  ,vear  if  the  war 
continues,  and  it  is  well  nigh  exhausted  now  of  those  necessaries  which, 
in  m3^  opinion,  first  rendered  it  advisable  to  hold  it  in  force.  Our  weak 
X)oint  on  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  road  would  be  about  Ashepoo 
and  Combahee.  The  weak  point  now  is  close  to  Charleston.  Should 
the  forces  of  the  enemy  make  a dash,  thej^  have  comparatively  no  dis- 
tance to  march  to  cut  the  rail. 

In  the  case  su])posed,  thej^  would  at  any  point  have  twice  or  thrice  the 
distance  to  march,  or  take  a narrow  and  tortuous  route  of  from  30  to  50 
miles  up  tidal  rivers ; moreover,  neither  we  nor  the  enem^'  can  hold  the 
line  of  the  railroad  about  Coosawhatchie  or  Pocotaligo  or  at  Salkehatchie 
or  Ashepoo  Ferry  more  than  six  or  seven  weeks  longer.  We  shall  have 
to  take  the  healthy  regions  about  Adams  Bun,  and  the  sandy  sea  isl- 


i Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  393 

i 

{ ands  in  the  vicinity  of  Charleston  and  to  tlie  north  of  Grahamville 

I would  be  one  good  location  for  the  troops  south  of  Broad  Kiver. 

^ In  the  vicinity  of  Charleston  we  have  Long,  Sullivan,  and  Morris  Isl- 
ands, besides  Folly,  and  perhaps  Kiawah  and  Summerville,  20  miles  up 
the  South  Carolina  road,  for  a reserve. 

Communication  with  Savannah  could  be  kept  up  by  the  rail  until  it 
was  cut,  and  if  it  should  so  happen,  the  rolling  stock  could  be  transferred 
to  the  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  Central  for  transportation  by  way  of 
Augusta. 

The  various  arguments  on  the  subject  it  would  be  hard  to  embody  in 
a single  letter,  but  the  general  idea  is  that  in  the  present  state  of  aifairs, 
while  a considerable  i^ortion  of  our  troops  are  guarding  a long  line  of 
railroad  through  a country  which  we  must  soon  leave  and  now  nearly 
exhausted,  our  weakest  point  is  clo^e  to,  perhaps,  our  most  important 
city,  and  that  city  has  not  men  enough  to  defend  it  in  case  of  attack. 

If  the  enemy  dashes  at  General  Evans,  and  the  rail  is  cut,  the  danger 
would  be  imminent,  and  should  either  or  both  Charleston  or  Savannah 
ftxll,  we  shall  be  forced  to  hold  unhealthy  positions  in  an  exhausted 
country,  or  to  retire  into  the  interior  and  give  up  the  seaboard,  with  its 
advantages  of  grain  crops  and  communications.  My  opinion  upon  these 
matters  has  not  been  asked,  but,  charged  as  I am  with  the  defense  of  this 
military  district,  I have  felt  it  my  duty  to  submit  the  considerations  to 
the  commanding  general.  I regret  that  I could  not  state  them  more 
forcibly  and  in  fewer  words. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  10,  1862. 

His  Excellency  John  Milton, 

Governor  of  Florida^  Tallahassee : 

Governor  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  the  letter  of  the  Oth 
instant,  from  Brig.  Gen.  E.  F.  Floyd  to  your  excellency,  referred  to  me. 
From  his  statement,  the  necessity  for  additional  troops  at  that  point  is 
apparent,  and  as  I have  none  under  my  command  to  send,  I have  to 
request  that  your  excellency  will  transfer  into  the  service  of  the  Con- 
federate States  a regiment  for  the  war,  if  possible,  and  order  it  to  re])ort 
to  Brigadier-Geueral  Trapier.  I have  already  written  to  General  Tra- 
pier  on  the  subject.  Unless  troops  can  be  organized  in  Florida  for  its 
defense,  I know  not  whose  they  can  obtain. 

I am,  &c.,  E.  E.  LEE, 

General^  Commanding, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  19,  1862. 

General  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding  District  Florida^  Tallahassee: 

General:  In  looking  at  the  whole  defense  of  Florida,  it  becomes 
important  to  ascertain  what  ixoints  can  x)robably  be  held  and  what  points 
had  better  be  relinquished.  The  force  that  the  enemy  can  bring  against 
any  position  where  he  can  concentrate  his  floating  batteries  renders  it 
prudent  and  proper  to  withdraw  from  the  islands  to  the  main-laud  and 
to  prepare  to  contest  his  advance  into  the  interior.  Where  an  island 
offers  the  best  point  of  defense,  and  is  so  connected  with  the  main  that 


394  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

its  communication  cannot  be  cut  off,  it  may  be  retained.  Otherwise  it 
should  be  abaudoned. 

A dispatch  was  sent  to  you  this  morning  on  this  subject,  and  I now 
wish  you,  in  reviewing  the  defensive  positions  in  your  district,  to  see 
what  changes  and  improvements  can  be  made  in  the  number  and  strength 
of  the  points  occupied.  I fear  but  littlo  aid  can  be  offered  you  from 
without  the  State  of  Florida.  You  must  therefore  use  every  exertion  to 
make  available  the  resources  in  it,  and  apply  the  means  at  your  disposal 
to  the  best  advantage.  Whatever  can  be  given  from  the  means  under 
my  control  will  be  cheerfully  accorded.  You  must,  however,  prepare  to 
concentrate  your  forces  at  the  point  liable  to  be  attacked,  and  make 
every  arrangement  to  secure  the  troops,  guns,  and  munitions  of  war 
at  such  points  as  you  may  deem  proper  to  relinquish. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  19,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commandmgj  ffc..  Charleston: 

General:  From  the  progress  of  the  war,  it  seems  plain  that  the 
enemy,  when  ready  to  move  against  Charleston,  should  he  select  it  as 
a point  of  attack,  will  advance  in  great  force.  We  should  therefore  be 
prepared  to  concentrate  rapidly  in  his  front,  on  the  lines  that  can  be 
best  defended,  so  as  to  be  able  to  contend  to  the  utmost  of  our  strength. 
Beyond  these  lines  every  preparation  should  be  made  to  withdraw  guns 
and  munitions  of  war  when  it  becomes  necessary  or  when  the  route  of 
the  enemy  renders  them  valueless  in  the  positions  occupied.  Aly  object 
is  to  ascertain  your  oi)inion,  whether,  without  weakening  the  plan  of 
defense,  our  lines  could  be  contracted,  and  exposed  or  distant  points 
abandoned. 

The  batteries  at  Cole’s  Island,  for  instance,  would  not  be  available,  pro- 
vided the  enemy  should  advance  by  the  Edisto,  and,  unless  arrangements 
are  made  to  withdraw  them,  would  be  lost.  If  they  can  be  reached  in 
great  force  by  the  enemy’s  gunboats  they  might  be  suppressed,  and  the 
Stono  seized  as  an  avenue  of  approach.  If  it  is  necessary  to  maintain 
these  batteries,  they  should  be  made  as  strong  as  possible  and  their  com- 
munications rendered  practicable  in  case  of  a reverse.  So  at  other 
exposed  points. 

I am  in  favor  of  abandoning  all  exposed  points  as  far  as  possible 
within  reach  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  of  gunboats  and  of  taking  interior 
positions,  where  we  can  meet  on  more  equal  terms.  All  our  resources 
should  be  applied  to  those  positions.  I wish  you  therefore  to  review 
the  whole  subject,  and  see  what  changes  or  improvements  can  be  made, 
bpth  as  to  the  imi^ortance  and  strength  of  the  positions  retained. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  20, 1862, 

Brig.  Gen.  K G.  Evans, 

Commanding^  &c.^  Adams  Bun: 

General  : If  I have  correctly  gathered  your  opinion,  you  seem  to 
think  it  j)robabie  that  the  enemy,  in  his  advance  upon  the  railroad  or  in 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  395 

attack  upon  Charleston,  would  ascend  the  North  Edisto  Island  either  at 
White  Point  or  Simon’s  Landing.  I hope  you  have  this  x)oint  well 
watched,  and  your  forces  prepared  to  throw  them  in  advance  of  the 
enemy  to  cut  them  oft'  from  the  railroad,  and  if  forced  to  retire  to  ])lace 
your  troops  so  as  to  defend  the  route  to  Charleston.  Should  you  dis- 
cover a movement  of  the  enemy  in  this  direction,  I desire  you  to  notify 
General  Pemberton  as  well  as  General  Ripley,  the  former  of  whom  can 
by  a flank  movement  press  upon  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  while  the  latter 
can  move  directly  to  your  support.  In  this  connection  I deem  it  proper 
that  you  should  hold  your  troops  as  concentrated  as  possible,  and  watch 
your  exposed  points  by  strong  guards.  If  necessary  to  retain  troops 
on  Wadmalaw  and  John’s  Islands,  they  should  be  light,  not  encumbered 
with  baggage,  with  communications  free  to  retire  to  the  main  and  join 
your  main  body.  I take  it  for  granted  that  everything  that  can  be 
removed  from  these  islands,  and  indeed  from  your  front,  has  already 
been  brought  off  by  the  inhabitants,  and  that  no  crops  can  be  raised 
there  the  ensuing  year.  The  country  therefore  does  not  require  troops 
for  protection,  but  merely  to  watch  the  enemy  and  guard  the  avenues 
of  approach. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding, 


Savannah  Ga.,  February  20,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding^  chc.,  Pocotaligo^  8.  C. : 

General  : The  observations  of  Generals  Ripley  and  Evans  lead  them 
to  believe  that  the  enemy  in  his  attack  upon  Charleston  will  ascend  the 
North  Edisto  as  high  as  White  Point  and  Simon’s  Landing,  and  make 
a dash  at  the  railroad,  of  which  he  will  be  within  7 miles,  so  as  to 
cut  our  communications.  It  will  be  apparent  to  you  that  this  is  one  of 
our  weak  points,  and  is  as  likely  to  be  seized  upon  by  the  enemy  as  any 
other.  General  Evans  has  been  requested  to  give  it  careful  attention, 
and  in  the  event  of  the  movement  apprehended  to  give  you  notice.  1 
wish  you  to  be  prepared,  therefore,  by  a flank  movement  to  intercept 
him,  and,  if  possible,  place  yourself  in  his  front,  so  if  he  is  not  driven 
back  that  we  can  fall  upon  him  with  our  whole  force  in  his  movement 
against  Charleston.  I have  always  thought  it  probable  that  i)reparatory 
to  an  attack  uj^on  Charleston  or  Savannah  the  enemy  would  attempt 
to  seize  the  line  of  the  railroad  both  east  and  west  of  the  waters  of  the 
Broad  River,  so  as  to  isolate  your  force,  the  strength  of  which  is  proba- 
bly known  to  them,  as  well  as  the  cities  themselves.  • 

I wish  you  to  be  prepared  against  such  a movement,  and  have  your 
forces  well  in  hand  to  move  to  any  threatened  point  and  take  direction 
of  the  operations.  I take  it  for  granted  that  all  property  of  value  has 
been  removed  from  your  front,  and  that  no  crops  can  be  raised  in  the 
country  of  the  Broad,  Combahee,  and  Ashepoo  Rivers,  and  that  the 
resources  in  this  vicinity  are  nigh  exhausted.  The  disposition  of  the 
troops,  therefore,  should  look  rather  to  their  concentration  to  resist  the 
enemy  than  to  hold  the  country. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding, 


396  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  IChap.  xv. 


Executive  Department, 

Milledgevillej  February  21,  1862. 

E.  E.  Lee, 

General^  Commanding: 

General:  I have  to  aekuowleclge  the  receipt  of  your  favor  of  the 
18th  instant.  I am  happy  to  learn  that  you  have  removed  the  troops 
from  the  islands  and  that  you  now  have  the  guns  at  Savannah.  God 
grant  that  they  may  enable  you  to  drive  the  enemy’s  gunboats  from  the 
river  when  the  attack  comes. 

In  reference  to  the  other  point  in  your  letter,  I have  to  say  that  if 
my  own  house  were  in  Brunswick  I would  certainly  set  fire  to  it,  when 
driven  from  it  by  the  enemy,  rather  than  see  it  used  by  them  as  a shel- 
ter. We  should  destroy  whatever  the  military  necessities  require.  I 
am  therefore  prepared  to  sustain  any  order  which  in  your  opinion  it  is 
necessary  to  have  executed.  Private  property  and  private  rights  must 
yield  to  the  great  public  interests  now  at  stake.  The  question  of  cotn- 
pensatioii  will  be  one  which  will  address  itself  to  the  State.  When  the 
war  is  over,  justice  to  sufferers  will  no  doubt  be  done. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JOSEPH  E.  BROWK 


AUGUSTA,  Ga.,  February  22,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  Lee,  C.  S.  A., 

Commanding : 

General  : I have  sent  the  bearer,  Mr.  1^.  B.  Grant,  a civil  engineer 
in  my  employment,  to  ascertain  if  a small  steamboat  can  be  procured  in 
Savannah  for  aiding  in  placing  obstructions  in  the  river. 

I made  a reconnaissance  for  about  70  miles  down  the  river  yesterday 
and  the  day  before,  and  decided  to  place  the  proposed  obstructions  at 
that  part  of  its  course  called  Shell  Bluff,  about  45  miles  from  this  city 
b3’  water  and  6 miles  to  the  nearest  point  of  the  railroad.  The  stream 
at  this  place  is  300  feet  in  width,  impinging  against  the  shell  formation, 
which  is  surmounted  by  a ridge  some  100  feet  in  height  parallel  to  the 
course  of  the  river,  with  a spur,  affording  direct  fire  at  the  point  selected, 
at  right  angles  to  the  stream  and  100  yards  distant. 

There  is  also  a small  plateau  about  30  feet  peri)endicular  above  the 
river  at  its  highest  stage,  affording  room  for  a battery  or  intrenchment 
of  limited  dimensions  immediately  on  the  river  and  at  the  foot  of  the 
ridge.  This  is  the  point  I have  selected  to  place  the  proposed  obstruc- 
tions, and  offers  excellent  advantages  for  such  purpose.  The  depth  of 
the  channel  is  about  30  feet  at  high  water. 

The  river  has  many  sudden  and  sharp  turns  in  the  part  examined,  with 
side  currents  of  much  force  passing  over  the  intervening  inundated 
lands,  thus  rendering  the  navigation  slow  and  difficult  for  a screw  steamer 
at  a high  stage  of  the  water,  and  I understand  the  shallowness  of  the 
bars  and  numerous  projecting  stumps  of  trees  render  .its  navigation 
dangerous  for  boats  drawing  6 feet  or  over  of  water  at  a medium  stage 
of  the  river,  and  impracticable  at  low  water  to  this  place. 

Thus  a high  stage  of  the  water  is  probably  the  only  period  at  which 
gunboats  w^ould  make  the  attempt,  and  from  the  numerous  high  liluffs 
bordering  the  right  bank  of  the  river  and  commanding  its  channel  at 
more  than  200  yards  distant,  I think  its  navigation  could  be,  in  the  gen- 
eral case,  rendered  dangerous  to  the  enemy,  if  not  absolutely  stopped, 
by  small  arms  alone. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  397 

We  would  want  a steambo^l^t  about  two  weeks  ])robably.  One  could  be 
procured  here,  but  of  larger  size  than  is  necessary  or  desirable,  and  at  a 
corresponding  increased  rate  of  charter 5 hence  1 have  thought  it])roi)er 
to  send  Mr.  Grant  to  obtain  one  of  the  small  boats  which  1 understand 
is  now  at  Savannah  in  Government  emi)loy,  if  practicable.  The  work 
of  procuring  the  timber,  iron,  &c.,  has  already  commenced,  and  matters 
Avill  be  pushed  forward  with  all  the  celerity  i)0ssible. 

Eespectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  W.  KAIN^S, 
il/ffjor,  Artillery  and  Ordnance^  &c. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  22,  18G2. 
His  Excellency  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Governor  of  Georgia^  Milled geville  : 

Governor  : In  the  present  condition  of  affairs  the  connection  between 
the  cities  of  Charleston  and  Savannah  by  the  Charleston  and  Savannah 
Eailroad  is  very  precarious.  Should  the  force  now  on  this  coast  be  re-en- 
forced, an  attem])t  will  be  made  in  all  i^robability  to  cut  the  road  between 
the  two  cities,  and,  in  view  of  this  contingency,  I have  the  honor  to  call 
your  attention  to  the  importance  to  the  defense  of  the  cities  of  Charles- 
ton, Augusta,  and  Savannah,  as  well  as  to  the  States  of  Georgia  and 
South  Carolina,  of  connecting  the  Augusta  and  Savannah  Kailroad  with 
the  Georgia  or  South  Carolina  Eailroad  at  Augusta.  I am  informed 
that  the  Augusta  and  Savannah  Eailroad  Company  is  willing  to  build 
the  connection  at  its  own  expense,  provided  they  be  allowed  to  take  the 
route  which  they  would  ])refer,  and  which  the  president  of  the  road  (Dr. 
Willis)  informs,  me  is  but  one-fourth  of  a mile  in  distance,  and  if  i)er- 
mission  were  given  at  once,  the  connection  could  be  completed  in  one 
week.  1 am  moreover  informed  by  Dr.  Willis  that  the  railroad  company 
will  make  the  connection,  taking  the  route  selected  by  the  city  council 
of  Augusta — more  than  twice  the  distance,  however — if  the  State  of 
Georgia  will  direct  it  and  assume  the  expense.  In  the  latter  case,  no 
doubt  the  State  would  be  reimbursed  by  the  Confederate  Government, 
but  all  considerations  of  time  and  expense  would  seem  to  recommend 
that  the  former  plan  be  adopted,  and  I earnestly  request  that,  if  there  is 
no  insurmountable  objection  to  its  being  carried  out,  your  excellency 
lend  your  aid  and  influence  to  have  it  done  immediately. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 

Genera  1,  Comm andi n g. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

» . • February  23,  18G2. 

Maj.  George  W.  Eains, 

Augusta^  Ga. : 

Major  : I am  glad  to  learn  by  your  letter  of  the  22d  instant  that  your 
examination  of  the  Savannah  Eiver  has  been  successful,  and  that  you 
have  selected  a ]>oint  suitable  for  obstructing  its  navigation.  I request 
that  you  will  commence  immediately  the  construction  of  the  work,  push 
it  forward  with  vigor,  and  at  the  same  time  erect  such  batteries,  intrench- 
ments,  and  rifle  i)its  as  in  your  judgment  will  best  defend  it,  and  which 
we  may  have  the  means  of  arming  and  manning. 


398  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


The  position  you  have^selected  seems  to  possess  excellent  advantages 
for  this  ])iirpose,  and  I trust  by  your  skill  and  energy  will  be  made 
impregnable.  It  sliould  be  provided  with  bomb-proofs  to  shelter  the 
men  from  shells,  &c.,  ])rovided  the  guns  cannot  themselves  be  protected 
from  these  missiles.  1 have  written  to  the  governor,  who  has  no  guns 
which  can  be  applied  to  your  position,  and  I cannot  say  now  whether 
any  can  be  sent  from  here.  Please  inform  me  of  your  progress,  and 
whether  I can  give  any  aid  to  the  work. 

Mr.  Grant  has  gone  to  inquire  about  a suitable  boat.  The  two  most 
convenient  for  your  purpose,  Talemino  and  Habersham,  are  in  constant 
use,  and  I do  not  suppose  can  be  spared.  In  that  event  you  must  impress 
a boat  and  pay  the  rates  given  here. 

I am,  &c., 


E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


War  Department,  G.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Fa.,  February  24,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Savannah^  Ga.: 

Sir  . The  recent  disaster  to  our  arms  in  Tennessee  forces  the  Gov- 
ernment to  the  stern  necessity  of  withdrawing  its  lines  within  more 
defensible  limits,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  meet  with  some  equality  the 
overpowering  numbers  of  the  enemy.  The  railroad  line  from  Memphis 
to  Eichmond  must  be  defended  at  all  hazards.  We  can  only  do  this  by 
withdrawing  troops  from  the  seaboard.  You  are  therefore  requested 
to  withdraw  all  such  forces  as  are  now  employed  in  the  delense  of  the 
seaboard  of  Florida,  taking  proper  steps  to  secure  the  guns  and  muni- 
tions of  war,  and  to  send  forward  the  troops  to  Tennessee,  to  report  to 
General  A.  S.  Johnston,  by  the  most  expeditious  route. 

The  only  troops  to  be  retained  in  Florida  are  such  as  may  be  neces- 
sary to  defend  the  Apalachicola  Eiver,  as  the  enemy  could  by  that 
river  at  high  water  send  his  gunboats  into  the  very  middle  of  the  State 
of  Georgia.  Let  General  Trapier  put  that  river  and  harbor  in  a satis- 
factory state  of  defense,  and  then  further  orders  can  be  given  to  him ; 
but  I beg  that  there  be  no  delay  that  you  can  possibly  avoid  in  for- 
warding to  Tennessee  the  troops  now  at  Fernandina  and  on  the  eastern 
coast. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  24,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding^  the.,  Tallahassee: 

General  ; I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  February  — , from  Fernandina,  relative  to  the  indefensibility  of  the 
position  on  Amelia  Island.  The  withdrawal  of  the  troops  from  Saint 
Simon’s  and  Jekyl  Islands  can  only  affect  the  inland  communication 
between  Brunswick  and  Cumberland  Sound,  rendering  it  less  secure 
and  certain.  The  batteries  commanding  the  principal  entrance  into 
Cumberland  Sound  can  be  as  easily  turned  through  Saint  Andrew’s 
Sound  as  Saint  Simon’s,  which  is  nearer  and  as  accessible  as  the 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  399 

latter.  1 had  hoped  that  guns  could  be  obtained  in  time  to  defend 
these  rear  approaches,  but  as  I now  see  no  possibility  of  doing  so,  and 
as  the  menus  on  the  island  are  incompetent  in  your  opinion  for  its  de- 
fense, you  are  authorized  to  retire  both  from  Cumberland  and  Amelia 
Islands  to  the  main-land,  taking  such  j)osition8  as  will  best  defend  the 
interests  of  the  State,  and  using  the  guns  and  troops  for  that  ])urpose. 
Captain  Blain’s  company  must  be  sent  as  soon  as  possible  to  this  city, 
to  report  to  General  Lawton. 

The  withdrawal  of  the  troops  and  guns  will  have  to  be  dbne  with 
extreme  caution,  and  your  arrangements  for  that  purpose  must  be  done 
so  quietly  and  executed  so  speedily  as  not  to  attract  the  attention  of 
the  enemy. 

The  guns  from  Cumberland  should  first  be  removed  and  transported 
across  at  night ; logs  in  imitation  of  guns  should  be  mounted  in  their 
place  as  the  guns  are  removed.  The  same  precaution  should  be  taken 
in  dismantling  the  batteries  at  Amelia  Island ; the  platforms,  ammu- 
nition, and  munitions  of  all  sorts  secured.  It  is  hoped  that  the  guns 
and  ammunition  derived  from  these  points  will  enable  you  to  secure 
other  important  points  in  the  State  of  Florida,  for  sux)i)lying  which  I 
see  no  other  means. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  24,  1862. 

Col.  J.  Gorhas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance^  dc.,  Richmondj  Ya,  ‘: 

Colonel  : I am  in  receipt  to-day  of  a letter  from  Brigadier- General 
Trapier,  commanding,  &c.,  Florida,  requesting  most  earnestly  to  be  at 
least  supplied  with  1,000  muskets  for  the  arming  of  the  new  troops 
under  his  command.  One  company,  which  was  mustered  in  the  serv- 
ice on  11th  December  last  for  the  war,  has  not  as  yet,  he  informs  me, 
received  a single  arm.  I have  not  any  at  my  disposal  to  give  him, 
those  allotted  to  my  department  having  already  been  devoted  to  the 
arming  of  troops  mustered  into  service  from  Georgia  and  South  Caro- 
lina. I sec  by  the  disposition  that  has  been  made  of  the  arms  that  900 
are  to  be  sent  to  Richmond;  if  those  are  not  wanted  there  I would  recom- 
mend that  they  be  applied  to  the  arming  of  the  troops  now  mustering 
for  the  war  in  this  department.  General  Trapier  also  applies  for  some 
blankets  and  powder,  if  they  can  be  spared.  Similar  applications  have 
been  made  to  me  by  the  governor  of  Florida. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General j Commandmg, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  24, 1862. 

His  Excellency  John  Milton, 

Governor  of  Florida^  Tallahassee : 

Governor:  I have-had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  21st 
instant,*  handed  to  me  by  Col.  J.  J.  Williams,  of  Florida. 

I regret  very  much  to  learn  that  the  means  for.  the  defense  of  the 
caiiital  of  the  State  are  so  deficient.  Not  finding  it  possible  to  defend 


* Not  found. 


400  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

all  the  important  points  in  the  State,  or  to  obtain  guns  to  place  Cum- 
berland Harbor  out  of  the  reach  of  capture,  I had  previously  authorized 
General  Trapier  to  withdra^y  the  troops  and  guns  from  that  point,  aud 
to  apply  them  to  other  vital  portions  of  the  State.  This  is  the  only 
course  now  left  to  supidy  means  for  defending  it.  I have  also  author- 
ized him  to  withdraw  generally  from  the  islands  to  the  main ; the  only 
way,  in  my  opinion,  successfully  to  resist  the  large  force  that  can  be 
brought  against  us  by  the  enemy,  and  to  deprive  him  of  the  benefit 
derived  from  his  fleet  and  heavy  floating  batteries. 

In  reference  to  the  cargo  landing  from  the  steamer  Carolina,  its  dispo- 
sition has  been  made  by  the  War  Department  at  Richmond,  which  will 
go  but  a little  way  in  supplying  the  urgent  demands  of  the  service.  It 
is  now  impossible  to  arm  troops  entering  the  service  for  the  war.  I con- 
sider it  therefore  useless  for  troops  entering  the  service  for  a less  period 
to  expect  arms  from  the  Government.  If  regiments  can  be  raised  in 
Florida  for  the  war  (the  only  period,  in  my  opinion,  for  which  they 
ought  to  be  accepted),  I will  endeavor  to  procure  arms  for  them. 

It  will  be  necessary  for  the  citizens  of  Florida  to  turn  out  to  a man  to 
defend  their  homes,  and  the  sooner  your  excellency  can  impress  upon 
them  this  fact,  the  easier  will  be  its  accomplishment.  Troops  cannot 
now  be  drawn  from  other  States  for  this  purpose.  Every  State  is 
looking  to  the  protection  of  her  own  borders  and  providing  the  regi- 
ments called  for  by  the  Secretary  of  War.  The  governor  of  Georgia 
has  been  obliged  to  refuse  my  recent  application  to  him  for  two  regi- 
ments, to  be  placed  under  the  command  of  General  Trapier,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  preventing  an  advance  of  the  enemy  through  Florida  into  the 
southwest  portion  of  Georgia. 

I am,  &c.,  R.  E.  LEE, 

General,  Commanding, 


Headquaeters,  Savannah,  6a.,  March  1,  1862. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va.: 

Sir  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  24th  February, 
in  relerence  to  withdrawing  the  forces  from  the  sea-coast  of  Florida,  and 
have  directed  General  Trapier  accordingly.  By  telegraph  he  has  been 
directed  to  send  Colonel  Dowd’s  Twenty-third  Mississippi  Regiment 
immediately  to  Tennessee,  to  report  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston.  On  the 
19th  ultimo  he  was  directed  by  telegraph  to  send  Colonel  Davis’  regi- 
ment of  cavalry  Irom  Florida  to  Chattanooga,  to  report  to  General  A. 
S.  Johnston.  As  soon  as  Amelia  Island  has  been  evacuated,  the  public 
property  secured  from  there  and  other  points  along  the  seaboard,  troops 
not  necessary  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  penetrating  into  the  interior 
will  be  forwarded  to  General  Johnston. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  2,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Savayinah : 

If  circumstances  will,  in  your  judgment,  warrant  your  leaving,  I wish 
to  see  you  here  with  the  least  delay. 


JEFFERSOIlI  DAVIS. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


401 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

March  3,  1802. 

General  A.  E.  Lawton, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia  : 

General  : I shall  be  compelled  to  leave  Savannah  this  evening'  on 
dutj^  Major  Long,  Captain  Ives,  and  Cajitain  Tatnall,  members  of  my 
staff,  will  remain  liere  for  the  present  on  the  duties  on  which  they  are 
now  engaged,  the  former  in  preparing  and  arming  the  new  batteries  in 
the  vicinity  of  Fort  Jackson;  the  second  in  superintending  the  batteries 
and  obstructions  on  and  near  Saint  Augustine  Creek,  and  the  latter  in 
getting  up  certain  boats  for  operations  on  the  water.  I need  not  i)ress 
upon  you  the  necessity  of  urging  forward  all  these  operations  with  the 
utmost  expedition.  It  is  my  wish  that  as  soon  as  the  batteries  are  in 
lighting  condition  the  work  of  protecting  the  guns  from  the  enemy’s 
missiles  be  vigorously  pushed  on,  a commencement  of  which  has  been 
made  at  Thunderbolt  and  the  battery  at  Fort  Jackson  under  Ca])tain 
Ives  and  Captain  Echols.  As  it  is  a subject  attended  with  difficulty,  I 
beg  you  will  give  attention  to  it  and  adoiit  the  plan  that  promises  the 
best  success. 

The  three-gun  battery  located  on  the  light  bank  of  the  river  to  unite 
with  the  battery  on  Hutchinson  Island  should  be  commenced  at  once, 
and  the  bomb-proof  arrangement  be  carried  on  with  its  construction. 
The  raft  must  be  put  in  position  below  Fort  Jackson,  and  strengthened 
as  far  as  time  and  opportunity  allow.  I have  proposed  a casemated  bat- 
tery of  one  or  two  guns,  if  they  could  be  obtained,  situated  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  Savannah,  with  embrasures  and  loop-holes  for  riflemen,  look- 
ing across  the  river,  to  fire  on  boats  reaching  the  raft.  The  battery 
will  be  located  at  the  end  of  the  raft,  and  have  no  opening  down  the 
river  by  which  the  raft  or  guns  could  be  harmed  by  the  shot  of  the 
enemy  from  that  direction.  If  no  better  arrangement  can  be  made,  the 
18-pounders  from  Fort  Jackson,  replaced  by  the  32-i)ounders,  could  be 
used  for  this  battery.  The  batteries  now  under  construction  are  so  far 
advanced  that  a portion  of  the  hands  could  be  diverted  to  these  last- 
named  batteries. 

I beg  now  to  refer  to  a matter  that  must  claim  your  earnest  and  close 
attention — the  probable  route  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  It  looks 
now  as  if  he  would  take  the  Savannah  Eiver.  In  that  event,  the  batter- 
ies of  Skidaway  and  Green  Island  would  be  out  of  the  line  of  approach, 
and  if  the  guns  can  be  applied  to  the  defense  of  the  Savannah,  should 
be  so  used.  They  can  be  removed  from  these  batteries  in  any  event, 
should  you  determine  it  best  to  withdraw  to  the  main.  Thunderbolt 
battery  must  then  be  re-enforced  and  some  32-pounders  mounted  at  the 
battery  at  Beulah,  reserving  the  heavy  guns  for  the  Savannah.  You 
are  aware  that  arrangements  are  made  for  obstructing  the  navigation 
of  the  river  at  Shell  Bluff*,  35  miles  below  Augusta.  This  matter  has 
been  intrusted  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gill  and  Major  Eains,  C.  S.  Army, 
and  any  aid  they  may  require  and  you  can  give  I desire  you  to  afford. 

Examinations  have  also  been  made  with  a view  of  obstructing  the 
river  above  Savannah.  Captain  Walker,  of  my  staff*,  has  been  on  this 
duty,  aud  will  continue  for  the  present.  He  recommends  a battery  at 
Mulberry  Grove,  and  that  the  main  and  minor  channels  be  obstructed. 
I wish  these  subjects  attended  to.  No  precise  instructions  can  now  be 
given,  but  they  are  left  to  your  judgment.  An  obstruction  on  the 
Ogeechee  has  been  proposed,  and  the  planters  on  the  river  have  offered 
to  furnish  the  necessary  labor.  You  are  referred  to  Captain  Hartridge’s 
26  R R VOL  VI 


402  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiai*.  XV. 

letter  on  the  subject,  and  requested  to  forward  the  matter  as  much  as 
possible. 

Every  effort  must  be  made  to  retard,  if  not  prev^ent,  tbe  further  prog- 
ress of  the  enemy  up' the  river.  If  he  attempts  to  advance  by  batteries 
on  the  marshes  or  islands,  he  must  be  driven  back,  if  possible.  Bold 
scouts  must  be  established  on  Elba,  and  the  right  and  left  banks  of  the 
river  closely  watched,  so  as  to  discover  his  first  lodgment,  when  they 
can  be  broken  up.  With  this  view  I invite  your  attention  to  the  i)ro- 
]n'iety  of  establishing  a battery  at  Mackay’s  Point,  to  drive  him  from 
Elba.  There  are  three  32-pounders  that  could  be  used  for  that  pur- 
pose, if  a battery  there  is  deemed  advisable.  It  could  not  be  main- 
tained against  his  gunboats  should  they  enter  the  river  in  force,  but 
might  with  the  aid  of  boat  attacks,  prevent  the  establishment  of  bat- 
teries on  Elba. 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  work  at  every  point  should  be 
pushed  forward  with  the  utmost  vigor  and  the  closest  attention  given 
to  the  whole  subject  of  the  defense  of  the  city. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding, 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  &c., 

No.  ().  ) FocotaligOj  8.  C.,  March  4,  1862. 

During  the  absence  of  General  E.  E.  Lee,  and  in  compliance  with  his 
instructions,*  the  undersigned  assumes  command  of  the  Department  of 
South  Carolina,  &c. 

The  headquarters  of  the  department  will  be  lor  the  present  at  Poco- 
taligo  Station,  S.  C.,  and  all  official  communications  intended  for  depart- 
ment headquarters  will  be  addressed  to  Maj.  T.  A.  Washington,  assist- 
ant adjutant-general. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 

Major- General.,  Commanding. 


State  or  Florida,  Executive  Department, 

Tallahassee,  March  5,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : Permit  me  to  present  to  your  acquaintance  the  Hon.  David  S. 
Walker,  who  visits  you  with  a copy  of  an  order  recently  issued  by  Gen- 
eral E.  E.  Lee  to  General  J.  H.  Trapier. 

The  effect  of  the  order  is  to  abandon  Middle,  East,  and  South  Florida 
to  the  mercy  or  abuse  of  the  Lincoln  Government.  It  cannot  be  pos- 
sible that  the  order  was  intended  to  have  such  an  effect.  If  strictly 
obeyed,  the  forces  at  Saint  Augustine,  on  the  Saint  John’s  Eiver,  at 
Tampa,  and  at  this  place,  have  to  be  ordered  to  the  defenses  of  the 
Chattahoochee  Eiver  or  to  Tennessee.  I cannot  and  will  not  believe 
that  an  order  to  have  that  effect  would  have  been  issued  without  pre- 
vious notice  to  the  executive  of  the  State,  that  proper  measures  might 
have  been  advised  for  the  protection  of  the  lives,  liberty,  and  property 
of  the  citizens  of  Middle,  East,  and  South  Florida.  Moreover,  the  order, 
if  executed,  would  not,  with  the  forces  now  in  Florida,  secure  the 
defenses  upon  the  Chattahoochee,  for,  if  the  enemy  were  in  possession  of 

* Special  Orders,  No.  34,  of  March  3. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


403 


Tallahassee  and  Saint  Andrew’s  or  Saint  Josejdi’s  Hays,  they  can  attack 
in  the  rear  all  batteries  wliich  may  be  constructed  on  either  side  of  the 
river. 

But,  sir,  if  the  sacrifice  of  Florida  is  necessary  to  secure  tlie  sacred 
rights  cl  limed  by  the  people  of  the  Confederate  States,  there  is  not  a 
man,  woman,  or  child,  true  to  the  cause  of  liberty  in  Florida,  but  what 
will  say  amen,  and  in  the  midst  of  desolation,  however  fearful,  advo- 
cate and  cheer  the  progress  of  freedom  to  the  South. 

But,  sir,  we  do  not  wish  to  gis^e  up  our  personal  rights  without  strik- 
ing a blow  in  their  defense,  and  we  are  destitute  of  arms  and  the  munitions 
of  war,  while  in  the  State  is  a large  quantity  of  arms  and  ammunition 
belonging  to  the  Confederate  Government  not  only  liable  but  in  danger 
of  being  captured  by  the  enemy.  I allude  to  the  arms  and  ammunition  at 
Smyrna.  Moreover,  when  brought  from  Smyrna  to  Madison  (the  rail- 
road depot),  for  the  want  of  ready  and  sufficient  means  of  transportation, 
they  are  subject  to  be  seized  and  used  by  slaves  against  the  lives  of  our 
citizens.  I propose  to  order  these  arms  and  munitions  of  war  to  be  sent 
to  this  place  for  safe-keeping,  and,  if  necessary,  for  use  by  the  forces 
now  being  mustered  in  for  Confederate  service  during  the  war.  To  get 
them  from  Smyrna,  I shall  probably  order  some  companies  to  that  place 
to  take  the  arms  and  march  with  them  to  protect  the  wagons  of  trans- 
portation. If  here,  they  will  be  subject  to  your  order  or  forwarded  with- 
out it  as  soon  as  possible.  If  the  enemy  should  get  command  of  the 
Saint  John’s  Eiver,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  get  the  arms  from  Smyrna 
without  a long  and  tedious  march,  where  subsistence  for  the  forces  can- 
not be  easily  obtained.  Say  to  me  to  arm  and  equip  2,500  men  in  Florida 
for  Confederate  service  for  the  year,  or  for  the  war,  if  it  is  to  the  end  of 
time,  and  the  2,500,  upon  the  terms,  will  be  armed  and  equipped,  and  the 
balance  of  the  arms  and  equipments  will  be  protected  from  the  enemy 
and  slaves,  and  forwarded  in  one-third  of  the  time  which  will  be  other- 
wise consumed  in  their  transportation,  even  if  not  interrupted. 

In  conclusion  permit  me  to  invite  jmur  attention  to  the  inclosed  copy 
of  a resolution  of  the  so-styled  executive  council.  My  views  with  regard 
to  this  regiment  have  been  too  freely  avowed  to  justify  my  saying  more 
on  the  subject. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully, 

' JOHN  MILTON. 

finclosure  No.  1.] 

Savannah,  Ga.,  March  1,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding^  at  Tallahassee : 

General  : In  pursuance  of  instructions  from  the  AVar  Department, 
you  are  directed  to  send  the  Mississippi  regiment.  Colonel  Dowd 
commanding,  to  Tennessee,  by  the  most  expeditious  route,  to  report  to 
General  A.  S.  Johnston.  He  is  reported  to  be  at  Murlrees borough,  and 
it  is  presumed  that  the  route  by  Chattanooga  will  be  the  most  direct.  I 
desire  that  no  delay  that  you  can  possibly  avoid  will  take  place  in  for- 
warding these  troops,  as  there  is  an  immediate  necessity  for  defending 
the  road  from  Memphis  to  Eichmond.  The  recent  disasters  to  our  arms 
in  Tennessee  forces  the  Government  to  withdraw  forces  employed  in  the 
defense  of  the  seaboard.  The  only  troops  to  be  retained  in  Florida  are 
such  as  may  be  necessary  to  defend  Apalachicola  Eiver,  by  which  the 
enemy’s  gunboats  may  penetrate  far  into  the  State  of  Georgia.  You  are 
therefore  desired  to  put'  that  river  and  harbor  in  a satisfactory  state  of 
defense,  and  forward  all  troops  not  necessary  for  that  purpose  to  report 


[Chap.  XY. 


404  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 

to  General  A.  S.  Johnston.  All  the  guns  and  munitions  of  war  must  be 
secured.  Let  me  know  what  arrangements  you  can  make,  and  whether 
all  of  the  guns  will  be  needed  for  local  defense. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Commanding. 

[In closure  No.  2.] 

State  of  Florida,  Executive  Department, 

Tallahassee^  March  5,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Eespected  Sir  : The  following  is  a copy  of  resolutions  of  the  execu- 
tive council  of  the  State,  passed  the  3d  instant,  in  regard  to  the  cavalry 
regiment  commanded  by  Col.  W.  G.  M.  Davis,  in  this  State : 

Resolved,  That  the  governor  he  requested  to  correspond  with  his  excellency  .Jeffer- 
son Davis,  the  Secretary  of  War,  General  R.  E.  Lee,  and  the  officers  of  Colonel 
Davis’  regiment,  as  to  the  necessity  of  the  regiment  being  converted  into  an  infantry 
regiment  and  remain  in  the  State  for  its  defense. 

Adopted. 

True  copy. 

E.  BERNARD, 

Private  Secretary  to  Ms  Excellency. 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor  of  Florida. 


State  op  South  Carolina, 
Department  of  the  Military,  • 
Columbia^  S.  C.,  March  7,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose,  for  your  information,  a statement 
from  the  adjutant  and  inspector  generaPs  office  of  the  State,  showing 
number  of  troops  sent  by  this  State  into  Confederate  service.  It  em- 
braces a period  up  to  20th  February  last.  Since  that  time  2,000  men 
have  been  added. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  CHESNUT,  Jr., 

Chief  &c. 

[Inclosure  l.J 

State  of  South  Carolina,  A.  and  I.  Gen.^s  Office, 

Columbia,  February  20,  1862, 

Hon.  James  Chesnut,  Jr., 

Chief  of  Military  Department  of 

Executive  Council  of  South  Carolina : 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  your  request  and  instructions,  received  from 
Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Gist,  adjutant  and  inspector  general  of  South  Carolina, 
I have  the  honor  herewith  to  submit  a statement  of  the  number  of  South 
Carolina  volunteer  troops  now  in  Confederate  service.  I would  respect- 
fully state  that  the  report  shows  the  original  strength  (except  in  the 
case  of  the  regular  force,  where  enlistments  are  still  progressing)  will 
reach  1,500,  the  troops  passing  entirely  out  Of  the  State  departments 
after  their  muster  into  Confederate  service,  except  as  to  simple  matters 
of  organization. 

The  statement  is  classified  as  follows : 

First.  Those  in  service  beyond  the  State.^ 

Second.  Those  in  service  within  the  State. 


Chap.  XV.  ] 


405 


CORKESrOXDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Third.  Those  for  and  durin|^  the  present  war. 

Fourth.  Those  for  shorter  terms  of  service. 

With  much  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

G.  A.  FOLLEN, 
Cleric  Adjutant- GeneraVs  Depart^nent 


[Inclosure  2.] 
EecainUilation. 


1.  Those  ill  service  heyoiid  the  State 9, 636 

2.  Those  in  service  within  the  State 21,271 

30, 907 

3.  Those  for  and  during  the  war 8, 153 

4.  Those  for  shorter  terms  of  service • 22, 754 


30, 907 


State  of  South  Carolina,  A.  and  1.  Gen.’s  Office,  • 

Columbia,  March  , 1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. : 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  the  requisition  of  your  Department  for  five 
regiments  of  infantry  to  serve  for  and  during  the 'present  war,  I have 
the  honor  to  inform  you  that  a jiroclamation  and  orders  for  the  rendez- 
vousing said  regiments  have  been  issued  by  the  State  authorities  and 
that  the  troops  will  soon  begin  to  report  in  camp.  The  present  camp  of 
rendezvous  selected  will  be  at  the  Lightwood  Knot  Springs,  near  Colum- 
bia, on  the  Columbia  and  Charlotte  Eailroad. 

You  say  these  troops  will  be  clothed,  supplied,  and  armed  on  Confed- 
erate expense,”  and  ^^each  soldier  will  receive  a bounty  of  $50,”  4&c.  I 
have  to  request  that  you  will  at  once  cause  the  necessary  arrangements 
to  be  made  for  the  reception  of  the  troops  at  the  camp  of  rendezvous  and 
for  the  compliance  with  the  above-quoted  stipulations,  and  to  tender  you 
the  assistance  of  this  office  in  the  premises. ' 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  GIST, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of  South  Carolina, 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston,  March  9,  1862. 

Hon.  Isaac  W.  Hayne, 

Chief  Police  and  Justice: 

Sir  : After  an  examination  of  the  land  defenses  on  James  Island,  I de- 
sired Brigadier-General  Eipley,  commanding  Second  Military  District, 
to  strengthen  them  in  part,  and  to  construct  certain  other  works  on  the 
island,  and  also  in  the  direction  of  Eantowles  Bridge.  General  Eipley, 
though  appreciating  the  imfiortance  of  the  work  to  be  done,  informs 
me  that  it  is  impossible  with  the  hands  now  at  his  disposal  to  undertake 
it,  and  that  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  a sufiicient  number  will  delay  it 
indefinitely. 

Eegarding  the  proposed  addition  as  essential  to  the  safety  of  the  city, 
should  the  enemy  attack  in  large  force,  I deem  it  my  duty  to  ask  your 


406  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

co-oiieration^  or,  if  necessary,  that  of  the  executive  and  council,  to  enforce 
the  supply  of  labor  which  General  Kipley  may  require. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Major-  G enera  /,  Commandin (j. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  March  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding^  d'C.,  Tallahassee: 

General  : In  my  letter  to  jmu  of  the  1st  instant,  from  Savannah,  it 
was  my  purpose,  under  the  instructions  that  I had  received  from  the  Sec- 
retary of  War,  to  indicate  to  you  the  measures  that  would  necessarily 
be  adojEed  under  the  emergency  of  the  occasion.  Colonel  Dowd's  Miss- 
issippi regiment  was  to  be  sent  with  the  least  practical  delay  to  report  to 
General  A.  S.  Johnston.  Colonel  Davis’  regiment  had  been  previously 
directed  to  do  so.  Both  orders,  1 hope,  have  been  executed.  The  Sec- 
retary, in  his  instructions,  directed  that  the  only  troops  to  be  retained  in 
Florida  were  those  employed  in  the  defense  of  the  Apalachicola,  and  I 
wished  you  to  understand  that  our  necessities  might  limit  us  to  the 
defense  of  that  avenue  through  Florida  into  Georgia.  But  I did  not 
intend  that  you  should  send  from  your  department  immediately  any 
troops  but  Dowd’s  and  Davis’  regiments,  retaining  the  rest  to  secure  the 
public  property,  guns,  &c.,  until  you  saw  what  arrangements  you  could 
make  for  the  defense  of  the  State  generally,  after  withdrawing  from 
those  points  of  the  seaboard  which  in  your  judgment  could  not  be  main- 
tained. It  was  with  this  view  that  I asked  to  be  informed  what  arrange- 
ments you  could  make  for  local  defense.  It  was  then  to  be  determined, 
under  the  instructions  from  the  War  Department,  what  other  forces  could 
be  spared  to  reinstate  our  operations  in  the  West.  My  own  opinion  and 
desire  is  to  hold  the  interior  of  the  State,  if  your  force  will  be  adequate, 
the  Saint  John’s  Eiver,  as  well  as  the  Apalachicola.  I do  not  think  you 
will  be  able  to  hold  Tampa  Bay,  and  the  small  force  posted  at  Saint 
Augustine  serves  only  as  an  invitation  to  attack  j but  on  these  i)oints 
you  must  judge,  and  I desire  your  opinion. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General^  Conunanding. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  March  14,  1802. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding^  cfc.,  Pocotaligo,  S.  C, : 

General  : You  will  receive  from  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s 
Office  an  order  placing  you  in  command  of  the  military  department  com- 
posed of  the  States  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  General  Trapier 
will  command  the  Department  of  Florida. 

Being  assigned  to  duty  at  the  seat  of  government,  I shall  require  cer- 
tain members  of  my  staff  left  at  my  headquarters  at  Coosawhatchie.  I 
desire  you  to  send  to  me  at  once  Maj.  T.  A.  Washington,  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, with  such  official  books  and  papers  not  appertaining  to  the 
Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c.  Captain  Memminger  may  continue 
on  duty  with  you,  as  you  will  require  additional  assistance  in  your  office. 
Major  Long  and  Captain  Ives,  having  in  charge  certain  operations  in 
the  vicinity  of  Savannah  at  the  time  of  my  leaving  the  department,  I am 


Chap.  XV. 1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


407 


unwilling  to  withdraw  them  until  1 learn  that  their  services  can  be  dis- 
pensed with  ; they  will  therefore  continue  with  you  for  the  i)resent.  I 
take  pleasure  iii  commending  to  you  my  volunteer  aide-de-camj),  Capt. 
J.  Manigault,  who,  from  his  local  knowledge  and  other  considerations, 
I presume  would  prefer  serving  in  South  Carolina,  and  hope  that  you 
may  give  him  some  position  in  which  his  services  may  be  secured  to  his 
native  State.  I also  left  in  Savannah  Capt.  4.  It.  F.  Tattnall,  C.  S. 
Marine  Corps,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  in  charge  of  certain  operations, 
in  which  it  may  be  desirable  tor  you  to  continue  him.  He  is  also  com- 
mended to  your  attention,  as  I believe  that  you  will  require  the  aid  of 
every  good  citizen  of  your  department  to  contribute  to  its  defense. 

I am,  &c., 

E.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding, 

[Inclosure.] 

Special  Orders,  i Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  59.  j Richmond,  March  14,  1802. 

# * * * # 

XXII.  Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton  is  assigned  to  the  command  of 
the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

XXIII.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  II.  Trapier  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the 
Department  of  Middle  and  Eastern  Florida.  The  western  boundary  of 
this  department  will  be  the  Choctawhatchie  Eiver. 

#*#*#** 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Foeotaligo,  March  18,  1862. 

Hon.  Isaac  W.  Hayne, 

Of  Executive  Council: 

Dear  Sir  : I have  just  returned  from  an  official  visit  to  Florida, 
which  I hope  will  excuse  the  tardy  acknowledgment  of  your  favor  of  the 
9th  instant.  I have  to  express  my  thanks  for  the  prompt  attention  given 
by  the  executive  council  to  my  application  in  reference  to  negro  labor. 
The  resolution  of  the  council  will  no  doubt  be  sufficient  to  accomplish 
all  that  is  desired.  It  is,  in  my  opinion,  a matter  of  great  public  interest 
that  the  connection  between  the  South  Carolina  Eailroad  and  Charles- 
ton and  Savannah  Eailroad  be  made  as  soon  as  practicable.  Any 
assistance  in  my  power  will  be  most  cheerfully  given.  The  connection 
is  emphatically  a military  necessity.  Be  iileased  to  inform  me  in  what 
manner  I can  best  aid  in  the  work. 

Very  respectfully,  J.  C.  PEMBEETOX, 

Major-General,  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina, 

Foeotaligo,  March  18,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Ins^pector  General: 

General  r I have  the  honor  to  report  my  return  from  an  official  visit, 
via  Chattahoochee  Eiver,  to  the  cities  of  Apalachicola  and  Tallahassee, 


408  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.J  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  LChai*.  XV. 

Fla.  On  my  arrival  at  Apalachicola,  I found  the  batteries  dismantled 
and  the  gnus,  carriages,  ammunition,  &c.,  already  on  board  the  steam- 
boat Marianna  and  about  leaving  for  Ricco’s  Bluff,  a point  on  the  river 
which  would  no  doubt  admit  of  a good  defense,  but  which,  after  a per- 
sonal examination  of  its  advantages,  seemed  to  me  to  be  inferior  in  tliat 
respect  to  a imsition  some  miles  lower,  and  known  as  Fort  Gadsden.  In 
a personal  interview  witli  Brigadier-General  Trapier  it  was  decided  to 
establish  the  batteries  at  the  latter  jilace,  against  which  an  attack  by 
land  ought  easily  to  be  repulsed,  by  reason  of  the  almost  impassable 
country  through  which  an  enemy  must  necessarily  advance. 

I ascertained  during  my  brief  stay  in  Apalachicola  that  very  many  of 
the  citizens — probably  a majority — prefer  to  remain  there.  A large  class 
of  the  population  is  comiielled  to  do  so,  having  no  means  of  subsistence 
elsewhere.  Many,  however,  are  abandoning  everything  and  going  into 
the  interior.  All  public  property  had  been  removed  before  my  depar- 
ture. All  river  iiilots  were  required  to  leave  the  city  with  the  troops. 
The  telegraph  office  was  closed,  and  the  instruments  for  the  present 
transferred  to  Chattahoochee. 

It  is  proposed  to  occupy  Fort  Gadsden  with  from  GOO  to  800  infantry, 
a battery  of  six  field  pieces  (not  yet  equipped),  and,  in  connection  with 
the  position,  two  or  three  companies  of  cavalry,  to  be  used  as  advanced 
pickets  for  courier  service.  Under  present  instructions  from  the  War 
Department  these  are  the  only  troops  to  be  retained  in  Florida  (being 
considered  sufficient  for  the  defense  of  the  Apalachicola  River),  unless  it 
is  deemed  advisable  to  continue  a competent  guard  in  the  direction  of 
New  Smyrna  and  the  Saint  John’s  River,  for  such  arms,  ammunition, 
and  other  imblic  stores  as  may  be  hereafter  landed  at  New  Smyrna. 
This  guard  I have  directed  to  be  retained  for  the  present.  It  is  the 
more  necessr.ry  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  enemy,  being  in  possession 
of  Jacksonville,  may  intercept  the  stores  sent  to  Baldwin,  only  20  miles 
distant,  for  transportation  by  rail.  Their  safety,  therefore,  may  require 
a further  wagoning  to  Lake  City. 

I regret  to  report  a very  unsatisfactory  condition  of  affairs  in  East 
and  Middle  Florida.  The  Mississippi  regiment,  some  time  under  orders 
to  repair  to  Tennessee,  has  not  yet  moved,  for  the  want  of  the  necessary 
transportation,  as  stated  by  General  Trapier.  Davis’  regiment,  also 
under  orders  for  General  A.  S.  Johnston’s  army,  is  in  a state  of  mutiny, 
positively  refusing,  as  I am  informed,  to  move  until  the  arrearages  of 
pay  due  are  received  and  until  satisfied  that  a sufficient  army  is  left  in 
Florida  for  the  protection  of  their  families.  A paper  to  this  effect  was 
shown  me  b^^  General  Trapier  a few  moments  before  my  leaving  Talla- 
hassee, which  was  signed  by  several  cajitains,  lieutenants,  and  appar- 
ently by  some  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the  regiment.  General  Trapier 
desiring  to  consult  with  me  on  the  subject,  I gave  him  my  views,  which 
will  be  carried  out,  i.  c.,  to  arrest  and  bring  to  trial  the  captains  whose 
signatures  were  attached ; that  the  articles  of  war  (7  and  8)  bearing  upon 
mutiny  be  read  before  the  regiment,  and  the  order  for  the  movement 
immediately  reiterated.  A personal  interview  of  a few  moments  with 
Colonel  Davis,  commanding  this  regiment,  whom  I met  with  yesterday, 
on  his  way  to  rejoin  his  command,  leads  me  to  hope  that  this  mutinous 
spirit  may  be  quelled  without  resorting  to  stronger  measures,  and  the 
orders  of  the  Department  be  carried  into  execution  without  further 
delay. 

I find  the  citizens  of  Tallahassee  much  excited  on  the  subject  of  the 
withdrawal  of  the  troops,  and  am  informed  by  Governor  Milton  and 
others  that  the  feeling  in  many  cases  amounts  almost  to  disaffection. 


€hai‘.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


409 


I observe  also  a (lisi)ositioii  to  plant  cotton  the  coming  season.  Several 
thousand  bales  are  still  in  the  vicinity,  which  1 have  directed  (leneral 
Trapier  to  notify  the  people  must  be  destroyed  rather  than  i)ermitted  to. 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  four  pieces  of  siege  artillery  now 
at  Saint  Mark’s  I have  directed  to  be  withdrawn,  as  no  troops  are  to  be 
retained  there.  They  will  be  forwarded  to  Fort  Gadsden. 

I respectfully  renew  the  request  that  General  Trapier  be  authorized 
to  retain  a sufficient  number  of  arms  troni  those  landed  at  New  Smyrna 
to  equip  the  unarmed  troops  mustered  into  the  Confederate  service  for 
the  war.  It  is  represented  to  me  by  Governor  Milton  that  if  arms  could 
be  issued  to  troops  called  out  by  the  State,  there  would  be  no  desire  to 
retain  Confederate  forces,  and  that  a feeling  of  security  would  be  engen- 
dered which  does  not  now  exist. 

In  bringing  this  subject  to  the  consideration  of  the  Department  I 
would  add,  that  it  a system  of  guerrilla  Avarfare  should  be  instituted  in 
a country  so  sparselj"  settled  as  is  Florida,  it  Avould  i)robably  result  in 
great  suffering  to  many  unprotected  families.  Unless,  therefore,  the  dis- 
trict of  country  liable  to  incursions  of  the  enemy  be  entirely  abandoned 
by  the  people,  I have  advised  the  governor  to  discountenance  such  mode 
of  Avarfare. 

I haA^e  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a copy  of  a communication  ad- 
dressed to  myself  by  General  Trapier,  showing  the  regiments  and  sepa- 
rate corps  to  be  transferred,  as  also  those  to  remain  in  the  State,  under 
the  present  instructions  of  the  War  Department. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Dept.  East  and  Middle  Fla., 

Tallahassee.,  March  10,  1802. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  P.  A.  C.  S., 

Comdg.  Be^jt.  of  8.  0.,  6^a.,  and  Middle  and  East  Fla. : 

‘ General  : I have  the  honor  \^ery  respectfully  to  inform  you  that,  in 
obedience  to  instructions  from  General  R.  E.  Lee,  the  Twenty -fourth 
Mississippi  Regiment,  Colonel  Dowd,  and  the  First  Regiment  Florida 
Cavalry,  Colonel  DaAus,  are  now  under  orders  to  proceed  to  Tennessee, 
and  will  leave  as  soon  as  transportation. can  be  furnished. 

The  remaining  troops  in  this  district  to  proceed  hereafter  to  Tennessee 
under  the  same  instructions  Avill  be — 

(Tweh^e-months :)  Third  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers,  Colonel  Dil- 
worth,  now  at  Baldwin. 

(Twelve-months :)  Fourth  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers,  Colonel  Hop- 
kins, now  at  Sanderson. 

Fifth  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers  (for  the  war),  in  camp  of  instruc- 
tions ; not  yet  fully  organized. 

Martin’s  light  battery,  six  pieces. 

Gamble’s  battery,  three  pieces,  not  equipped. 

The  troops  to  remain  [in]  Florida,  by  your  direction,  for  service  on  the 
Apalachicola  River,  and  for  scouts,  couriers,  &c.,  are  the  First  Florida 
Special  Battalion,  six  companies.  Major  Hopkins! 

Baya’s  company  of  artillery  (independent). 

Dunham’s  light  battery. 

Owens’  troop. 

Brokaw’s  troop. 


410  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  .VND  EAST  FLA.  ICiiai-.  KV. 

Capt.  C.  Smith’s  company  of  cavalry. 

Cai)tain  Partridge’s  comi)auy  of  cavalry. 

Captain  Thigpen’s  company  of  cavalry. 

Captain  Smitli’s  company  of  cavalry. 

Captain  Turner’s  company  of  cavalry  (to  be  disbanded). 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfall^y  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TRAPIER, 
Brigadier- General^  Cominaiidin g. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

PocotaUgOj  illarcA  18,  1862. 

General  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  East  and  Iliddle  Fla.^  Tallahassee^  Fla.  : 

General  : The  general  commanding  the  department  directs  me  to  in 
form  you  that  he  considers  it  of  great  moment  that  all  the  cotton  that 
has  been  accumulated  at  Tallahassee  and  vicinity  should  be  removed 
as  speedily  as  iiossible  to  some  secure  place  or  places  in  the  interior, 
where  there  would  be  no  chances  of  capture  by  the  enemy  in  case  of 
their  getting  i)ossession  of  the  city.  To  this  end  you  will  give  the  neces- 
sary notice  to  the  citizens  and  owners,  and  in  case  such  an  emergency 
as  the  probable  lo  ss  of  it  should  ensue,  you  should  be  prepared  to  burn 
or  otherwise  destroy  it  rather  than  that  it  should  fall  into  the  enemy’s 
hands. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  WASEINGTOK, 

Major.,  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Pocotaligo,  March  18,  1862. 

General  Henry  C.  Wayne, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Georgia  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  March  8, 1862,*  and  in  answer  am  instructed  to  state  that  he  [General 
Pemberton]  approves  of  your  idea  of  ordering  out  the  militia  in  that  part 
of  your  State  invaded  by  the  enemy ; but  before  inaugurating  a system 
of  guerrilla  warfare  he  would  recommend  that  all  women  and  children  be 
removed  before  such  operations  are  commenced  on  our  part 
I am,  &c., 

[T.  A.  WASHINGTON.] 


Hdqrs.  Prov.  Porces  Dist.  Middle  and  East  Fla., 

Tallahassee,  March  19,  1862. 

Maj.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Pocotaligo,  8.  C.  : 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  herewith  a copy  of  a letter 
received  yesterday  from  General  Leet  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding.  Under  these  instructions  it  becomes  my  duty  to 
suspend  the  movement  of  all  troops  except  that  of  Dowd’s  and  Davis’ 
regiments  and  the  battalion  which  is  to  garrison  the  works  on  the 
Apalachicola  River.  Want  of  transportation  on  the  Apalachicola  River 


Not  found. 


t See  Lee  to  Trapier,  March  13,  p.  406. 


Chap.  XV. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  411 

has  prevented  my  visiting  and  deciding  upon  the  proper  position  lor  a 
defense  of  that  riven  up  to  this  time.  1 leave  here  to-morrow  morning 
for  that  purpose.  1 learn,  however,  from  General  Floyd  that  all  the  guns 
were  landed  at  Eicco’s  Bluff,  and  that  they  were  being  i)ut  in  battery. 
Unless,  therefore,  I find  the  advantages  of  the  lower  position  (old  Fort 
Gadsden)  greatly  superior  to  those  of  Eicco’s  Bluff’,  I shall  decide  to  allow 
the  guns  to  remain  at  the  latter  place. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TEAEIEE, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Dept.  East  and  Middle  Fla., 

Tallahassee,  March  19,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Richmond,  Va.: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  letter 
of  the  commanding  general,  dated  Eichmond,  March  13,  1862. 

The  regiments  of  Colonels  Dowd  and  Davis  were  put  under  orders 
for  Tennessee  immediately  upon  the  receipt  of  the  general’s  instruc- 
tions to  that  effect.  I regret  to  say  that  owing  to  the  limited  means 
of  transportation  in  this  military  district  neither  of  them  has  as  yet  left 
the  State.  Their  arrangements,  however,  are  now  nearly  complete,  and 
Colonel  Dowd  will  take  up  the  line  of  march  to-morrow  from  Madison, 
on  the  Tallahassee  Eailroad,  for  Quitman,  on  the  Savannah  road.  Colo- 
nel Davis  will  follow  by  another  route  in  a couple  of  days,  I hope. 

1 regret  very  much  my  misapprehension  of  the  spirit  and  intention  of 
the  general’s  letter  of  instructions  of  the  1st  March.  The  language  used 
was  explicit,  and  did  not  seem  to  leave  any  discretion  with  me.  I was 
told  ‘^the  only  troops  to  be  retained  in  Florida  are  such  as  may  be 
necessary  to  defend  the  Apalachicola  Eiver,”  and,  further,  to  send  for- 
ward all  troops  not  necessary  for  that  purpose,  to  report  to  General  A. 
S.  Johnston.” 

With  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  this  order,  I was  assembling  the 
troops  in  the  interior  of  the  State,  where  it  was  my  intention  to  have 
held  them  till  “all  the  guns  and  munitions  of  war”  had  been  secured, 
if  possible ; sending  forward,  however,  to  the  Apalachicola  Eiver  the 
forces  intended  for  its  defense. 

Major-General  Pemberton  visited  this  military  district  a few  days 
since,  and  had  ordered  immediate  iireparations  made  for  the  movement  ' 
of  the  troops  to  Tennessee,  excepting  the  guard  for  the  protection  of 
the  arms  that  had  been  landed  at  Smyrna,  a regiment  which  was  to 
remain  temporarily  in  observation  before  Jacksonville,  and  the  inde- 
pendent companies  of  cavalry,  all  of  which  he  directed  should  be  re- 
tained in  the  State. 

Carrying  out  my  instructions,  I had  withdrawn  from  the  Saint  John’s 
Eiver,  which  river  is  now  in  the  possession  of  the  enemy. 

I concur  entirely  in  opinion  with  the  general  that  we  should  “ hold 
the  interior  of  the  State,”  if  practicable,  and  to  this  end  I recommend 
the  raising  and  thoroughly  arming  and  equipping  bands  of  guerrillas. 
The  forces  at  my  command  are  utterly  inadequate  to  the  defense  of  the 
State  generally  by  heavy  bodies  of  troops,  except  it  be  the  capital  of 
the  State.  In  front  of  this  place  masses  of  troops  may  operate,  and  I 
strongly  advise  the  concentration  here  of  an  army  of  at  least  3,000  men. 

I have  ordered  the  trooiis  to  withdraw  from  Saint  Augustine,  and 


412  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

shall  not  countermand  the  order,  for  I agree  with  the  general  that  the 
place  is  not  tenable.  Tampa  1 think  we  maj^  hold,  and  I shall  counter- 
mand the  order  for  its  evacuation,  since  the  general  leaves  it  discretion- 
ary with  me  to  do  so. 

1 am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedieilt  servant, 

J.  H.  TEAPIEE, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee^  March  19,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  The  inclosed  copy  of  f letter  ofj  General  Eichard  E.  Floyd  is 
respectfully  submitted  to  your  consideration. 

I am  informed  that  General  Trapier  desires  to  be  relieved  from  service 
in  this  military  department,  and  respectfully  recommend  General  Floyd 
to  be  appointed  brigadier-general  and  assigned  to  duty  here. 

Nearly  all  our  guns  have  been  lost  at  Fernandina  and  on  the  Saint 
Johifs  Eiver,  and  an  immediate  and  rigid  inquiry  into  the  causes  is  alike 
due  to  the  xmblic  interests  and  the  character  of  officers. 

The  prejudices  excited  against  General  Trapier,  whether  just  or  unjust, 
prevent  his  being  an  efficient  officer  in  this  department.  I regret  it 
very  much,  and  entertain  for  him  the  kindest  regard,  but  an  immediate 
ehange,  in  my  opinion,  is  necessary  to  the  defenses  of  the  State.  If 
agreeable  to  you,  submit  this  letter  to  the  consideration  of  his  excellency 
President  Davis,  and  moreover  whether  it  will  be  agreeable  to  him  and 
the  War  Department  for  me,  as  the  governor  and -commander-in-chief 
of  the  State,  to  command  the  Confederate  forces  a few  weeks  for  the 
defense  of  the  State. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON. 


- [Inclosure.l 

Brigadier-General’s  Office, 
Tallahassee^  Fla.j  March  17,  1862. 
His  Excellency  Governor  Milton, 

Tallahassee^  Fla. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  as  the  State  troops  were 
• to  go  out  of  service  on  the  10th  instant,  and  as  others  were  not  forth- 
coming to  replace  them  at  Apalachicola,  I deemed  it  proper  to  remove 
the  guns,  ordnance  stores,  and  other  public  property  from  that  i)OSt  to 
one  of  greater  security.  I therefore  commenced  to  take  the  cannon  from 
the  batteries  on  the  10th.  The  State  troops  were  held  for  this  purpose 
by  their  own  voluntary  action.  After  many  days  and  nights  of  constant 
labor  I got  the  cannon,  with  all  their  appliances,  ammunition  for  small- 
arms  also,  on  board  steamers,  and  removed  them  to  Eicco’s  Bluff,  on 
the  east  side  of  the  Apalachicola  Eiver.  At  this  point  the  cannon  (thir- 
teen in  number,  being  all  I had  at  Apalachicola)  were  being  placed  in 
position  for  immediate  use,  if  necessary,  and  orders  have  been  issued  to 
Lieu  tenant- Colonel  James,  in  command  there  for  the  present,  to  erect 
batteries  with  all  dispatch.  The  brass  field  pieces  of  the  Milton  Artil- 
lery, together  with  all  things  i)ertaining  to  them,  I brought  to  Ohatta- 
hoochie  Arsenal,  at  which  place  they  are  now,  in  charge  of  Second  Lieu- 
tenant Bull,  of  the  Milton  Artillery. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  415 

Your  instructious  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  James  and  Major  lliehard- 
son  should  continue  for  the  present  in  their  respective  commands  have 
been  made  known  to  those  officers,  and  they  have  cheerfully  complied 
with  your  wishes.  Lieutenant-Colonel  J anies  has  been  very  efficient  and 
energetic  in  his  duties,  almost  everything  having  devolved  upon  him  in 
the  absence  of  Major  Kichardson  ui)on  recruiting  service. 

The  companies  of  Captains  Grace  and  Attaway,  for  Confederate  serv- 
ice, now  full,  and  Captain  Gregory’s,  not  yet  full,  constitute  the  force 
now  at  Eicco’s  Bluff.  All  other  troops  have  returned  to  their  homes. 
Subsistence  for  the  troops  at  Eicco’s  Bluff  has  been  sent  from  Ai)alachi- 
cola  to  that  point. 

The  balauce  of  Captain  Dunham’s  company,  the  Milton  Artillery,  have 
orders  to  beat  Chattahoocliie  to-day.  I deemed  it  i^rudent  to  leave  him 
with  the  remainder  of  his  company  at  Apalachicola  for  a few  days,  to 
keep  order  there  and  prevent  communications  being  sent  to  the  enemy’s 
vessels  and  to  protect  the  balance  of  the  women  and  children  desiring  to 
leave  that  place  immediately.  Captain  Thigpen’s  company  of  dragoons 
was  not  reorganized  in  full. 

I had  the  telegraph  office  at  Apalachicola  closed,  and  apparatus  removed 
on  the  day  of  my  departure.  Some  river  pilots  have  been  arrested  and 
brought  to  Chattahoochie.  This  was  done  as  a measure  of  i^rudence,  and 
not  because  their  loyalty  was  suspected. 

In  descending  the  river  I examined  all  the  available  positions  with  a 
view  to  the  erection  of  batteries  on  the  east  bank.  I beg  to  submit  to 
you  my  opinion  of  these.  Fort  Gadsden  is  too  much  exposed ; a long 
and  wide  reach  of  the  river  would  enable  the  enemy  to  take  distant 
positions,  and  with  their  heavy  guns  play  upon  batteries  erected  there. 

' The  only  advantage  this  place  has  is  that  there  is  a thick  swami)  below 
it.  Eicco’s  Bluff*  also  possesses  this  advantage,  besides  many  others. 
The  sharp  bend  of  the  river  comi)els  vessels  to  approach  within  very 
short  range  of  our  guns  in  coming  up  and  they  must  come  immediately 
under  them  in  turning  the  point,  and  again  be  in  short  range  if  they 
succeed  in  passing  the  point.  Fort  Gadsden  is  also  rei)resented  by  old 
settlers  to  be  extremely  unhealthy,  while  Eicco’s  Bluff*  is  reported  to  be 
a healthy  location. 

I examined  other  points,  and  regard  them  all  as  possessing  but  few 
advantages  by  comparison  with  Eicco’s  Bluff*.  Ee-enforcements  are 
much  required  to  expedite  the  works  now  progressing  at  that  point,  and 
I earnestly  recommend  that  they  should  be  sent  there  as  early  as  i^rac- 
ticable. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  excellency’s  very  obedient  servant, 

E.  F.  FLOYD, 

Brigadier  General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

- No.  63.  / Richmond j March  19,  1862. 

##***#* 
XXIX.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  is  relieved  from  the  command  of  the 
Department  of  Florida,  and  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Decatur,  Ala., 
and  report  for  duty  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston,  commanding.  Col.  W. 
S.  Dil worth  is  assigned  to  the  temporary  command  of  the  Department 
of  Florida. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  GeneraL 


414  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  1.  ) Focotaligo,  8.  C.,  March  19,  18G2. 

I.  By  direction  of  tlie  War  Department  the  undersigned  assumes 
commaud  of  the  Departments  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

II.  The  followiDg-named  officers  are  announced  as  composing  the 
department  staff,  viz : 

Capt.  J.  E.  Waddy,  adjutant-general  of  the  department. 

Capt.  R.  W.  Memminger,  assistant  adjutant-general. 

Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  acting  inspector-general. 

Maj.  A.  L.  Long,  chief  of  ordnance. 

Capt.  W.  W.  McCreery,  assistant  to  chief  Of  ordnance. 

Capt.  J.  C.  Ives,  chief  engineer. 

First  Lieut.  J.  H.  Morrison,  P.  A.  C.  S.,  aide-de-camp. 

III.  The  headquarters  of  the  department  are  for  the  present  estab- 
lished at  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 

[J.  C.  PEMBERTON.] 


Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.,  &c., 

No.  44.  ) Pocotaligo^  S.  C.,  March  19,  1862. 

IV.  Special  Orders,  No.  17,  dated  Headquarters  Department  South 
Carolina,  &c.,  December  10,  1861,  are  so  far  amended  as  to  cause  the 
Fourth  Military  District  to  embrace  that  part  of  the  coast  between  the 
Ashepoo  and  east  bank  of  the  Pocotaligo,  River,  to  be  commanded  by 
Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg,  P.  A.  C.  S. 

The  Fifth  Military  District  will  embrace  that  part  of  the  coast  of 
South  Carolina  between  the  west  bank  of  the  Pocotaligo  River  and  Ocella 
Creek  to  Ferebeeville,  under  the  commaud  of  Brigadier-General  Douel- 
sou,  P.  A.  C.  S. 

V.  The  district  heretofore  known  as  the  Fifth  Military  District  will 
hereafter  be  known  as  the  Sixth  Military  District,  the  limits  of  said  dis- 
trict remaining  the  same,  and  commanded  by  Brigadier- General  Dray- 
ton, P.  A.  C.  S. 

VI.  The  brigadier-generals  commanding  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Mili- 
tary Districts  will  have  control  of  the  quartermaster  and  commissary 
departments  within  the  limits  of  their  respective  districts. 

# * * * * ’ * # 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton  : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutayit- General. 


Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Dept.  East  and  Middle  Fla., 

Tallahassee^  Fla.^  Mareh  20,  1862. 

Maj.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assi§tant  Adjutant- General.,  Poeotaligo,  S.  C.: 

Major  : Through  inadvertency  I have  neglected,  until  the  present 
time,  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  commanding  general,  that  by 
my  order  eight  steam  saw  mills,  near  Jacksonville,  in  this  State,  had  been 
burned,  to  prevent  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  together 
with  a large  quantity  of  sawed  lumber  lying  near  them.  I caused  also 
to  be  burned  an  iron  foundery  and  work-shops,  the  property  of  a Mr. 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  415 

Mooney,  in  the  same  place ; also  the  gunboat  which  was  building  near 
Jacksonville  for  the  Government. 

I am,  major,  ver^^  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  11.  TRAPIER. 

> Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  21,  18G2. 

General  Henry  C.  Wayne, 

Milledgeville  : 

1 have  ordered  2,400  Enfield  rifles,  with  a like  number  of  infantry  ac- 
couterments and  a proper  supply  of  cartridges,  sent  to  Pocotaligo  for 
your  three  regiments.  Send  to  us  at  Goldsborough,  K.  C.,  three  or  four 
of  your  new  regiments  as  promi)tly  as  possible,  and  they  will  be  armed 
in  like  manner.  The  necessity  for  troops  is  most  urgent,  and  not  an  hour 
should  be  lost.  Advise  me  when  you  send  them. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  IFur. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo.,  March  21,  1862. 

General  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  Second  2Iilitary  District  South  Carolina: 
General  : I have  i*eceived  your  communication  of  to-day’s  date, 
marked  ‘‘  confldential.”*  General  Evans  writes,  March  21 : 


Yesterday  the  enemy  -w  ere  seen  inakingpreiDarationstocross  Watt’s  Cnt,  and  are  evi- 
dentljMnaking  arrangements  either  to  make  a feint  from  Jehossee  or  land  on  the  main- 
land, &c. 


Of  Course  you  keep  in  communication  with  General  Evans.  You  are 
aware  that  three  regiments  have  been  removed  from  what  was  the  Fourth 
Military  District  out  of  the  State.  No  other  troops  have  as  yet  arrived 
to  replace  them.  I look  for  them,  however,  on  Monday  or  Tuesday  next. 
You  will  of  course  keep  securely  the  prisoners  sent  by  General  Evans. 
I shall  write  immediately  for  instructions  with  reference  to  them  to  War 
Department. 

I wish  you  to  assist  in  any  way  you  can  to  firovide  transportation  for 
rice  to  points  where  it  will  be  available. 

How  do  your  fortifications  progress  ? I shall  endeavor  to  see  you  in 
a few  days. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo.,  March  22,  1862. 

Hon.  Isaac  W.  Hay^ne, 

Chief  Justice  and  Police: 

Dear  Sir  : Yours  of  the  21st*  is  just  received,  and  I regret  to  learn 
that  in  your  opinion  the  governor  and  council  have  in  terms  conferred 


Not  found. 


416  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

greater  powers  upon  me  than  they  intended  in  the  matter  of  the  im- 
l^ressment  of  slaves  for  labor  on  fortifications.  No  new  fortifications 
have  been  directed  by  me  since  the  receipt  of  the  resolution,  nor  do  I 
at  present  contemplate  any.  Up  to  this  date  all  my  requisitions  for 
labor  have  been  for  work  previously  under  way.  Lines  of  defense  which 
I consider  important  had  been  suspended  in  their  progress  to  comple- 
tion for  want  of  hands;  the  engineer  in  charge  in  this  military  district 
informing  me  that  all  but  nine  negroes  had  been  withdrawn"  by  their 
owners.  As  to  voluntary  labor  being  furnished,  experience  has  taught 
me  that  it  is  not  to  be  relied  on  at  all,  each  owner  of  slaves  judging 
apparently  of  the  value  of  the  work  by  what  amount  of  protection  his 
individual  interest  may  t eem  to  derive  from  it. 

Where  emergencies  do  not  exist,  I am  of  opinion  that  in  a country 
where  slave  labor  ought  to  be  so  abundant  the  soldiers  can  be  more 
appropriately  and  profitably  employed  in  attaining  proficiency  in  drill, 
&c.  You  may  rest  assured,  sir,  that  I will  not  call  for  labor  under  the 
authority  of  the  resolution  which  in  my  opinion  can  be  safely  dispensed 
with. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General^  Comma7iding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Oaholina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  N.  0.,  March  23,  1802. 

Col.  W.  S.  Walker, 

Provisional  Army^  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

Colonel  : The  following  telegraphic  dispatch  was  received  last  night, 
and  its  tenor  telegraphed  to  you  at  Camp  McDonald.  You  are  directed 
to  proceed  to  Columbus,  Ga.,  and  impress  the  powder  referred  to.  Take 
immediate  measures  to  have  it  tested  under  your  own  supervision; 
report  its  quality  to  me,  also  to  the  Secreiary  of  War  direct,  stating 
likewise  the  proportion  of  cannon  powder.  Report  as  lu'omptly  as  pos- 
sible : 


Richmond,  March  22,  1862. 

To  Major-General  Pemberton: 

The  steamer  Florida  brought  64,000  pounds  of  powder,  which  the  parties  want  to  bu}^ 
[sell]  at  $2  per  pound,  deliverable  at  Marianna,  Fla.,  and  the  Government  to  take  the 
risk  of  forwarding  it  to  Columbus.  This  I have  refused. 

I have  answered  that  I would  pay  the  price  for  it  when  delivered  at  Columbus,  if 
found  to  be  of  good  quality.  You  are  required  to  imimess  the  powder,  and  have  it  tested 
by  a competent  ofiScer,  and  report  as  promptly  as  possible  of  its  quality.  Let  me  know 
also  what  proportion  of  it  is  cannon  ijowder.  The  arms  on  board  are  for  the  State  of 
Louisiana,  and  cannot  be  impressed. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Actiiuj  Secretary  of  War. 


Very  respectfully, 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General  J Com  ma  n di  ng. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  S.  C.,  March  24,  18G2. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  taken  the  necessary 
steps  to  impress  the  64,000  pouuds  of  powder  brought  by  the  steamer 


Chap.  XY.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  417 

Florida  immediately  upon  its  arrival  in  Columbus,  Ga.  It  will  be 
thoroughly  tested,  under  the  supervision  of  Maj.  A.  L.  Long,  chief  of 
ordnance  and  artillery  in  this  department,  and  if  of  good  quality 
20,000  pounds  will  be  at  once  forwarded  to  Maj.  Gen.  Sam.  Jones,  at 
Mobile,  and  the  remainder  to  Major-General  Lovell,  at  New  Orleans. 
I have  sent  an  agent — Mr.  J.  Manigault — to  Marianna,  Fla.,  to  keep  an 
eye  upon  thi  powder,  which  is  there  and  in  transit. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces  Dept.  East  and  Middle  Fla., 

Tallahassee.,  March  25,  1862. 

Maj.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Pocotaligo,  8.  G.  : 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  information  of  the  command- 
ing general,  that  having  received  .intelligence  which  leads  me  to  doubt 
the  accuracy  of  the  report  as  to  the  enemy’s  forces  in  Jacksonville,  which 
came  to  me  yesterday,  and  having  at  the  same  time  received  orders 
relieving  me  from  the  command  in  this  district,  I am  making  my  prepa- 
rations for  an  early  departure  for  the  headquarters  of  General  A.  S.  John- 
ston. 

The  forces  in  East  Florida  are  reported  so  much  weakened  by  sickness, 
that  I have  taken  the  responsibility  of  keeping  Davis’  regiment  in  that 
part  of  the  State  till  the  arms  from  Smyrna  are  in  a place  of  safety.  The 
colonel  of  the  regiment  has  reported  that  it  would  not  be  prepared  to 
march  for  some  days,  at  any  rate. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  T RAPIER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


[ludorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  8.  C.,  April  2,  1862. 

Having  no  control  over  Florida,  this  communication  is  respectfully 
forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  War  Department. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Majbr-General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston,  March  25,  1862. 

Col.  A.  M.  Manigault, 

Commanding  First  Military  District  8outh  Carolina : 

Colonel:  Having  maturely  considered  the  subject,  I have  deter- 
mined to  withdraw  the  forces  from  Georgetown,  and  therefore  abandon 
the  position. 

You  will  accordingly  take  immediate  measures  to  have  the  guns  dis- 
mounted, taking  care  to  have  at  hand  heavy  logs  to  place  in  position  as 
each  gun  shall  be  dismounted.  Do  not  allow  more  guns  to  be  displaced 
at  a time  than  you  can  immediately  remove. 

The  heavy  metal  should  be  removed  first^  and  the  work  should  be  done 
27  R R VOL  VI 


418 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.j  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 


[Chap.  XV. 


as  far  as  practicable  by  night,  and  as  rapidly  as  the  means  at  your  dis- 
posal will  admit  of.  You  will  use  the  light-draught  steamers  for  trans- 
portation to  the  railroad,  and  forward  the  guns  and  all  munitions  to 
Charleston.  I earnestly  impress  upon  you  the  necessity  of  promptness 
and  caution  in  this  movement. 

You  will,  so  soon  as  the  batteries  are  dismantled  and  the  material 
secured  to  a certainty  against  capture  by  the  enemy,  proceedfcvith  all  the 
infantry  force  under  your  command  (except  troops  for  local  defense)  to 
this  city  and  report  to  Brigadier-General  Eipley. 

The  cavalry,  field  artillery,  and  local  troops  will  for  the  present  be 
continued  as  guard,  and  you  will  make  such  disposition  of  them  for  that 
purpose  as  your  judgment  and  experience  shall  dictate. 

If  the  field  artillery  is  not  equipped,  it  may  be  well  also  to  remove  it. 
You  are  requested  to  make  immediate  report  on  this  point  and  upon  any 
other  connected  with  this  movement  which  you  may  deem  of  interest. 

Jtespectfully, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 


Special  Orders,  \ Dep’t  East  and  Middle  Florida, 

No.  118.  ) Tallahassee j March  25,  1862. 

#***#*# 

Col.  William  G.  M.  Davis,  First  Florida  Cavalry,  will  proceed  to 
Camp  Langford,  with  his  whole  command,  and  relieve  Colonel  Dilworth, 
Third  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers,  in  command  of  all  the  forces  in  that 
portion  of  the  State,  provided  Colonel  Hopkins’  Fourth  Regiment 
Florida  Volunteers  is  not  present. 

As  soon  as  the  arms  now  en  route  for  Lake  City  shall  have  arrived  at 
that  point  Colonel  Davis  will,  with  his  regiment,  proceed  immediately 
to  Tennessee,  and  report  for  duty  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston,  C.  S. 
Army. 

###**** 


By  order  of  General  Trapier: 

R.  H.  ANDERSON, 
Major ^ and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


POCOTALIGO,  S.  C.,  March  26,  1862. 

General  A.  R.  Lawton, 

Savannah,,  Ga.: 

General  : I have  just  received  the  following  telegraph.  Answer  me 
at  once  by  telegraph,  and  report  facts  in  full  by  letter: 

Richmond,  March  26,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

The  governor  of  Georgia  complains  that  arms  imported  in  the  Gladiator  and  landed 
at  Savannah  have  been  seized  by  the  Confederate  ofiBlcers.  If  this  be  so,  have  them 
released. 

GEO.  W.  RANDOLPH. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General j Commanding. 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESrONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


419 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  March  20,  1802. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton, 

Com^nanding  tSixth  Military  District  South  Carolina: 

General  : It  is  impossible  at  this  time  to  send  you  permanent  re- 
enforcements. Tbe  three  Georgia  regiments  which  have  just  reported 
are  without  arms  or  instruction.  I expect,  however,  to  have  them  armed 
immediately.  One  of  these  regiments  is  at  Grahamville,  and  will,  with 
the  rest  of  General  Donelson's  brigade  between  Broad  and  New  Bivers, 
be  the  principal  assistance  upon  which  you  must  depend  for  a move- 
ment against  the  enemy  should  he  land  east  of  New  Kiver.  You  have 
sufficient  force  now  west  of  that  stream,  together  with  su^h  aid  as  may 
be  sent  you  from  General  Lawton’s  command,  to  effectually  resist  its 
passage  or  to  meet  the  enemy  should  he  approach  from  Bed  Bluff.  The 
rest  of  your  troops  can  be  made  disposable  for  any  emergency  in  the  south 
and  west  of  New  Eiver. 

I do  not  expect  you  to  protect  any  possible  landing  place.  Generally 
cavalry  advanced  guards  are  sufficient ; the  great  object  being  to  have 
information  communicated  rapidly,  and  to  this  end  I desire  you  to  keep 
your  cavalry  scouts  in  constant  communication  and  in  close  proximity 
with  General  Donelson’s,  who  will  also  be  directed  to  establish  them  for 
that  purpose  at  the  head  of  Fording  Island  road.  The  only  reason 
why  the  powder  for  torpedoes  was  not  sent  was  because  I found  when 
in  Charleston  that  the  amount  in  hand  was  not  sufficient  to  admit  of  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J.  C.  PEMBEBTON. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

PocotaligOy  March  27,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a telegram 
from  the  Secretary  of  War,  dated  March  26,  1862,  in  relation  to  a com- 
plaint from  the  governor  of  Georgia  that  certain  arms  imported  in  the' 
Gladiator  and  landed  at- Savannah  had  been  seized  by  the  Confederate 
officers.  The  Secretary  directs,  if  this  be  so,  the  arms  shall  be  released. 

I have  replied  by  telegraph  of  this  date,  on  report  from  Brigadier- 
General  Lawton,  commanding  at  Savannah,  this  moment  received, 
that — 

The  arms  were  not  seized,  hut  came  into  the  hands  of  the  ordnance  officer  with  Con- 
federate arms  and  without  any  notice  of  the  State’s  claim  until  they  were  shipped. 
Those  arms  cannot  be  recovered  for  the  State,  as  they  were  shipx)ed  to  Tennessee, 
Richmond,  and  other  places,  but  they  may  be  replaced  by  #thers  to  arrive  from 
Florida. 

Having  had  no  notification  of  the  disposition  to  be  made  of  arms,  &c., 
from  the  cargo  of  the  Gladiator,  I am  not  prepared  to  say  at  present 
how  the  arms  were  diverted  fiom  their  proper  destination.  General 
Lawton  will  report  in  full  by  mail  to-morrow.  I respectfully  request  to 
be  instructed  by  the  Department  as  to  the  course  to  be  inirsued  in  replac* 
ing  these  arms  from  any  future  arrival. 

I telegraphed  to  the  Secretary  of  War  this  morning  that  certain  parties 
in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  offered  to  dispose  of  about  a ton  of  pig  lead  to  the  Gov- 
ernment at  30  cents  jier  pound.  The  highest  price  paid  heretofore,  as  I 
am  informed  by  Captain  Cuyler,  ordinance  officer  at  Savannah,  has  been 


420  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

IG  cents.  The  lead  is  very  necessary  and  becoming  very  scarce.  I 
would  suggest  that  general  instructions  be  given  me  to  impress  for  the 
use  of  the  Confederate  States  in  all  cases  where  such  gross  extortion  is 
attempted. 

The  G4,000  pounds  of  powder  which  I was  directed  to  impress  on  its 
reaching  Columbus,  Ga.,  has  not  yet  arrived  there.  Officers  are  in 
attendance  to  carry  out  the  instructions  of  the  Secretary. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTO]N, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Focotaligo.^  March  27,  18G2. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Brigadier-General  Ripley 
has  been  directed  to  withdraw  the  guns  from  the  batteries  on  Cole’s 
Island,  and  to  confine  the  defenses  of  the  city  of  Charleston  by  that 
approach  to  James  Island  and  the  Stono  River. 

Col.  A.  M.  Manigault,  commanding  at  Georgetown,  S.  C.,  has  als^ 
been  instructed  to  remove  the  guns  from  the  works  at  that  place  to 
Charleston,  and  to  withdraw  all  troops  except  those  raised  for  ‘Gocal 
defense.”  These  last,  amouuting  in  the  aggregate,  present  and  absent, 
to  about  1,200  infantry  and  400  cavalry,  I propose  to  continue  for  the 
present  as  a sufficient  guard  against  raids  by  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding, 


POCOTALIGO,  March  27,  18G2. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War,  Eichnwnd,  Va, : 

General  Lawton  reports — 

The  arms  were  not  seized,  but  came  into  the  hands  of  ordnance  officer  with  Confed- 
erate arms,  and  without  notice  of  State’s  claim  until  they  were  shipped.  Those  arms 
cannot  be  recovered,  as  they  were  shipped  to  Tennessee,  Richmond,  and  other  places, 
but  can  be  replaced  by  others  to  arrive  from  Florida. 


Shall  they  be  so  replaced? 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding, 


Richmond,  Ya.,  March  28,  18G2. 


General  Pemberton, 

Pocotaligo,  S,  C, : 

Replace  the  arms  belonging  to  Georgia  when  you  receive  others. 

GEO.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


421 


liiCHMOND,  Ya.,  Afarch  28,  18G2. 

Governor  Brown, 

Milledgeville^  Ga. : 

Your  arms  were  taken  by  mistake  and  distributed  to  various  points. 
They  cannot  be  recovered,  but  I have  ordered  General  Pemberton  to 
replace  them  from  others  expected  from  Florida. 

GEO.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligoj  Alarcli  28,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District : 

General  : The  major-general  commanding  wislies  me  to  say  to  you 
that  it  would  be  well  for  you  to  notify  the  planters  in  the  vicinity  of 
Ashepoo  Eiver  (Chapman^s  fort)  that  as  spring  approaches  the  troops  in 
that  section  will  be  compelled  to  fall  back  to  a more  healthy  region  of 
the  country,  and  the  guns  at  Chapman’s  fort  will  be  removed  to  some 
other  point,  as  necessity  may  require. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Poeotaligo,  Afarch  30,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  two  accompanying  papers,* 
received  through  Brigadier-General  Lawton,  in  relation  to  certain  arms 
represented  by  his  excellency  t*he  governor  of  Georgia  to  have  been 
seized  by  Confederate  officers  in  Savannah,  the  arms  being  the  iiroperty 
of  the  State  of  Georgia. 

The  Secretary  of  War  directs  that  if  the  arms  were  taken,  as  charged, 
that  they  be  restored.  It  will  be  seen  by  General  Lawton’s  letter,  that, 
Jiaving  been  shipped  to  various  and  distant  points,  it  is  impracticable 
to  recover  them.  I request  further  instructions  on  the  subject. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Alajor- General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah,  March  31,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Governor  of  Georgia  : 

Sir  : It  has  recently  been  brought  to  my  notice  that  there  is  at  present 
a large  amount  of  cotton  stored  in  and  near  Augusta,  and  it  has  been 
suggested  to  me  that  an  expression  of  the  intention  of  the  commander 
of  the  military  department  to  have  this  cotton  destroyed  rather  than 
allow  it  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  might  have  a beneficial  eftect 

* Not  found. 


o 


422  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  X'^. 

in  inducing  its  removal.  Should  the  enemy  be  successful  in  his  attempt 
upon  Savannah,  Augusta  will  be  seriously  threatened,  and  if  rapid  in  his 
movements  it  is  probable  that,  in  the  confusion  and  panic  which  would 
be  likely  to  ensue,  much  of  the  cotton  would  not  be  removed.  I therefore 
refer  to  your  excellency’s  serious  consideration  the  propriety  of  the  State 
authorities  notifying  the  people  of  the  intention  of  the  military  com- 
mander, in  order  that  such  preliminary  arrangements  may  be  made  for  the 
removal  of  the  cotton  should  the  unfortunate  emergency  arise,  which 
would  otherwise  involve  serious  loss  of  property. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia^  Maj.  Gen,  John 
C.  Pemberton  commanding,  for  March,  1862. 


Hdqtis.  Dept.  South  Caholina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo^  April  1,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District: 

General:  The  general  commanding  wishes  Colonel  Dunovant’s  regi- 
ment advanced  as  skirmishers  until  they  engage  the  enemy.  You  will 
make  such  disposition  of  Leake’s  battery  as  circumstances  may  require. 
He  has  ordered  two  42-pounder  carronades  to  the  work  at  Stony  Creek. 
The  general  wishes  you  to  keep  him  constantly  advised  of  the  enemy’s 
movements. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

J.  E.  WADDY. 

P.  S. — Move  the  two  Georgia  regiments  down  as  far  as  the  work  on 
Stony  Creek. 

By  order  Major-General  Pemberton  : 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

Occupy  the  several  causeways  (intrenched)  and  all  important  posi- 
tions from  Stony  Creek  to  Benton  Causeway  with  one  of  the  Georgia 
regiments.  Keep  Leake’s  battery  in  hand  to  occupy  any  work  which 
may  be  threatened.  Let  the  mounted  troops  keep  the  enemy  always  in 
view.  If  compelled  to  fall  back  from  Hosper’s  Creek,  burn  the  boats. 
Respectfully. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


CIIAP.  xv.l 


423 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Military  District  S.  0., 

Jericho,  April  1,  1802 — 11  a.  m 

Capt.  J.  E.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Pocotaligo : 

Captain:  I learu  that  the  enemy  have  retired  to  the  other  side  at 
Port  Eoyal  Ferry.  I send  you  a coi)y  of  a slip  of  paper  left  by  them.* 

The  enemy  landed  this  morning  at  Page’s  Point  at  a later  lionr  than 
at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry.  They  were  l)urning  some  houses  when  last  heard 
from.  I have  not  yet  been  informed  of  any  advance  by  them.  Our 
advanced  guards  of  infantry,  at  Garden’s  Corner  and  Camp  Pemberton 
have  not  been  approached.  I am  about  proceeding  down  the  road  to 
ascertain  the  precise  situation  of  affairs,  taking  the  Twelfth  Eegiment 
South  Carolina  with  me. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

MAXCY  GEEGG, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  Fourth  Military  District, 

P.  S. — While  writing  the  above  I have  received  your  two  notes,  with 
General  Pemberton’s  postscript  to  me. 

In  my  dispositions  to  receive  the  enemy,  made  early  this  morning,  I 
ordered  Major  Huger,  with  the  artiller^^,  from  near  Fishburn’s  Causeway 
to  the  east  end  of  the  Combaht^l  Ferry  Causeway,  there  to  await  fur- 
ther orders,  supported  by  four  companies  of  the  Thirteenth  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers  (two  more  of  which  are  on  this  side  of  the  ferry).  I had 
not  intended  to  move  the  two  Georgia  regiments  farther  than  Old  Poco- 
taligo before  being  assured  of  the  enemy’s  advance.  In  obedience  to 
General  Pemberton’s  instructions,  I will  now  move  them  forward  to  the 
intrenchments. 

MAXCY  GEEGG. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  April  2,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Information  just  received  by  telegraph  from  Colonel  Dil worth,  com- 
manding Department  of  East  and  Middle  Florida,  shows  it  necessary 
that  immediate  instructions  be  given  him  as  to  disposition  of  arms  en 
route  from  Smyrna,  Fla.t 

J.  C.  PEMBEETOX, 

Major-General,  Comdg.  Dept.  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 


Headquarters,  Richmond,  Va.,  April  2,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  Dept.  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. : 

General:  By  direction  of  General  Lee,  commanding,  &c.,  I have  the 
honor  to  state  that  he  has  just  received  a telegram  from  Governor 
Pickens,  who  states  that  the  abandonment  of  Cole’s  Island  before  the 
inner  lines  are  prepared  opens  the  approach  to  the  city  by  Stono  to  the 
enemy,  and  requests  that  the  guns  may  be  retained  there  for  the  present. 
He  further  states  that  the  sickly  season  is  approaching,  and  that  there 
is  no  place  on  James  Island  where  troops  can  live. 


* Not  found. 


tSee  report  of  affair  March  23,  at  Smyrna,  p.  111. 


424  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

Governor  Pickens  has^already  been  informed  by  telegraph  that  move- 
ments of  this  character  can  only  be  decided  by  the  officer  in  command 
of  the  Department,  although  the  matter  is  respectfully  referred  for  your 
further  consideration. 

V ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters, 

. Eichmondj  Va.,  April  3,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Lawton, 

Commanding^  (fee.,  Savannah^  Ga.: 

General  : I am  directed  by  General  Lee  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  letter  of  the  22d  instant,  and  to  say  in  reply  that  the  State 
troops  should  by  all  means  be  retained  in  the  service  for  the  war  by  the 
Confederate  Government,  if  possible,  and,  if  not,  by  the  State  govern- 
ment. He  agrees  with  you  that,  “if  the  entire  State  forces  with  their 
arms  could  at  once  be  received  into  the  Confederate  service,  it  would  add 
materially  to  our  security.’^  But  at  ^11  events  the  troops  should  be 
retained,  and  for  the  war,  and  he  has  advised  Governor  Brown  to  this 
effect. 

As  regards  the  matter  of  the  State’s  undertaking  its  own  defense,  he 
thinks  the  Confederate  Government  should  do  all  in  its  power  to  iDrotect 
the  State  and  defend  her  interests ; and  if  for  any  reasons  it  should 
appear  advisable  that  the  State  alone  and  unaided  undertake  her  defense, 
the  proposition  should  come  from  her  and  not  from  him. 

I am,  verj^  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Focotaligo^  April  4,  1862. 


Colonel  Dilworth, 

Tallahassee^  Fla,: 

By  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  you  will  send  at  once  1,500  mus- 
kets or  rifles  to  Col.  T.  M.  Jones,  at  Pensacola,  Fla.,  and  report  to  the 
War  Department  by  telegraph  the  number  on  hand. 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


Headquarters, 
Richmoiid,  Va.^  April  4,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Comdg,  Dept,  South  Carolina  and  Georgia^  Pocotaligo^  S,  C, : 
General  : General  E.  E.  Lee,  commanding,  directs  me  to  acknowl- 
edge the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  27th  ultimo,  in  which  you  report 
that  you  have  directed  the  withdrawal  of  the  guns  and  troops  from  the 
batteries  at  Georgetown  and  on  Cole’s  Island.  Since  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  a communication  has  been  written  by  Governor  Pickens,  repre- 


Chap.  XV.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


425 


senting  the  exposed  condition  to  which  the  inhabitants  and  much  prop- 
erty must  be  subjected  in  the  country  about  Georgetown,  and  also  that 
the  enemy^s  gunboats  easily  ascend  the  river  to  the  railroad  unless  there 
be  interposed  sufficient  guns  and  troops  to  prevent  them. 

In  view  of  these  facts,  the  general  commanding  suggests  the  i)ropriety 
of  complying  with  the  governor’s  suggestions  at  least  until  such  a time 
as  would  enable  the  planters,  &c.,  to  remove  their  property,  and  also  to 
allow  time  to  those  who  desire  it  to  move  away  themselves. 

In  conclusion,  it  is  respectfully  submitted  to  your  Judgment  whether, 
in  order  to  preserve  harmony  between  the  State  and  Confederate  author- 
ities, it  would  not  be  better  to  notify  the  governor  whenever  you  deter- 
mine to  abandon  any  position  of  your  line  of  defenses,  in  order  that  he 
may  give  due  notice  to  the  inhabitants  to  look  out  for  their  security. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

Major ^ and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  April  5,  18G2. 

Governor  Brown, 

Savannah  : 

Sir:  I regret  extremely  the  interference  with  your  arms;' will  use 
every  exertion  to  recover  and  restore  them,  or  to  return  others  of  equal 
value.  The  arms  sent  to  Eichmond  were  many  of  them  stopped  at  Ea- 
leigh  and  turned  aside  to  Goldsborough,  for  the  purpose  of  arming  three 
Georgia  regiments  called  for  by  General  Lee.  It  may  be  that  those  were 
your  arms. 

I have  instructed  General  Pemberton  to  call  on  you  for  an  invoice  or 
other  description  of  the  arms,  and  to  return  them  out  of  the  first  parcel 
received.  If  they  cannot  be  replaced^they  can  be  paid  for.  I have  cau- 
tioned Colonel  Dilworth,  at  Tallahassee,  against  using  any  State  arms, 
and  will  cause  any  officer  to  be  punished  who  knowingly  takes  them. 

GEO.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Hdqrs.  Tenth  Eegt.  S.  C.  Y.,  C.  S.  P.  A. 

Second  Military  District^  Mount  Pleasant^  April  5,  1862. 
Capt.  J.  E.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General^  Headquarters^  Pocotaligo  : 

Captain  : By  permission  of  General  Eipley,  to  whom  I reported  on 
my  arrival  here  from  Georgetown  with  my  command,  the  Tenth  Eegi- 
ment,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  instructions  received  from  the 
general  commanding  have  been  executed.  The  redoubts  in  the  First 
Military  District  have  been  abandoned ; the  guns,  20  in  number,  dis- 
mounted, and  are  now  on  their  way  by  railroad  to  Charleston,  with 
ammunition,  ordnance  stores,  &c.  Logs  of  wood  resembling  pieces  of 
ordnance  have  been  mounted  in  the  place  of  each  gun  that  has  been 
removed,  and  three  companies  of  cavalry  and  three  of  infantry  are  en- 
camped near  them;  the  positions  have  the  appearance  of  being  still 
occupied.  The  troops  cannot  be  cut  off  by  any  but  a land  attack,  against 
which  only  ordinary  precaution  will  be  necessary. 


[Chap.  XV. 


426  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA. 

The  works  are  uninjured,  having  received  no  orders  to  destroy  them, 
and  deeming  it  inexpedient  to  do  so. 

The  command  of  the  district  I have  turned  over  to  Col.  E.  F.  Graham 
commanding  Twenty-hrst  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  with 
the  following-named  force  under  him  : 

State  defense : Twenty-first  Eegiment,  E.  F.  Graham,  commandant, 
ten  companies,  700  men  ; battalion,  E.  Nesbit,  commandant,  seven  com- 
panies, 500  meu.  Fourth  Battalion  Cavalry,  Maj.  J.  C.  Wilson,  four 
companies,  240  men  ; Tucker’s  cavalry,  one  company,  115  men. 

For  the  war  unconditionally : Ward’s  light  battery,  six  pieces,  one 
company,  112  men. 

The  district  in  its  present  defenseless  condition  requires  a considera- 
ble cavalry  force  as  a coast  guard  and  police  force.  The  five  companies 
left  there  are,  I think,  sufficient  for  that  purpose.  The  infantry  can  be 
of  but  little  use,  and  I think  it  would  be  better  to  place  them  on  the 
line  of  railroad  (Kingstree),  from  which  point  they  could  be  easily  moved 
in  any  direction  in  the  State  where  their  services  may  be  needed.  At 
Georgetown  where  they  now  are,  it  would  be  a three  days’  march  to 
reach  any  point  on  the  railroad,  and  requires  by  the  ordinary  mail  route 
two  days  nearly  to  convey  information  to  them.  I arrived  here  on  the 
3d  instant  with  Tenth  Eegiment,  903  strong,  having  left  behind,  sick 
and  convalescents,  123  men,  the  greater  portion  of  whom  will  rejoin  me 
on  Tuesday  next,  also  77  men  on  furlough  at  that  time,  30  of  whom  are 
on  thirty  days’  furlough.  Aggregate  strength,  1,103. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  M.  MANIGAULT, 

Colonel  Tenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 


State  of  Florida,  Executive  Department, 

’ Tallahassee^  April  7,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis  : 

Sir:  The  retiring  of  forces  from  Fernandina  and  the  Saint  John’s 
Eiver  was  attended  with  the  loss  of  nearly  all  our  guns,  &c.  The  trans- 
portation of  the  arms  and  munitions  of  war  from  Smyrna  has  also  been 
so  mismanaged  as  to  cause  heavy  losses.  The  causes  should  be  promptly 
and  rigidly  inquired  into. 

The  troops  have  become  demoralized,  and  the  faith  of  many  citizens 
in  the  integrity  and  ability  of  the  Government  impaired. 

The  enemy  is  in  possession  of  all  of  Florida  east  of  the  Saint  John’s 
Eiver,  and  doubtless  intend  to  take  this  place  and  hold  Saint  Mark’s  and 
Apalachicola. 

The  forces  which  were  in  Fernandina  and  are  now  here,  if  properly 
commanded,  are  enough  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the  State. 

The  militia  have  not  yet  been  ordered  into  the  field,  first  because  of  the 
difficulty  of  procuring  subsistence  and  arms,  secondly  because,  from  the 
Ijrejiidices  excited,  it  would  be  difficult  to  preserve  harmony  between 
them  and  those  in  Confederate  service. 

I have  recommended  General  Eichard  F.  Floyd  to  be  appointed  briga- 
dier-general and  assigned  to  this  military  department.  He  is  brave 
and  yet  prudent,  and  commands  the  confidence  not  only  of  the  citizens 
(militia),  but  of  those  in  Confederate  service.  He  was  in  command  at 
Apalachicola  until  the  troops  were  retired  from  that  place,  and  if  we 


Chap.  XV. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  427 

could  have  gotten  a regiment  there  in  addition  to  the  500  men  he  had, 
would,  with  the  i)reparation  he  had  made,  have  defended  the  place.  As 
it  was,  in  the  i)resence  of  the  enemy  he  retired  in  order  without  the  loss 
of  a gnu  or  any  ammunition  or  military  stores. 

There  is  much  confusion  and  disorder  among  those  in  Confederate 
service,  and  simply  because  a competent  officer  in  command  is  neces- 
sary. When  General  Trapier  was  relieved  of  the  command,  I expressed 
to  the  Secretary  of  War  a willingness  to  direct  the  military  movements 
in  the  State  a few  weeks,  until  a suitable  officer  could  be  assigned  to 
the  duty,  if  he  would  order  the  officers  in  command  of  regiments  to 
report  to  me,  but  he  replied  there  was  no  law  to  authorize  it. 

As  soon  as  an  officer  shall  be  assigned  to  the  command,  competent  to 
the  discharge  of  the  duties,  I shall  proclaim  martial  law  throughout  the 
Military  Department,  because  of  the  disposition  manifested  in  several 
places  to  submit  to  the  enemy,  and  in  fact  upon  the  first  opportunity  to 
rally  to  their  standard.  I would  much  rather  be  in  the  field  than  dis- 
charging the  duties  of  civil  life,  and  would  like  to  be  appointed  to  the 
command  of  a brigade,  where  active  service  will  be  required  and  the 
enemy  can  be  met. 

Agreeably  to  a requisition  of  General  Lee,  four  cavalrj^  companies 
have  been  mustered  into  Confederate  service  and  are  upon  duty,  to  su]>- 
ply  the  place  of  the  cavalry  regiment  commanded  by  Col.  Wm.  G.  M. 
Davis,  who  was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Johnston.  Col.  Davis’ 
regiment  is  still  here,  and  your  attention  is  respectfully  invited  to  the 
inclosed  correspondence.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  April  7,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District  8.  G, : 

General  : The  remaining  Charleston  comx)anies,  referred  to  in  our 
conversation  of  the  5th  instant,  can  be  mustered  in  for  one  year,  to  com- 
ifiete  the  organization  of  corps.  I trust,  however,  that  every  effort  will 
be  made  to  bring  all  these  troops  i!i  for  the  war.  I believe  it  can  be 
done,  and  such  I heard  is  also  the  opinion  of  Adjutant-General  Gist. 

If  the  accounts  we  have  just  received  from  the  West  of  the  success  of 
our  Army  be  true,  it  seems  to  me  very  probable  that,  to  counterbalance 
his  defeat  there,  the  enemy  may  make  a prompt  and  serious  attack  upon 
someimportant  point  on  this  seaboard.  I am  very  anxious,  therefore,  that 
every  exertion  should  be  made  to  get  the  works  at  Elliott’s  Cut  into 
condition  to  receive  the  guns  from  Cole’s  Island.  If  you  cannot  obtain 
labor  otherwise,  you  should  impress  it  at  once.  You  are  so  confident  of 
being  able  to  hold  Cole’s  Island,  that  I will  not  insist  on  the  removal  of 
the  guns  from  there  until  they  can  be  fought  at  Elliott’s  Cut.  Let  me 
know  by  telegraph  whether  the  work  there  is  under  way  j if  not,  when 
it  will  be. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Not  found. 


428  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  79.  ) • Richmond^  Fa.,  A]^ril  7,  1862. 

###**** 

X.  Major-General  Pemberton’s  command  is  extended  so  as  to  include 
Eastern  and  Middle  Florida  as  far  west  as  the  Ohoctawhatchie  Eiver. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JXO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligoj  April  8,  1862. 

Bj'ig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton, 

Commanding  Sixth  Military  District  South  Carolina: 

General  : I desire  yon  to  proceed  with  as  little  delay  as  possible  to 
the  city  of  Augusta,  Ga.,  and  confer  with  the  mayor,  R.  H.  May,  esq., 
in  relation  to  the  immediate  connection  through  Augusta  of  the  Waynes- 
borough  and  Augusta  and  South  Carolina  Railroads.  You  will  explain 
to  the  city  authorities  and  to  the  presidents  and  directors  of  the  railroad 
companies  that  this  measure  is  a military  necessity,  which  I trust  those 
interested  will  acknowledge.  It  is  only  necessary  to  revert  to  the  impor- 
tant fact  that,  should  the  enemy  cut  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Rail- 
road, there  will  be  no  direct  communication  between  the  cities  of  Charles- 
ton and  Savannah  by  railroad  unless  this  connection  is  made.  I am 
informed  by  his  excellency  Gov.  J.  E.  Brown,  of  Georgia,  that  the  route 
through  Augusta  proposed  by  Dr.  Willis,  president  of  the  Waynes- 
borough  and  Augusta  road,  and  which  he  is  willing  to  construct  at  the 
expense  of  the  company,  is  the  shortest ; and  being,  for  military  neces- 
sities, the  iiroper  route,  you  will  therefore  require  the  said  connection 
to  be  made  by  this  route,  and  as  expeditiously  ^as  possible. 

I am,  very  respectfuly,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah,  Ga.,  April  8,  1862. 

Capt.  N.  C.  Tilton, 

Assistant  Quartermaster,  P.  A.  C.  S. : 

Captain:  The  major-general  commanding  department  directs  that 
you  proceed  at  once  to  Tallahassee  and  other  points  in  Florida,  and 
collect  such  of  the  arms  recently  landed  in  Florida  belonging  to  the 
Confederate  States  as  may  be  in  the  possession  of  parties  not  author- 
ized by  the  Government  of  the  Confederate  States  to  hold  them.  You 
will  call  on  Governor  Milton,  of  Florida,  and  the  commanding  officer  at 
Tallahassee,  for  such  assistance  as  you  may  require,  in  order  to  secure 
the  arms  referred  to.  After  executing  this  order  you  will  report  imme- 
- diately,  first  by  telegraph  and  then  by  letter; 

I am,  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XV.] 


429 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


Richmond,  ^Ya.,  Aj)ril  8,  18G2. 

Gov.  John  Milton, 

Of  Florida^  Tallahassee^  Fla.: 

Before  receipt  of  your  dispatch  of  yesterday,  Joseph  Finegan  had 
been  appointed  brigadier- general  and  assigned  to  command  East  and 
Middle  Florida. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  April  8,  1862. 

His  Excellency  John  Milton, 

Governor  of  Florida : 

Governor  : Your  letter  of  the  19th  March,  to  the  Secretary  of  War, 
was  submitted  by  that  officer  to  the  President,  who  has  requested  me 
to  inform  you  of  the  action  that  has  been  taken  with  reference  to  the 
appointment  of  a brigadier-general  for  command  in  Florida. 

When  the  desire  of  General  Trapier  to  be  relieved  from  his  command 
in  Florida  became  known,  the  President  was  advised  by  prominent  citi- 
zens of  that  State  to  appoint  General  J.  Patton  Anderson  as  successor 
of  General  Trapier,  if  the  former  officer  could  be  spared  from  his  present 
command.  Acting  upon  this  advice,  the  President  proceeded  to  ascer- 
tain whether  the  services  of  General  Anderson  could  be  had.  Before, 
however,  this  iuformation  could  be  obtained,  and  when  the  posture  of 
affairs  in  the  department  to  which  General  Anderson  is  attached  ren- 
dered it  unlikely  that  the  commanding  general  would  be  willing  to  de- 
tach General  Anderson,  an  application  was  made  to  the  President  by 
the  Florida  delegation  for  the  appointment  of  General  Jos.  Finegan  as 
brigadier-general  in  the  event  that  the  services  of  General  Anderson 
could  not  be  obtained.  The  application  for  appointment  of  a com- 
mander in  Florida  being  urgent,  and  the  necessity  for  prompt  action 
being  fully  appreciated  by  the  President,  he  availed  himself  of  the  ad- 
vice of  the  members  of  Congress  from  Florida,  and  nominated  General 
Finegan  to  the  position  of  brigadier- general,  and  that  officer,  if  his  nomi- 
nation be  confirmed,  will  be  assigned  to  command  in  Florida. 

The  President  has  no  doubt,  from  the  statements  made  to  him  by  all 
the  Representatives  from  your  State  as  to  the  qualifications  of  General 
Finegan,  that,  while  he  has  not  been  able  to  follow  the  recommendation 
of  your  excellency  in  making  the  appointment,  you  will  find  that  your 
object  in  making  that  recommendation  has  been  fully  attained  by  the 
action  that  has  been  taken. 

I am,  governor,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo,  April  8,  1862. 

Maj.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General: 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  the  4th  instant.  A portion  of  the  guns  from  the  batteries  near 
Georgetown  are  already  in  Charleston,  the  remainder  en  route,  and  all 
secure.  The  aggregate  of  all  arms  left  for  the  protection  of  the  local 
interests  is  1,555,  in  which  are  included  two  comi)anies  of  cavalry  and  a 
field  battery — four  pieces  equipped  with  horses,  two  without,  but  soon 


430  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

to  be.  These  are  all  |roops  for  local  defense.  Great  stress  has  been 
laid  by  some  who  have  objected  to  the  removal  of  the  ^^nns  from 
Georgetown  on  the  asserted  fact  that  but  8 feet  can  come  over  the  bar. 
In  reply  I will  only  state  that  the  Nashville,  drawing  11  feet,  passed  in 
and  out  under  a midshipman  at  less  than  half  tide  and  without  deten- 
tion. Gunboats  drawing  over  12  feet  might  therefore  readily  engage 
our  batteries,  and  to  oppose  them  we  had  in  position  two  32-pouuders, 
six  24-pounders,  four  18-pounders,  one  12-pounder  rifled,  one  O-pounder 
rifled,  two  12-pounders  rifled,  two  12-pounder  howitzers. 

In  my  estimation  such  a battery  was  worse  than  useless,  and  if  the 
destruction  of  the  railroad  bridge  was  an  object,  the  capture  of  the  guns 
would  only  have  added  a certain  eclat,  I will  add  further  on  this  subject 
that  almost  two  weeks  before  I issued  the  order  in  question  I mentioned 
to  General  Gist,  then  adjutant  and  inspector  general  of  the  State,  that 
I thought  seriously  of  withdrawing  the  batteries  from  Georgetown,  and 
he  has  since  informed  me  that  he  stated  to  the  governor  and  council 
that  I contemplated  so  doing. 

I will,  however,  in  future  be  more  particular  in  giving  notice  of  any 
intended  change,  and  have  in  fact  done  so  to  the  planters  interested  in 
the  Ashepoo.  As  to  the  probable  speedy  withdrawal  of  the  battery  from 
Chapman’s  fort,  so  far  as  I am  aware,  I beg  to  assure  the  general  com- 
manding that  perfect  harmony  exists  between  the  Confederate  States 
authorities,  as  represented  by  myself,  and  the  government  of  South  Caro- 
lina, notwithstanding  the  difierence  of  opinion  on  the  subject  in  question. 
Of  this  I am  assured,  having  had  several  interviews  with  his  excellency 
Governor  Pickens  since  the  date  of  his  letter  to  the  general  commanding. 

As  regards  Cole’s  Island,  the  guns  are  still  in  position  and  will  remain 
so  until  the  works  on  Stono  Eiver  are  ready  to  receive  them,  which  I 
trust  will  be  in  a very  few  days. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  80.  ) Richmond^  Ya..,  April  8,  1862. 

*##**#* 

YI.  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan  will  report  to  Major-General  Pember- 
ton, commanding,  &c.,  for  assignment  to  the  command  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  Eastern  and  Middle  Florida. 

******* 

XXII.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  E.  Gist  will  report  .for  duty  to  Major-General 
Pemberton,  commanding  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 
******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War. 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  &c., 

Pocotaligo,  April  9,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 


General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a copy  of  a letter 
addressed  by  me  to  General  H.  C.  Wayne,  adjutant  and  inspector 


Chap.  XV.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  431 

general  of  Georgia.  In  reply  I received  a printed  coi)y  of  Gov.  J.  E. 
Brownes  speech  to  the  State  troops  at  Savannah  on  the  15th  instant, 
which  General  Wayne  says  ‘^develops  his  (the  governor’s)  policy  with 
regard  to  their  continnance  in  service,”  and  adds,  “if  they  do  not  re- 
volunteer within  the  week,  as  set  forth  in  his  speech,  he  will  replace 
them  by  an  equivalent  force  of  new  volunteers.” 

On  the  7th  instant  I had  a personal  interview  with  Governor  Brown, 
when  the  subject  was  discussed  more  at  large.  In  conversation  the  gov- 
ernor authorized  me  to  say  that  he  did  not  think  more  than  3,500  of  the 
State  troops  now  in  service  could  be  counted  upon  at  any  one  time 
within  the  next  two  or  three  months  for  the  defense  of  Savannah.  My 
own  opinion  is,  after  a great  deal  of  inquiry,  that  even  this  number  is 
an  overestimate.  I am  convinced  that  there  is  a general  indisposition 
to  re-enter  the  State  service,  though  the  governor  thinks  differently. 

I did  not  in  any  manner  enter  into  the  question  of  the  comparative 
advantages  or  disadvantages  of  the  organization  of  State  troops  for 
local  defense  5 my  object  being  entirely  to  ascertain  how  far  I could 
rely  on  such  forces  to  make  up  the  requisite  numerical  strength  for  the 
protection  of  the  city  and  State. 

Allowing  the  estimate  of  Governor  Brown  to  be  correct,  the  effective 
force  will  be  diminished  by  4,000  at  least  for  several  months  to  come. 

I do  not  consider  the  present  strength  as  more  than  adequate  to  the 
defense,  but  the  direct  purpose  I have  in  view  is  to  bring  to  the  notice 
of  the  department  the  fact  that  this  strength  is  daily  diminishing,  and 
that,  should  the  exigencies  of  the  service  elsewhere  demand  the  with- 
drawal of  troops  from  this  department,  it  will  become  necessary  to  aban- 
don at  least  a part  of  our  line  of  defense  and  with  it  some  of  the 
approaches  to  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Kailroad.  In  view  of  the 
possibility  of  these  exigencies,  I am  taking  measures  to  secure  an  unin- 
terrupted communication  between  the  two  cities,  by  requiring  a con- 
nection to  be  made  through  Augusta  of  the  Waynesborough,  Augusta 
and  South  Carolina  Eailroad.  I consider  the  connection  referred  to  a 
military  necessity,  and  I believe  it  to  have  been  so  regarded  by  Gen- 
eral Lee,  as  I know  that  he  desired  it  to  be  made.  Some  difficulties, 
ho V/ ever,  as  to  the  particular  route  intervened  to  prevent  it,  and,  the 
general  leaving  the  department  about  that  time,  no  steps  were  taken  to 
enforce  it. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBEETO^I, 

Major- General^  Commanding, 


[Inclosure.] 

Hdqes.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligoj  Ajgril  1,  1862. 

General  Henry  C.  Wayne, 

Adjutant  a7id  Inspector  General  of  Georgia: 

Sir  : As  the  term  of  service  of  the  Georgia  State  troops  is  about  to 
expire,  I would  be  glad  to  know  the  views  of  his  excellency  the  gov- 
ernor in  regard  to  that  force,  now  forming  so  large  and  important  a 
part  of  the  army  intended  for  the  defense  of  Savannah  and  Georgia. 

If  it  is  the  intention  of  the  State  government  to  continue  the  present 
or  an  equivalent  force  in  service,  it  may  be  unnecessary  for  the  Confed- 
erate Government  to  furnish  more  regiments.  It  is  very  desirable  that 
this  matter  be  determined  without  delay,  as  the  safety  of  the  city  may 
depend  upon  prompt  action. 


432  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XV. 

I shall  defer  communication  with  the  War  Department  on  the  subject, 
awaiting  his  excellency's  reply, 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  &c., 

No.  5.  S Focotaligo,  S.  0.,  April  9,  1862. 

I.  The  undersigned  having  been  officially  notified  from  the  Adjutant 
and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  Richmond,  that  East  and  Middle  Florida 
as  far  west  as  the  Ghoctawhatchie  River  is  included  within  his  command, 
hereby  assumes  command  thereof.  All  reports  and  returns  will  be  made 
accordingly. 

II.  Maj.  A.  L.  Long,  P.  A.  C.  S.,  in  addition  to  his  duties  as  chief  of 
ordnance,  is  assigned  to  those  of  chief  of  artillery  of  the  department. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton: 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  81.  ( Richmond,  Va.,  April  9,  1862. 

*****  * * 

XX.  Eastern  and  Middle  Florida  will  hereafter  constitute  a separate 
department,  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan. 

* * * * * # * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Richmond,  April  10,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton: 

Beauregard  is  pressed  for  troops.  Send,  if  possible,  Donelson’s  bri- 
gade of  two  regiments  to  Corinth.  If  Mississippi  Valley  is  lost  Atlantic 
States  will  be  ruined. 

Very  respectfully, 

R.  E.  LEE. 


POCOTALIGO,  S.  C.,  April  10,  1862 — 6.30  p.  m. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Richmond,  Ya. : 

Your  telegram  just  received.  I consider  it  an  order.  Donelson’s  bri- 
gade— two  Tennessee  regiments,  aggregate  1,572 — will  move  to  Corinth 
as  soon  as  transportation  can  be  got  ready.  The  enemy  opened  fire  at  8 
o’clock  this  morning  from  his  land  batteries  on  Fort  Pulaski.  Firing 
continuous.  The  Georgia  State  troops  are  being  fast  discharged.  I shall 
order  down  the  rest  of  the  troops  from  Georgetown,  S.  C. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XV.] 


433 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Columbia,  April  10,  18G2. 

Major-General  Pemberton: 

The  President  telegraphs  me  to  send  immediately  troops  to  Beaure- 
gard. I have  none,  but  I telegraphed  Hii)ley  to  send  Colonel  Dunovant’s, 
Manigault’s,  and  Marshall’s,  as  best  prepared,  from  Charleston.  Please 
let  me  know.  Let  Eipley  have  your  orders. 

Very  respectfully, 

F.  W.  PICICENS. 


POCOTALIGO,  April  10, 18G2. 

Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Milledgeville^  Ga.: 

Two  regiments  have  been  ordered  from  here  to  Tennessee.  I am  not 
aware  that  they  are  to  be  replaced  by  Confederate  troops. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTONT, 
Major-  General,  Commanding, 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept.  S.  Carolina,  Georgia,  &c., 

N'o.  20.  1 Pocotaligo,  April  10,  18G2. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith,  P.  A.  C.  S.,  having  reported  at  these  head- 
quarters, in  obedience  to  orders  from  the  War  Department,  is  assigned 
to  duty  in  the  Military  District  of  Georgia,  and  will  report  to  Brigadier- 
General  Lawton,  commanding  at  Savannah,  Ga. 

******* 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  D.  S.  Donelson,  commanding  Fifth  Military  District, 
with  the  Eighth  and  Sixteenth  Eegiments  of  Tennessee  Volunteers,  will 
proceed  with  as  little  delay  as  possible  and  report  to  General  Beaure- 
gard at  Corinth,  Miss.,  for  duty. 

******* 

V.  Col.  P.  H.  Colquitt,  commanding  Forty-sixth  Eegiment  Georgia 
Volunteers,  is  assigned  to  the  temporary  command  of  the  Fifth  Military 
District,  which  extends  from  Pocotaligo  Eiver  to  Ocella  Creek. 
******** 

X.  Maj.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg  will  take  immediate  measures  to  have 
Chapman’s  fort,  on  Ashepoo  Eiver,  dismantled,  dismounting  the  guns, 
having  at  hand  heavy  logs  to  i^lace  in  position  as  each  gun  shall  be  dis- 
mounted, and  taking  care  that  no  more  guns  be  displaced  at  a time  than 
can  be  immediately  removed.  You  will  forward  the  guns  immediately 
to  Green  Pond,  S.  C.,  for  transportation  to  Savannah. 

Colonel  Graham  will  take  immediate  measures  to  move  all  troops  and 
public  stores  under  his  command  from  Georgetown  to  Charleston. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjuta7it-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond,  Va.,  April  11, 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Bexmrtment  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia : 
General:  General  Lee,  commanding,  directs  me  to  inform  you  that 
he  has  notified  General  Beauregard  by  telegraph  that  the  Tennessee 
28  R R VOL  VI 


434  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.  XV. 

brigade,  the  two  South  Carolina  regiments,  and  the  two  regiments  of 
Georgia  State  troops  would  be  sent  from  your  department  to  re-enforce 
him  temporarily,  and  that  they  must  be  returned  to  you  as  soon  as  their 
services  can  be  dispensed  with. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  WASHINGTOI^, 

Major ^ and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Columbia,  April  11, 18G2. 

General  Pemberton: 

Telegraph  received.  Eipley  has  two  raw  regiments  and  also  twelve 
new  Charleston  companies,  just  mustered  in  and  well  armed.  I hope, 
therefore,  it  is  not  necessary  to  withdraw  the  troops  from  Georgetown, 
for  it  is  the  only  protection  they  can  have,  even  for  domestic  police. 

Colonel  Manigault^s  Georgetown  regiment  is  one  of  the to  send 

to  Corinth,  together  with  the  regulars. 

Very  respectfully, 

P.  M,  PICKENS. 


Headquarters  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  &c., 

Pocotaligo,  April  11,  1862. 

General  N.  G.  Evans, 

Commanding  Third  Military  District : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say 
to  you  that  he  desires  you  to  look  rather  to  the  approach  of  the  enemy 
by  the  Willstown  road  than  to  the  holding  of  the  point  of  your  line..  You 
will  therefore  make  such  disposition  of  the  troops  of  your  district  as 
will  enable  you  to  concentrate  towards  Eantowles  Bridge,  to  resist  the 
enemy  should  he  approach  in  that  direction.  The  general  also  suggests 
the  immediate  withdrawal  of  all  batteries  not  absolutely  necessary  to 
the  i)rotection  of  Charleston.  We  need  all  the  guns  we  can  obtain  for 
the  defense  of  our  extensive  interior  lines  of  intrenchments.  Two  regi- 
ments have  been  ordered  to  Tennessee  from  General  Eipley^s  command 
and  two  from  the  Fifth  Military  District.  It  becomes  therefore  more 
necessary  for  you  to  have  your  forces  in  hand  and  aid  General  Eipley  if 
called  upon. 

Yery  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  &c., 

PocotaligOj  April  11,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District: 

General  : 1 am  instructed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  say  to 
you  that  you  will  immediately  assume  command  of  what  is  at  this  time 
and  under  existing  order  known  as  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Military  Dis- 
tricts, that  is,  the  old  Fourth  Military  District,  recently  commanded  by 
himself. 

The  general  goes  to  Savannah  early  in  the  morning  and  will  remain 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


Chap.  XV.] 


435 


for  several  days.  The  order  assigning  Colonel  Colquitt  will  be  at  once 
countermanded. 

I am,  general,  &c., 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  &c., 

Focotaligoy  April  11,  18G2. 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District  8.  G. : 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  inform 
you  that  your  military  district  is  extended  as  far  west  as  the  Coosaw- 
hatchie  Eiver,  including  the  station  at  Coosawhatchie,  from  and  below 
Coosawhatchie  Station,  bounded  by  the  east  bank  of  the  Coosawhatchie 
Eiver. 

The  major-general  commanding  would  suggest  that  you  send  a com- 
pany of  cavalry  under  your  command  to  take  the  place  of  the  company 
of  Tennessee  volunteers  about  to  be  removed,  and  also  that,  as  soon  as 
the  guns  on  the  Ashepoo  Eiver  are  removed,  the  company  of  German 
artillery  now  at  Chapman’s  fort  be  divided  into  three  detachments,  one 
to  serve  the  guns  at  Combahee  Ferry,  the  second  to  serve  the  carron- 
ades  at  Stony  Creek  work,  and  the  third  to  man  the  heavy  guns  at 
Bee  Creek  battery,  each  detachment  to  be  under  the  command  of  a com- 
missioned officer ; the  captain  to  be  stationed  at  such  point  as  you  in 
your  judgment  may  designate. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

E.  W.  MEMMmGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  April  11,  1862. 

Governor  Pickens, 

Columbia^  8.  G.: 

Thank  you  for  your  prompt  attention  to  my  request.  General  Pem- 
berton has  sent  two  of  your  regiments  and  the  two  from  Tennessee.  I 
am  not  willing  to  tax  you  further. 

JEFFEESOI^  DAVIS. 


CHAPTER  XTI 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  FLORIDA,  SOUTHERN  ALA- 
BAMA, SOUTHERN  MISSISSIPPI,  AND  LOUISIANA. 


September  1,  1861-May  12,  1862. 


STJMIM^RY  OF  THE  EVENTS. 

Sept.  2, 1861. — Destruction  of  United  States  dry-dock  at  Pensacola,  Fla. 

14. 1861.  — Descent  on  Pensacola  navy-yard  by  boats  from  U.  S.  squadron. 

Oct.  1, 1861. — The  Department  of  New  England  constituted,  under  command  of 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  A.^ 

7.1861.  — Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg’s  command  extended  over  the  coast  and 

State  of  Alabama. 

9. 1861.  — Action  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla. 

14. 1861.  — The  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida  constituted,  under 

command  of  Major-General  Bragg,  C.  S.  Army. 

^ 18, 1861. — Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  C.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Maj.  Gen. 
David  E.  Twiggs  in  command  of  Department  No.  1. 

Nov.  22-23, 1861. — Bombardment  of  tbe  Confederate  lines  about  Pensacola,  Fla. 

27. 1861.  — The  Skip  Island  Expedition  sails  from  Hampton  Roads,  Va. 

Dec.  3, 1861. — Ship  Island,  Miss.,  occupied  by  Union  forces. 

12. 1861.  — The  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida  extended  to  em- 

brace Pascagoula  Bay  and  that  portion  of  Mississippi  east  of  the 
Pascagoula  River. 

Jan.  1, 1862. — Bombardment  of  Forts  McRee  and  Barrancas,  Pensacola  Harbor. 

20. 1862.  — Contest  over  the  British  schooner  An dracita  on  the  coast  of  Alabama. 

27.1862.  — Brig.  Gen.  Jones  M.  Withers,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of 

the  Army  of  Mobile. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of  the 
Army  of  Pensacola. 

Feb.  22, 1862. — Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold,  U.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Col.  Harvey 
Brown,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  in  command  of  the  Department  of 
Florida. 

23. 1862.  — The  Department  of  the  Gulf  constituted,  under  command  of  Maj. 

Gen.  Benjaaiin  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Army. 


* This  department  was  created  in  connection  with  the  organization  of  the  Gulf 
Expedition  and  was  discontinued  February  20,  1862. 

436 

/ 


Chap.  XVI.1  DESCENT  ON  NAVY  YARD  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA. 


437 


Feb.  28,  1862. — Brig,  Gen.  Samuel  Jones,  C.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Major-General 

Bragg  in  command  of  tbe  Department  of  Alabama  and  West 
Florida.* 

March  8,  1862. — Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones,  Twenty-seventh  Mississippi  Infantry,  as- 
signed to  command  at  Pensacola. 

15,  1862. — The  Department  of  Florida  merged  into  the  Department  of  the 
South,  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding. 

20,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 
the  Department  of  the  Gulf. 

27-31,  1862. — ^Reconnaissance  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla. 

April  3-  4,  1862. — Expedition  from  Ship  Island  to  Biloxi  and  Pass  Christian,  Miss. 

7,  1862.— Affair  at  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,HFla. 

18-28,  1862. — Bombardment  and  capture  of  Forts  Jachson  and  Saint  Philip,  La. 
25,  1862. — New  Orleans,  La.,  captured  by  the  U.  S.  Navy. 

27,  1862. — Fort  Quitman,  La.,  abandoned  by  the  Confederate  forces. 

Forts  Livingston,  Pike,  and  Wood,  La.,  recaptured  by  Union 
forces. 

28,  1862. — Surrender  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  La. 

28,  1862. — Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of 
the  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida. 

May  1,  1862. — ^New  Orleans,  La.,  occupied  by  the  Union  forces. 

9-12,  1862. — Evacuation  of  Pensacola,  Fla.,  by  the  Confederates,  and  its  occu- 
pation by  the  Union  forces. 

SEPTEMBER  14,  1861. — Descent  on  ITavy-Yard  at  Pensacola,  Fla. 

REFORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Harvey  Brown,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  C.  S.  Army. 

1^0.  1. 

Report  of  Col,  Harvey  Brown^  Fifth  If.  S.  Artillery, 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  PickenSy  September  14,  1861. 

Colonel  : A naval  boat  expedition,  under  command  of  Lieutenant 
[John  H.]  Eussell,  of  the  flag-ship  Colorado,  this  morning,  at  2 o’clock, 
burned  the  piratical  schooner  Judah  and  spiked  the  gun  of  the  only 
battery  in  the  navy-yard.  The  schooner  was  armed  with  five  guns,  and 
was  lying  in  the  slip  in  front  of  the  battery,  evidently  awaiting  an  oppor- 
tunity to  go  to  sea.  We  lost  three  killed  (one  of  them  instantly,  by  one 
of  our  own  party),  four  badly  and  three  or  four  slightly  wounded,  among 
the  latter  Lieutenants  Eussell  and  [F.  B.]  Blake,  [Capt.  E.  McD.]  Eey- 
nolds,  of  the  Marines,  and  a midshipman.  The  whole  affair  was  well  con- 
ceived, well  managed,  and  entirely  successful. 

I took  it  for  granted  it  would  cause  the  opening  of  the  rebel  fire  on 
this  fort,  but  until  the  present  time  no  demonstration  has  been  made. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAEYEY  BEOWIT, 
Colonelj  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

*On  March  4 Major-General  Bragg,  at  Jackson,  Tenn.,  issued  an  order  resuming 
command  of  the  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida,  but  that  order  appears 
to  have  been  inoperative. 


438  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg.,  G.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Troops  of  the  Confederate  States, 

Near  Bensacolay  Fla.y  SejAemher  16,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  Depart- 
ment, that  a row-boat,  with  nine  enlisted  men  of  marines,  sent  on  iiatrol 
duty  on  the  night  of  the  8th  instant  in  the  harbor,  failed  to  return.  The 
crew  has  no  doubt  deserted  to  the  enemy.  It  was  a gross  neglect  on 
the  part  of  the  officer  in  charge  of  this  service  in  not  sending  an  officer 
in  command  on  such  a duty. 

On  the  night  of  the  13th  a boat  expedition  of  three  ships^  launches,  . 
heavily  armed,  made  an  attack  on  a i)oint  at  the  navy-yard  where  the 
boats  of  our  harbor  police  were  moored,  and  succeeded  in  setting  fire 
to  and  destroying  a small  armed  vessel  in  our  service.  Our  guards 
were  not  surprised,  but  by  some  strange  neglect,  which  is  now  under 
investigationj  permitted  the  success  of  this  daring  exploit,  led,  no  doubt, 
by  our  deserters.  I hope  to  fix  the  responsibility  and  make  an  examxile 
of  the  guilty  parties. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Brigadier- Generaly  Commanding. 

Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

Richmondy  Va. 


OCTOBER  9,  1861. — Action  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Col.  Harvey  Brown,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Department  of 
Florida. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Zealous  B.  Tower,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

No.  3. — Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  4. — Col.  William  Wilson,  Sixth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  5.— Capt.  John  McL.  Hildt,  Third  U.  S.  Infantry. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  Chauncey  B.  Reese,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

No.  7. — Capt.  James  M.  Robertson,  Second  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  8. — Capt.  Richard  C.  Duryea,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  9. — Lieut.  Alexander  N.  Shipley,  Third  U.  S.  Infantry. 

No.  10. — Capt.  Loomis  L.  Langdon,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  11. — Lieut.  Francis  W.  Seeley,  Fourth  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  12. — Lieut.  Richard  H.  Jackson,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  13. — Congratulatory  orders  from  Major-General  McClellan,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  14.— rMaj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Pensacola,  with  con- 
gratulatory orders. 

No.  15. — Brig.  Gen.  Richard  H.  Anderson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Col.  Sarvey  Brouniy  Fifth  U.  S.  Artilleryy  commanding  De- 
partment of  Florida. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  FiclcenSy  October  9,  1861. 

Colonel  : The  enemy,  1,200  or  1,500  strong,  landed  on  this  island 
this  morning,  about  3 o’clock,  some  3J  or  4 miles  from  the  fort.  They 


Chap.  XVI.] 


ACTION  ON  SANTA  EOSA  ISLAND,  FLA. 


439 


marched  down  the  island  in  tliree  columns,  and  attacl^ed  and  partially 
burned  the  camp  of  the  Sixth  New  York  Volunteers.  They  were 
promptly  met  and  driven  by  the  regulars  of  the  fort,  and  a small  number 
of  Zouaves,  under  Major  Arnold,  of  the  First  Artillery,  to  their  place  of 
landing,  and  left  the  island  under  a well-directed  and  deliberate  fire  of 
our  musketry,  within  goodrange,  which  must  have  done  great  execution, 
their  boats  being  densely  crowded.  Their  departure  w’^as  hailed  with 
three  heavy  cheers  from  our  gallant  soldiers,  which  were  received  with 
the  most  solemn  silence.  We  have  about  a dozen  of  their  dead  j some 
30  prisoners,  including  5 officers.  Our  loss  is,  of  regulars,  5 killed, 
about  15  wounded,  and  8 missing,  including  1 officer.  Major  Vogdes, 
who  was  taken  prisoner  early  in  the  action  ; of  the  volunteers,  7 killed, 
8 or  9 wounded,  and  10  missing.  I will  make  a detailed  report  so  soon 
as  I can  receive  those  of  Major  Arnold  and  the  officers  engaged. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARVEY  BROWN, 

Colonel^  Commanding, 

Col.  E.  H.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Washington^  D,  C. 


Headquarters  Departiment  of  Florida, 

Fort  Picicens,  October  11,  1861. 

Colonel  : I briefly  reported  to  you  on  the  9th  instant  that  the  rebels 
had  landed  on  this  island,  partially  destroyed  the  camp  of  the  Sixth 
Regiment  New  York  Volunteers,  and  been  driven  off  by  our  troops.  I 
now  report  in  more  detail  the  events  of  the  attack. 

For  the  better  understanding  of  the  several  movements  it  may  be 
well  to  state  that  the  enemy  landed  about  4 miles  from  this  fort, 
(the  place  maybe  recognized  on  the  map  by  three  ponds  and  a mound); 
that  the  island  there  is  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  wide;  that  a short 
distance  below  it  narrows  to  some  200  hundred  yards,  then  widens  again, 
and  at  the  camp  the  distance  across  is  about  five-eighths  of  a mile ; that 
a succession  of  three  or  four  sand  ridges  run  on  the  sea-side  iiarallel  to 
the  coast  along  the  island,  and  low,  swampy  ground,  interspersed  with 
sand  hillocks,  some  bushes,  and  a few  trees,  extends  along  the  harbor 
side,  both  shores  being  sandy  beach.  Wilson’s  camp  is  near  the  sea- 
coast  and  a short  mile  from  the  fort.  The  two  batteries  spoken  of  in  his 
report,  and  to  which  he  retreated.  Batteries  Lincoln  and  Totten,  are, 
the  first  on  the  harbor,  and  the  other  on  the  Gulf  side,  about  400  yards 
from  Fort  Pickens. 

About  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  instant  I was  awakened 
by  the  officer  of  the  day,  who  reported  that  a picket  driven  in  had 
reported  the  landing  of  60  men  on  the  point.  Having  little  confidence  in 
the  correctness  of  this  report  I directed  that  no  alarm  should  be  made, 
and  shortly  after  he  reported  that  the  alarm  was  false.  About  3.30 
o’clock  he  again  reported  that  volleys  of  musketry  were  heard  at  the 
camp  of  the  Sixth  New  York  Volunteers.  I immediately  ordered  the 
roll  to  be  beaten.  Major  Vogdes  to  take  two  companies  and  proceed  to 
the  spot,  and  Major  Arnold  to  man  the  guns  on  the  ramparts  on  that 
face.  About  half  an  hour  after  this  time  the  firing  was  heavy  and  the 
light  of  the  burning  camp  seen,  and  I sent  a staff’  officer  to  commu- 
nicate with  Major  Vogdes,  who  returned  very  soon,  and  said  that  he 
had  fallen  in  with  a large  body  of  the  enemy  on  the  inside  shore,  and 
could  not  find  the  major.  I immediately  ordered  Major  Arnold  to  pro- 


440  OPEEATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

ceed  to  support  Major  Yogdes  with  two  compauies,  and  at  the  same 
time  sent  an  order  to  Colonel  Wilson  to  advance  and  attack  the  enemy. 
I also  dispatched  a staff  officer,  on  board  the  steamer  McClellan,  with 
orders  for  him  to  take  position  opposite  the  landing  place  and  open  on 
the  enemy ; unfortunately  at  the  same  time  directing  him  to  go  to  the 
Potomac,  lying  near,  and  ask  for  some  men  to  assist  him  in  case  land- 
ing was  necessary.  Captain  Powell  directed  him  to  tow  his  ship  to  the 
scene  of  action,  which  so  delayed  him  that  he  did  not  arrive  until  after 
the  enemy  had  vacated.  Captain  Powell  acted  from  the  best  motives, 
and  under  ordinary  circumstances  from  correct  jminciples,  but  the  result 
was  unfortunate,  as  the  McClellan  could  have  driven  the  rebel  steamer 
away,  and  we  must  have  made  prisoners  of  most  of  the  invaders. 

At  the  request  of  Major  Arnold,  late  in  the  morniDg  I sent  forward  a 
light  field  gun,  which,  however,  did  not  reach  until  the  affair  was  over. 

As  I propose  only  briefly  to  allude  to  the  volunteers,  I respectfully 
refer  you  to  the  official  report,  marked  A [No.  4J,  of  the  colonel  of  tbe 
regiment.  The  picket  of  this  regiment  and  guards  sustained  its  princi- 
I)al  if  not  entire  loss,  and  behaved  well.  Captain  Dobie’s  company,  on 
duty  with  the  regulars,  did  good  service,  and  the  captain  is  spoken  of 
by  Major  Arnold  in  terms  of  high  approbation.  He  had  2 men  killed. 
Captain  Bailey ^s  company  was  at  a battery,  and  not  called  out.  He 
was  performiug  his  appropriate  duty  during  the  fight.  Major  Yogdes, 
with  Companies  A,  First  Artillery,  and  E,  Third  Infantry,  proceeded 
beyond  the  Spanish  fort,  about  a mile  from  the  fort,  when  from  the 
obscurity  of  the  night  he  found  himself  and  command  completely  inter- 
mingled with  the  enemy.  He  was  immediately  recognized  and  made 
prisoner,  the  command  devolving  on  Captain  Hildt,  of  the  Third  In- 
fantry, who  disengaged  his  command  from  their  perilous  position,  and 
opened  a heavy  fire  on  the  enemy,  and  finally,  with  great., gallantry, 
forced  them  to  retreat  (he  being  ably  supported  by  Lieutenant  Seeley, 
my  assistant  adjutant-general,  who  volunteered  for  the  occasion),  with 
a loss  of  11  killed.  Major  Arnold  at  this  moment  came  np  and,  the 
enemy  retreating,  followed  on.  During  this  time  Major  Tower  and 
Lieutenant  Jackson,  who  I had  successively  sent  to  push  forward  the 
Zouaves,  succeeded  in  get; in g some  collected,  and  Colonel  Wilson  also 
advanced,  the  enemy  precipitately  retreating.  Major  Arnold,  with 
Captain  Eobertson’s  and  Lieutenant  Shipley^s  companies,  promptly 
followed,  and  attacked  as  they  were  embarking,  the  other  companies 
coming  up  successively.  Captain  Eobertson  opened  a heavy  fire  at 
short  musket  range  on  the  crowded  masses,  and  Lieutenant  Shipley 
some  fifteen  minutes  later  joined  him,  and  their  fire  must  have  been 
very  effective.  This  was  continued  as  long  as  they  were  within  range. 
When  they  had  got  beyond  it  the  gallant  major  ordered  them  to  cease 
firing  and  to  give  them  three  cheers,  to  which  no  response  was  made. 
During  the  time  of  this  occurrence  Major  Tower  came  up  with  two  small 
companies  of  Zouaves,  and  subsequently  Colonel  YTlson  with  a portion 
of  his  regiment.  When  it  is  considered  that  less  than  200  regulars,  with 
some  50  volunteers,  pursued  five  times  their  number  4 miles  and 
expelled  them  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  island  they  had  desecrated, 
it  will,  I trust,  be  considered  an  evidence  of  their  having  gallantly  per- 
formed their  duty.  The  plan  of  attack  of  the  enemy  was  judicious,  and, 
if  executed  with  ordinary  ability,  might  have  been  attended  with  serious 
loss ; but  he  failed  in  all,  save  the  burning  one-half  of  the  tents  of  the 
Sixth  Eegiment,  which,  being  covered  with  brushes,  was  very  combus- 
tible, and  in  rifling  the  trunks  of  the  officers.  He  did  not  reach  within 
500  yards  of  either  of  the  batteries  the  guns  of  which  he  was  to  spike, 


Chap.  XVI.] 


ACTION  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA. 


441 


Dor  within  a mile  of  the  fort  he  was  to  enter  pell-mell  with  the  fugitives 
retreating  before  his  victorious  arms.  1 have  now  in  my  i)ossession 
nine  spikes,  taken  from  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  designed  for  our  guns. 

Our  loss  is,  of  regulars,  4 killed,  20  wounded  (most  very  slightly), 
and  8 missing,  among  whom  is  Major  Vogdes;  of  the  Sixth  Eegiment 
New  York  Volunteers,  10  killed,  9 wounded,  and  IG  missing.  The 
enemy  lost,  as  known  to  us,  14  killed,  including  1 captain  ; 7 wounded, 
including  1 lieutenant  (2  since  dead),  and  5 officers  and  22  enlisted 
men  prisoners,  and  as  he  was  known  to  have  carried  off  some  of  his 
dead  and  probably  most  of  his  wounded,  those  in  our  hands  being  all 
severely  so  and  unable  to  be  removed,  and  as  the  heaviest  loss  is  sup- 
posed to  have  been  in  the  boats  at  the  re-embarkation,  it  was  probably 
three  times  as  great  in  killed  and  wounded  as  1 have  named. 

I close  with  the  agreeable  duty  of  naming  to  you  the  officers  engaged 
who  so  faithfully  performed  their  duty.  1 mention  Major  Vogdes  first, 
who,  unfortunately,  was  taken  prisoner  before  a gun  on  our  i)art  was 
fired,  to  say  that,  as  second  in  command  and  my  executive  officer,  he 
has  efficiently  and  industriously  performed  his  duty  during  the  whole 
time  of  my  command,  and  his  services  have  been  very  valuable. 

Major  Arnold,  who  succeeded  to  the  command  after  the  capture  of 
his  superior,  conducted  the  aff’air  with  great  gallantry,  prudence,  and 
ability.  He  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  Captains  Eobertson  and 
Hildt  and  Lieutenants  Shipley  and  Seeley,  and  indeed  of  all  the  others 
whose  names  1 give:  Major  Tower  and  Lieutenant  Eeese,  of  the  Engi- 
neers j Lieutenants  Duryea,  Langdon,  Jackson,  and  Taylor,  U.  S. 
Artiller3",  and  Captain  Dobie,  of  the  New  York  Volunteers;  and  it 
gives  me  great  pleasure  to  append  the  names  of  non-commissioned 
officers  and  privates  named  by  their  company  commanders  for  distin- 
guished good  conduct,  and  to  recommend  them  to  the  favorable  notice 
of  the  Government. 

The  following  are  the  companies  of  Major  Vogdes’  and  Arnold’s  com- 
mand who  participated  in  the  battle,  and  (with  a very  few  exceptions 
of  individuals)  to  whom  the  greatest  praise  is  due : Company  A,  First 
Artillery;  H,  Second  Artillery,  and  Companies  C and  E,  Third  Infantry. 

1 estimate  the  force  of  the  enemy  at  1,200  or  1,500,  having  closely 
observed  them  through  a fine  telescope  as  they  retreated.  There  were 
two  layge  steamers  and  a barge  of  equal  size  and  five  or  six  launches 
all  crowded  with  troops,  and  the  almost  unanimous  estimate  of  the  offi- 
cers engaged  is  1,500,  from  personal  observation  close  by. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARVEY  BROWN, 
Colonel^  Commanding, 

Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Washington^  D,  C. 

P.  S. — I have  just  seen  the  Pensacola  xjaper,  which  gives  their  loss  as 
follows : Killed,  21 ; wounded,  38 ; prisoners,  22,  which  probably  is  not 
one-fourth  of  the  actual  loss.  General  Anderson  is  severely  wounded. 

[Inclosure.] 

Table  of  distances  from  Fort  Ficlcens  to  tvhere  the  rebels  landed  on  the 

morning  of  the  Wi  of  October^  18G1,  to  the  intermediate  points,  by  actual 

measurement,  made  October  23,  1861. 

Yards. 


From  Fort  Pickens  to  Battery  Cameron 580 

Battery  Lincoln 803 

Spanish  Fort 2,612 


442  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


Yards. 

From  the  first  place  of  fighting,  where  Major  Vogdes  was  captured .3,3:31 

The  first  pine  trees 4, 043 

Long  Point  Beach 6, 101 

Where  we  first  fired  on  the  steamers , 6, 832 

Where  the  rebels  landed,  and  where  they  were  attacked  by  Major  Arnold, 

with  Captain  Robertson’s  and  Lieutenant  Shiifiey’s  companies 7,306 

or  4 miles  266  yards. 

HAEYEY  BROWN-, 
Colonel^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pickens^  October  12,  1801. 

General  : lu  my  official  report  of  the  affair  of  the  9th  instant  it  will 
be  perceived  that  I briefly  notice  the  New  York  volunteers.  I did  so 
because  the  regiment  did  not  behave  well  on  the  occasion,  and  because 
I think  that,  if  properly  officered,  its  conduct  would  have  been  different. 
I desired  to  spare  it  the  stigma  of  cowardice,  which  I should  have  been 
compelled  to  inflict.  The  material  of  the  rank  and  file  is  very  good, 
and  in  the  hands  of  even  respectably  intelligent  officers  might  be  made 
efficient  j but  as  a body,  and  with  very  few  exceptions,  the  officers  are 
in  every  respect  unfit  for  officers,  and  incapable  of  performing  their 
appropriate  duties,  and  the  enlisted  men  consequently  can  have  but 
little  respect  for  or  confidence  in  tl^em.  If  it  can  legally  be  done,  I 
would  recommend  the  transfer  to  other  regiments  of  the  few  efficient 
officers,  the  disbandment  of  the  others,  and  the  transfer  of  the  enlisted 
men  to  the  regular  companies  at  this  post.  By  so  doing  the  regiment 
can  in  one  month  be  made  efficient,  and  I would  with  confidence  lead 
them  into  battle,  which  I should  now  be  very  sorry  to  do. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARVEY  BROWN, 

Colonel j Commanding, 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant-General^  Washington  City^  J),  C, 


Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  PiehenSj  October  17,  1861. 

Colonel  : I had  occasion  yesterday  to  send  Lieutenant  Seeley,  my 
assistant  adjutant- general,  with  a flag  to  the  other  side.  While  there 
he  saw  a rebel  newspaper,  containing  an  article  on  the  action  of  the 
9th  instant,  in  which  was  this  paragraph : 

It  is  now  certain  tbat  175  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  will  more  than  cover  our 
entire  loss,  while  250  will  probably  barely  cover  tbat  of  the  Federalists. 

This  shows  that  in  estimating  in  my  official  report  their  loss  at  three 
times  the  number  left  on  the  island,  viz : 1 captain,  13  enlisted  men 
killed,  1 lieutenant,  6 enlisted  men  wounded,  and  5 officers  and  22  en- 
listed men  prisoners,  I underestimated  their  actual  loss  according  to 
their  own  acknoAvledgment,  and  we  may  safely  infer  from  past  expe- 
rience that  only  half  the  truth  is  here  told.  Their  loss,  therefore,  is 
nearly  equal  to  the  whole  number  of  troops  actually  inflicting  it,  and 
this  without  attaining  one  single  object  proposed  by  the  expedition, 
except  the  partial  burning  of  the  camp  of  the  Sixth  Regiment  New 
York  Volunteers  and  the  robbing  its  officers.  They  did  not  destroy  a 
single  article  of  quartermaster’s  or  commissary  stores  j they  did  not 


Chap.  XVI.]  ACTION  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA.  443 

destroy  one-lialf  of  tlie  teots  of  the  volunteers ; they  did  not  spike  a 
single  gun,  nor  do  any  other  injury  whatever,  except  the  burning  of  30 
tents  and  the  capture  of  some  dozen  muskets,  and  of  whicli  we  have 
of  theirs  more  than  two  for  one.  Our  whole  casualties  are,  as  stated  in 
my  official  report,  4 regulars  and  9 volunteers  killed,  20  regulars  and 
7 volunteers  wounded,  and  10  regulars  and  11  volunteers  missing,  and 
it  gives  me  very  great  pleasure  to  state  that  Surgeon  Campbell  reports 
all  our  wounded  as  doing  well,  and  he  thinks  we  will  not  lose  a man. 
Their  actual  number  on  the  island,  by  their  own  acknowledgment,  was 
1,500  men. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAEVEY  BKOWX, 
Colonel^  Commanding, 

Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Generalj  Washington^  D,  C, 


Headquarters  Departivient  of  Florida, 

Fort  Ficlcens,  October  22,  18G1. 

Colonel  : I desire  to  correct  an  omission  in  my  official  report.  Capt. 
Henry  L.  Hoelzle,  of  the  Sixth  Kew  York  Eegiment  Volunteers,  joined 
Major  Arnold  with  10  men  of  his  company  and  behaved  gallantly.  Lieut. 
Moore  Hanham,  of  the  same  regiment,  commanded  the  picket  guard, 
and  behaved  with  courage  and  firmness  under  a heavy  fire,  in  which 
most  of  his  sentinels  were  killed  or  wounded. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAEVEY  BEOWN, 
Colonel,  Commanding, 

Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjuta^it- General,  Washington,  D.  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj,  Zealous  B,  Tower,  TJ.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  October  15,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  what  information  I can  collect  in 
reference  to  the  forces  opposite  and  their  means  of  attack.  The  most 
rehable  authority  gives  General  Bragg’s  forces  on  the  11th  October  as 
7,000  men.  It  is  also  stated  that  two  regiments  some  weeks  since  were 
ordered  North,  but  that  General  Bragg  had  refused  to  let  them  go,  and 
had  asked  for  re-enforcements.  He  has  eighteen  field  pieces,  six  of 
which  are  rifled.  A party  at  that  time  (October  11)  were  at  Pensacola, 
who  had  come  over  to  rifle  guns. 

Between  twenty  and  thirty  10-inch  columbiads  have  been  brought  by 
railroad  to  Pensacola.  The  person  describing  them  (while  looking  at 
our  pieces  of  the  same  cahber)  said  that  they  were  straight  at  the  muz- 
zle and  were  heavier  and  shorter  behind  the  trunnions,  and  that  they 
were  made  at  Eichmond.  He  also  informed  me  that  as  many  as  eight 
10-inch  sea-coast  mortars  had  come  by  railroad  to  Pensacola. 

You  will  perceive  that  the  armament  the  enemy  received,  together 
with  that  found  at  the  works,  is  heavier  than  ours.  I have  not  heard 
of  other  guns,  excepting  one  Dahlgren  j but  should  any  heavier  guns  be 
cast,  the  walls  of  this  fort  will  hardly  be  able  to  stand  them  even  at 


444  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

2,300,  2,400,  and  2,500  yards.  Twenty  10-incli  guns  of  the  new  pattern, 
firing  at  miles,  with  solid  shot,  constantlj-  at  one  part  of  this  old  work 
of  very  poor  masonry,  may  possibly  shake  the  walls.  Our  forces  are 
small  in  number.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  naval  steamers  assist 
us  here,  otherwise  the  island  may  be  seized  at  any  time  and  the  siege 
commenced.  The  enemy  has  large  quantities  of  shells  and  mortars. 
Whether  it  will  be  his  policy  to  besiege  us  or  to  try  to  crush  us  with 
curvated  fire,  and  by  heavy  guns  and  rifled  cannon  to  knock  down  a 
portion  of  our  work,  I cannot  foresee.  The  serious  obstacle  to  such 
means  on  his  part  will  be  the  great  expenditure  of  powder.  Navy  ships, 
with  their  large  crews,  of  course  would  be  a great  security  and  assist- 
ance to  us.  Gunboats  are  wanted  if  the  position  opposite  is  to  be 
attacked.  The  late  unfortunate  affiiir  at  the  head  of  the  Mississippi 
Passes  will  call  away  the  Niagara  and  leave  the  Colorado  here  for  the 
present. 

I have  given  Captain  Kurtz  a description  of  the  night  attack  made 
by  the  secession  forces  upon  Wilson’s  camp  on  the  night  of  the  8th  and 
9th  October.  I have  no  doubt  that  the  enemy  were  much  disappointed 
mth  the  results.  The  Zouaves  (excepting  the  pickets)  proved  of  little 
account.  They  are  badly  commanded.  If  incorporated  with  the  regu- 
lars they  might  be  made  effective.  Contrary  to  the  reports  in  the 
Southern  papers,  the  enemy  did  not  spike  one  gun  or  burn  a store- 
house. They  destroyed  about  three-fourths  of  the  tents  of  five  compa- 
nies of  Zouaves  and  robbed  some  of  the  officers’  trunks.  They  ought 
to  have  been  more  severely  punished  for  coming  with  1,000  men  within 
a mile  of  our  work,  but  in  the  confusion  of  a night  attack  matters  do  not 
always  get  on  well. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  TOWER, 

Major  of  Engineers, 

Bvt.  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  Engmeer,  Washington^  ID,  G, 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold,  First  U.  S,  Artillery, 

Fort  Pickens,  El  a.,  Octoler  10,  1861. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  the  directions  of  the  colonel  commanding, 
I have  the  honor  to  report  the  operations  of  the  troops  under  my  com- 
mand which  yesterday  aided  in  driving  the  rebel  force  of  not  less  than 
1,000  men,  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  Richard  H.  Anderson,  discom- 
fited and  in  confusion,  from  the  island  of  Santa  Rosa. 

I was  ordered  by  the  colonel  commanding,  at  5 o’clock  a.  m.,  October 
9,  to  take  command  of  two  companies  of  regulars.  Captain  Robertson, 
Company  H,  Second  Artillery,  and  Lieutenant  Shipley,  commanding 
Company  C,  Third  Infantry,  and  support  Major  Vogdes,  First  Artil- 
lery, in  command  of  two  companies  of  regulars ; Captain  Hildt,  Com- 
pany E,  Third  Infantry ; Lieutenant  Taylor  and  30  men  of  Company 
A,  First  Artillery,  and  Captain  Dobie,  Company  G,  New  York  volun- 
teers, who  had  preceded  me  along  the  north  beach  of  the  island  about 
an  hour,  with  the  purpose  of  attacking  in  flank  the  rebels,  who  had 
made  an  attack  on  Camp  Brown,  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  the  fort. 
Having  formed  my  command  very  promptly,  owing  to  the  efficiency 
and  zeal  of  the  company  commanders,  I rapidly  marched  up  the  beach 


Chap.  XVI.]  ACTION  ON  SANTA  EOSA  ISLAND,  FLA.  445 

about  IJ  miles,  when  I reached  the  scene  of  a sharp  action  between 
Major  Yogdes’  command  and  the  rebels,  in  which  11  of  the  enemy  were 
kilied,  and  probably  many  more  than  that  number  wounded. 

It  is  due  to  Captain  Ilildt,  Third  Infantry,  to  state  that  our  troops 
here  engaged  were  under  his  directions,  as,  from  the  statements  of  that 
officer  and  Lieutenants  Seeley  and  Taylor,  the  only  officers  with  Major 
Yogdes,  he  must  have  been  taken  prisoner  before  the  fight  commenced. 
After  marching  half  a mile  farther  up  the  beach  I discovered  a large 
row-boat,  about  1,200  yards  off,  filled  with  men,  making  for  the  navy- 
yard.  I directed  the  men  to  fire  at  great  elevation  on  this  boat,  whicli 
was  well  executed,  with  some  effect.  Soon  after  this,  whilst  advancing 
rapidly,  I discovered,  nearly  2 miles  away,  on  a point  or  neck  of  land, 
a very  large  body  of  the  enemy,  which  I judged  to  be  ten  times  my 
strength.  I shortly  after  left  the  beach,  going  behind  the  sand  ridge 
which  skirts  it,  and  deployed  my  command,  for  the  purpose  of  conceal- 
ing its  weakness  and  to  attack  them  in  flank  and  rear.  I very  soon 
met  Captain  Hildt,  Third  Infantry;  Lieutenants  Duryea,  Langdon, 
Seeley,  and  Taylor,  of  the  artillery,  who  informed  me  of  the  capture  of 
Major  Yogdes.  I ordered  Captain  Ilildt  to- join  me  with  the  remnant 
of  his  command.  Lieutenant  Duryea  to  act  as  my  staff  officer,  in  which 
capacity  he  made  a bold  reconnaissance,  supported  only  by  six  men, 
bringing  me  the  valuable  information  that  the  enemy  were  embarking 
in  two  steamboats  4 miles  from  the  fort.  I directed  Lieutenant  Lang- 
don to  report  to  the  colonel  commanding  my  relative  position  with  that 
of  the  enemy,  which  he  could  well  and  quickly  do,  being  mounted,  and 
ffom  his  recent  dangerous  jiroximity  to  the  enemy,  and  to  request  that 
a field  gun  and  a supporting  force  be  sent  me.  I ordered  Captain  Eob- 
ertson.  Second  Artillery,  to  move  with  his  company  along  the  sand  hills 
skirting  the  beach,  and  to  attack  the  enemy  if  a favorable  opportunity 
should  offer,  which  he  did  in  the  most  effective  manner.  I proceeded 
with  the  balance  of  the  command.  Lieutenant  Shipley,  with  his  com- 
pany (C,  Third  Infantry),  leading  off*,  within  supporting  distance  of 
Captain  Eobertson,  which  portion  of  the  command  was  unfortunately 
delayed  about  fifteen  [five]  minutes  by  having  to  turn  a swamp  which 
intervened.  Both  divisions  of  the  command  displayed  great  zeal  and 
coolness  in  coming  into  the  action.  The  fire  of  the  men  was  deliberate 
and  well  delivered  into  the  crowded  mass  on  board  the  steamboats  and 
flats  in  tow,  which  must  have  punished  the  enemy  severely — particu- 
larly the  fire  delivered  by  Captain  Eobertson’s  company  for  fifteen  or 
twenty  minutes,  at  short  range,  while  the  flat  in  tow  of  one  of  the 
steamers  was  aground.  I am  indebted  to  Major  Tower,  Engineer  Corps, 
for  his  advice  on  the  field  and  for  ordering  up  the  Kew  York  volun- 
teers as  a supporting  column. 

Captain  Eobertson,  Second  Artillery ; Captain  Hildt,  Third  Infantry; 
Lieutenants  Shipley,  Third  Infantry;  Langdon,  Seeley,  Jackson,  and 
Taylor,  First  Artillery,  and  Captains  Dobie  and  Hoelzle,  Sixth  Eegi- 
ment  NTew  York  Yolunteers,  who  served  under  my  command  during  the 
day,  did  their  duty  nobly.  My  special  thanks  are  due  to  Capt.  J.  M. 
Eobertson,  Second  Artillery,  and  First  Lieut.  A.  E.  Shipley,  Third  In- 
fantry, the  two  officers  of  my  original  command,  for  their  activity, 
energy,  and  coolness  displayed  and  valuable  services  rendered  by  them 
and  their  commands. 

I refer  the  colonel  commanding  to  the  reports  of  the  commanders  of 
, companies  and  parties  specially  detached  for  individual  instances  of  good 
conduct  displayed;  also  a list  of  officers  and  enlisted  men  (regulars) 
kiUed,  wounded,  and  missing,  which  reports,  &c.,  I herewith  inclose. 


446  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

The  enemy’s  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners  left  in  our 
hands  (they  carried  off  all  those  killed  on  the  boats  and  many  of  those 
wounded  on  the  shore),  amounts  to  1 captain  and  15  enlisted  men  killed, 
and  1 lieutenant  and  5 enlisted  men  wounded,  and  6 commissioned  offi- 
cers and  27  enlisted  men  prisoners. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

L.  G.  AKNOLD, 

Major  First  Artillery^  Commanding, 

Lieut.  F.  W.  Seeley, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Hdqrs,  Dept,  of  Florida, 


Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  December  24,  1861. 

Colonel  : My  attention  has  been  called  to  an  error  as  regards  time 
in  my  report  of  the  engagement  of  the  troops  under  my  command  with 
the  rebels  on  Santa  Eosa  Island,  October  9, 1861,  which  error  I perceive 
has  been  adopted  in  your  published  report  of  the  same  engagement.  It 
is  really  not  of  much  moment,  but  I consider  it  due  to  Lieutenant 
Shipley  and  his  company  (C,  Third  Infantry)  and  to  truth  to  correct  it. 
Quotation  from  my  report : 

I proceeded  with  the  balance  of  the  command,  Lieutenant  Shipley,  with  his  com- 
pany (C,  Third  Infantry),  leading  off,  within  supporting  distance  of  Captain  Robertson, 
which  portion  of  the  command  was  unfortunately  delayed  ahomfifteen  minutes  by  hav- 
ing to  turn  a swamp  which  intervened. 

Instead  of  fifteen  minutes^  it  should  have  been  five  minutes.  Both  com- 
panies behaved  handsomely,  firing  on  the  enemy  with  great  effect,  and 
deserve  much  more  credit  than  has  been  accorded  to  them. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' L.  G.  AENOLD, 

Major ^ First  Artillery, 

Col.  Harvey  Brown, 

Commanding  Departme^it  of  Florida, 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Piclcens,  December  25,  1861. 

Eepectfully  forwarded  to  the  Adjutant-General,  with  a request  that 
my  report  and  that  of  Major  Arnold  may  ^e  altered  so  as  to  conform 
to  the  within  statement. 

I desire  also  to  correct  another  error.  Captain  Dobie  himself  did  good 
service  on  the  night  of  the  9th  October,  but  his  company  did  nothing 
worthy  of  notice. 

HAEYEY  BEOWF, 
Colonel^  Commanding, 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Col.  William  Wilson^  Sixth  N’ew  Torlc  Infantry, 

Camp  Brown,  Fort  Pickens,  Fla., 

Sixth  Regt.  A.  Y,  S.  F.,  Oetober  11,  1861.  , 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  instant, 
at  about  3.30  o’clock,  the  camp  was  alarmed  by  rapid  discharges  and 


Chap.  XVI.] 


ACTION  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA. 


447 


volleys  of  miisketrj  in  the  direction  of  the  hospital.  My  command  of 
live  companies,  numbering'  250  men,  was  turned  out,  and  formed  on  the 
drill  ground  fronting  the  hospital.  Lieutenant  Hanham  came  running 
in,  and  informing  me  that  about  2,000  armed  men  in  two  columns  were 
marching  upon  us  5 that  the  pickets  were  all  attacked  about  tlie  same 
time.  I at  once  sent  (no  officer  being  near)  an  orderly  to  inform  Colonel 
Brown.  The  orderly,  when  returning,  was  made  prisoner.  Skirmishers 
were  thrown  out  in  advance  and  on  the  left  flank.  I was  on  the  left 
flank,  preparing  to  wheel  by  companies  to  the  left  and  then  deploy,  when 
volleys  of  musketry  were  fired  into  us  from  the  direction  of  the  camj). 
The  two  left  companies  wheeled  to  the  left,  deployed,  and  returned  the 
fire.  Immediately  the  tents  were  in  a blaze,  and  the  enemy  could  be 
seen  in  the  center  of  the  camp  closed  in  mass,  apparently  400  or  500 
men.  Other  companies  were  in  line  on  the  ridge  extending  towards  the 
old  commissary  store.  Companies  were  seen  poving  across  the  ridges. 
My  men,  on  seeing  this,  broke  for  the  beach.  I managed  by  the  assist- 
ance of  Lieutenants  Hanham  and  Kraell  to  halt  and  form  about  00  of 
them  behind  the  first  ridge  from  the  drill  ground.  I then  sent  for  Lieut- 
enant-Colonel Creighton  and  the  remainder  of  my  command.  The  men 
returned,  stating  that  they  could  not  find  him.  Stragglers  came  in, 
informing  me  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Creighton,  Captain  Hazeltine, 
Captains  Hoelzle  and  Henberer,  and  Lieutenant  Silloway,  with  the  rest 
of  the  command,  had  marched  towards  the  batteries.  My  men  on  hear- 
ing this  could  not  be  restrained,  and  moved  towards  the  beach  and  then 
to  Battery  Totten,  where  we  halted  and  rested  a short  time. 

Up  to  this  time  I was  ignorant  of  the  whereabouts  of  my  officers  or 
men  or  the  movements  of  troops  from  the  fort.  Major  ToAver  came  up 
and  informed  me  that  several  companies  of  regulars  were  in  pursuit  of 
the  enemy,  and  for  me  to  advance,  which  I did  as  rapidly  as  the  tired 
condition  of  the  men  would  permit.  About  half  a mile  above  the  hos- 
pital I met  the  remainder  of  my  command,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Creighton.  At  Major  Tower’s  request  I sent  forward  two  companies  at 
double-quick  time.  I then  moved  on,  endeavoring  to  overtake  the  enemy 
or  render  what  assistance  I could.  I reached  the  place  where  the  enemy 
embarked  just  as  our  men  were  returning.  On  my  returning  I deployed 
two  companies  across  the  island  as  skirmishers  to  pick  up  stragglers 
and  the  dead  and  wounded.  I have  to  report  the  folloAAung  losses: 
Killed,  9 ; wounded,  7 5 missing,  11. 

I would  respectfully  add  that  I am  pleased  with  the  good-will  and 
promptness  of  the  officers  and  men  in  the  performance  of  their  duties. 
Your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  WILSOK, 

Colonel^  Commandmg  Sixth  Regiment  N.  Y.  8.  Vols, 
Col.  Haryey  Brown, 

Commanding  Department  of  Florida, 


Hdqrs.  Camp  Brown,  Department  of  Florida, 

October  14,  1861. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  instructions  to  report  the  manner  of  attack 
and  conduct  of  officers  and  men  in  the  late  attack  on  the  morning  of  the 
9th  instant,  I respectfully  report : 

The  sentinels  of  the  picket  guard  were  all  attacked  the  same  time  by 


448  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

small  bodies  of  the  enemy,  supported  by  three  detachments  of  them, 
each  about  600  strong,  approaching  upon  them  from  the  Gulf  beach, 
center  of  island,  and  bay  shore.  Lieutenant  Hanham  was  officer  of  the 
picket  guard.  He  formed  his  relief  in  good  order  and  retreated,  firing 
upon  the  enemy,  and  rallied  upon  the  battalion  then  on  the  parade 
ground. 

Captain  Hoelzle  was  officer  of  the  day.  He,  on  the  first  alarm,  formed 
the  main  guard  and  marched  towards  the  beach,  where  alarms  were 
being  given.  He  met  a large  body  of  the  enemy,  fired  into  them,  and 
was  fired  into  in  return.  Captain  Hoelzle  was  knocked  down  and  walked 
over.  He  arose  quickly  and  shot  a man  who  was  taking  aim  at  him. 
He  then  retreated  to  the  front  of  the  guard -house,  and  met  Captain  Ha- 
zeltine,  who  was  in  command  of  the  skirmishers,  then  retreating  before 
the  enemy. 

Captain  Huffy,  who  haff  command  of  the  skirmishers  on  the  left,  was 
cut  off  with  four  men,  audi  had  to  remain  in  front  of  the  camp  until  near 
daylight. 

The  sentinels  all  stood  their  ground  manfully,  firing  while  retreating. 
Corp.  William  Parsonage,  of  Company  H (since  dead),  while  supporting 
a sentinel  and  fighting  manfully,  was  shot  through  the  body  in  three 
jdaces  and  bayoneted,  but  killed  his  opponent.  Private  P.  McGrail,  of 
Company  F,  posted  at  the  Spanish  Fort,  was  killed  at  his  post  after  fir- 
ing three  shots  at  the  enemy.  Private  William  Scott,  of  Company  C,  on 
the  approach  of  the  enemy  from  the  Gulf  beach,  waited  until  they  ap- 
proached to  within  10  feet,  and  deliberately  shot  Captain  Bradford,  who 
was  leading  them  on. 

I must  thank  Lieutenant  Hanham,  Lieutenant  Kraell,  and  Sergt. 
Maj.  Eobert  Gill  for  the  valuable  assistance  they  rendered  me  in  keepiog 
my  men  in  order,  and  for  their  good  behavior  while  under  the  fire  of 
the  enemy. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

WM.  WILSOK, 

Colonel  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers, 

Col.  Harvey  Brown, 

Commanding  Department  of  Florida^  Fort  Pickens, 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  3IcL.  Eildt,  Third  U,  S.  Infantry, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  October  10,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  an  engagement 
with  the  enemy  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  of  October: 

About  3.30  o’clock  a.  m.,  it  having  become  evident  from  firing  from 
the  direction  of  Camp  Brown  that  the  enemy  had  made  an  attack  on 
the  companies  of  the  Sixth  Kew  York  Yolunteers  stationed  at  that  point. 
Company  E,  Third  Infantry,  62  rank  and  file,  under  command  of  Capt. 
J.  McL.  Hildt,  Third  Infantry,  and  31  rank  and  file  of  Company  A, 
First  Artillery,  under  command  of  Second  Lieut.  F.  E.  Taylor,  First 
Artillery,  the  whole  commanded  by  Maj.  1.  Yogdes,  First  Artillery,  left 
the  fort  to  render  any  necessary  assistance.  The  command  proceeded 
through  Batteries  Cameron  and  Lincoln,  being  re-enforced  at  the  latter 


Chap.  XVI.]  ACTION  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA.  449 

by  Company  G,  Sixth  Kew  York  Volunteers,  Captain  Dobie.  After  pro- 
ceeding a short  distance  up  the  north  beach,  Captain  Dobie  was  directed 
to  deploy  his  company  as  skirmishers  on  the  right  flank.  The  company 
became  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  command,  and  I saw  no  more 
of  it.  We.  proceeded  along  the  beach  until  some  distance  above  Camp 
Brown.  A large  force  appeared  on  our  right  flank  and  rear.  Owing 
to  the  darkness  it  was  impossible  to  tell  whether  this  force  was  the 
enemy  or  New  York  volunteers.  Major  Vogdes,  who  was  in  front, 
immediately  faced  the  command  to  the  right  and  rode  towards  the  right 
of  the  line.  This  was  the  last  I saw  of  him.  A moment  afterwards  an 
officer  (of  the  enemy)  stepped  up  to  me,  stating  that  our  commanding 
officer  was  a prisoner,  and  requesting  me  to  surrender  the  comman(l. 
The  first  firing  (two  shots)  was  directed  at  this  officer.  I then  moved 
the  command  to  and  formed  as  well  as  circumstances  would  permit 
behind  some  rising  ground  about  20  yards  in  front.  First  Lieut.  F.  W. 
Seeley,  Fourth  Artillery,  who  had  volunteered  and  joined  the  advance 
guard  during  the  march,  here  rendered  valuable  service  in  forming  and 
encouraging  the  men. 

After  some  very  effective  firing  from  this  point  it  became  necessary 
to  move  part  of  the  command  to  the  left,  to  oppose  a threatened  flank 
attack.  The  men  became  more  exposed  and  the  fire  of  the  enemy  very 
severe.  Finding  ourselves  greatly  outnumbered,  and  encumbered  by 
the  wounded,  we  fell  back  diagonally  towards  the  opposite  beach  and 
the  enemy’s  flank,  halting  behind  the  numerous  sand-hills  and  deliver- 
ing our  fire.  A party  of  3 surgeons  and  guard  of  8 men  were  at  this 
time  made  prisoners.  Several  other  prisoners  had  been  previously 
taken.  As  soon  as  his  front  was  clear  the  enemy  proceeded  along  the 
north  beach.  Ilis  force,  as  given  by  the  prisoners,  was  1,010  men.  Our 
actual  force  engaged,  owing  to  the  flankers  being  made  prisoners  pre- 
vious to  the  action,  did  not  exceed  80  men.  We  then  proceeded  to  col- 
lect our  remaining  wounded  until  the*arrival  of  Major  Arnold’s  command. 
The  men  generally  behaved  well.  Many  could  be  mentioned  who  were 
conspicuous.  Among  them  First  Sergt.  David  Grier,  Comi>any  E,  Third 
Infantry,  who,  although  with  the  flankers,  succeeded  in  eluding  the 
enemy  and  joining  the  command  5 Corp.  Thomas  G.  Duncan,  Privates 
James  Clark,  James  Corcoran,  John  Moran,  Michael  Coleman,  Company 
E,  Third  Infantry,  and  Privates  James  Connelly,  Timothy  Kelly,  and 
Michael  Lavelle,  Company  A,  First  Artillery.  I desire  to  mention  par- 
ticularly Corp.  Charles  Schafer,  Private  William  Dougherty,  Company 
E,  Third  Infantry,  and  Lance  Corp.  Edward  B.  Fitz gibbons.  Private 
Franklin  Eastman,  Company  A,  hirst  Artillery.  Lieutenants  Seeley 
and  Taylor  throughout  the  afiair  acted  with  marked  coolness  and 
bravery,  and  by  their  exertions  and  examples  contributed  largely  to  the 
safety  of  the  command. 

Our  loss  was  4 killed,  20  wounded,  and  1 officer  and  8 men  missing. 
The  loss  of  the  enemy,  judging  from  the  number  of  dead  left  on  the 
ground,  was  much  larger.  A list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing 
I herewith  inclose. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

J.  McL.  HILDT, 
Captain,  Third  Infantry. 

Major  L.  G.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery. 

29  R R — YOL  VI 


450  OPERATIONS  m W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

NTo.  6. 

Repoy't  of  Lieut  Cliauncey  B,  Reese,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  October  11,  1861. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  yonr  instructions,  I have  the  honor  to  transmit 
the  following  as  connected  with  the  operations  against  the  enemy  on  the 
morning  of  the  9th  instant : 

At  a little  before  daybreak  I was  directed  by  the  colonel  commanding 
to  instruct  Major  Vogdes  to  pursue  the  enemy  with  his  command,  keep- 
ing his  left  flank  upon  the  north  beach.  The  colonel  at  the  same  time 
stated  that  Major  Vogdes  had  gone  up  the  north  beach  via  Battery 
Lincoln.  I started  on  horseback,  and  when  about  half  a mile  beyond 
Battery  Lincoln  came  upon  a body  of  troops  about  7d  strong,  which  I 
at  first  took  for  Major  Vogdes^  command,  but  which  proved  to  be  the 
enemy,  who  fired  one  shot  at  me  as  I turned  to  retreat.  While  return- 
ing I met  Lieutenant  Duryea  at  Battery  Lincoln  in  seach  of  Major 
V ogdes’  command.  I intrusted  the  message  to  Lieutenant  Dnryea,  and 
returned  to  report  the  position  of  the  enemy.  About  fifteen  minutes 
after  my  return  I w'as  directed  by  the  commanding  ofiicer  to  proceed  to 

the  Potomac,  and  ask  Captain  Powell  to  place  a detachment  onboard 
the  McClellan  and  direct  Captain  Gray  to  proceed  along  the  island  in 
order  to  shell  the  enemy.’’  The  commanding  officer  also  directed  me  to 
go  with  Captain  Gray.  These  instructions  were  afterwards  modified. 
so  as  “ to  request  of  Captain  Powell  as  large  a force  as  he  could  spare, 
with  a view  to  landing  it,  if  necessary.”  After  being  delayed  some- 
thing like  half  an  hour  in  getting  a boat,  I went  to  the. Potomac  and 
delivered  the  substance  of  the  message  to  Captain  Powell,  who  stated 
that  he  would  have  Captain  Gray  take  him  in  tow  while  the  men  were 
getting  ready.  (I  will  here  state  that  four  or  five  shots  had  been  fired 
from  Battery  Lincoln,  and  Captain  Powell  asked  me  what  I thought  it 
was.  I replied  that  it  must  be  from  our  batteries  upon  the  boats  of  the 
enemy  retreating.) 

1 then  went  on  board  the  McClellan.  Captain  Gray  took  the  Potomac 
in  tow,  but  had  hardly  started  when  the  hawser  parted.  We  had  seen 
a steamer  approach  the  north  beach  of  the  island.  Upon  going  near  the 
Potomac,  preparatory  to  getting  another  hawser.  Captain  Gray  asked 
Captain  Powell  if  he  did  not  think  the  steamer  was  trying  to  take  the 
enemy  off.  I heard  no  reply.  The  Potomac  was  then  towed  in  about 
2 miles  towards  the  hospital.  Forty- four  marines,  including  one  officer, 
w^ere  put  on  board  the  McClellan,  and  Captain  Powell  asked  if  more 
were  needed.  It  was  thought  best  not  to  wait  for  more  to  be  put  on 
board,  but  Captain  Powell  said  he  would  have  enough  ready  to  make 
100,  if  we  should  want  them. 

I had  noticed  several  parties  of  from  5 to  20  soldiers,  whom  I thought 
to  be  of  Colonel  Wilson’s  regiment,  going  along  the  beach  towards  the 
fort,  and  it  was  thought  advisable  to  go  ashore  for  information.  I went 
ashore,  and  learned  that  the  enemy  had  left  the  island  and  that  the 
troops  from  the  fort  had  returned.  I stated  this  to  Captain  Gray,  and 
it  was  agreed  to  go  along  the  island  some  15  miles  to  discover  if  any 
rebels  had  been  cut  off  and  retreated  up  the  island.  This  was  done,  and 
no  signs  of  the  enemy  were  seen.  The  McClellan  then  returned,  arriv- 
ing at  her  anchorage  at  about  2 p.  m. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  B.  EEESE, 

Col.  Harvey  Brown,  First  Lieutenant  of  Engineers. 

Fifth  Artillery,  Commanding  Department  of  Florida. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


451 


ACTION  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA. 


N-Q.  7. 

Eeports  of  Capt.  James  M,  Robertson^  Second  U.  S.  Artillery, 

Battery  Lincoln, 

Santa  Rosa  Island^  Fla.,  October  10,  18G1. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  about  3.30  o’clock  a.  m.  yester- 
day I was  awakened  by  the  report  of  musketry  on  the  island.  I at  once 
ran  out  and  joined  my  company,  which  was  just  forming  in  rear  of  their 
bomb-proof.  Almost  immediately  after  I Avas  joined  by  Company  G, 
Sixth  Kegiment  Kew  York  Volunteer  Militia,  under  command  of  Capt. 
J.  H.  Dobie,  assisted  by  Lieutenant  Black.  When  the  companies  were 
properly  formed  I moved  forward,  with  the  exception  of  the  detachments 
lor  the  i2  i)ounder  howitzers  and  rifled  42-pounder,  to  the  coA^er  of  a sand 
hill  near  my  camp,  and  ordered  the  men  to  lie  doAvn,  at  the  same  time 
sending  out  5 men  with  a non-commissioned  officer,  Avith  orders  to 
take  positions  on  the  best  grounds  for  obserAung  the  approach  of  an 
enemy  from  100  to  300  yards  in  adA^ance.  After  making  these  disposi- 
tions I waited  for  orders.  About  4.30  a.  m.  Major  Vogdes,  First  Artil- 
lery, passed  Avith  a detachment  of  regular  troops  from  Fort  Pickens  and 
took  with  him  Captain  Dobie  and  his  company.  Soon  alter  this  1 
received  orders  from  Colonel  BroAvn  to  be  ready  and  fire  on  any  boat 
Avhich  should  leave  this  island  for  the  opposite  shore.  When  you  arriA^ed 
at  daybreak  under  your  orders  1 left  the  first  sergeant  of  my  company 
(H,  Second  Artillery,  to  which  I am  assigned  for  temporary  duty),  and 
joined  your  column  with  the  remainder — 48  men. 

From  this  time  till  1 was  detached  from  your  column  Avith  my  com- 
pany you  are  aware  of  what  transpired.  After  leaving  you  I threw  for- 
ward a portion  of  my  company  as  skirmishers  and  advanced  up  the 
island  about  1 mile,  diminishing  and  extending  my  Iront  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  when  1 discoAmred  three  steamers,  each 
having  in  tow  a large  scow  or  flat  boat  densely  packed  with  armed  men. 
I at  once  put  my  company  into  a double-quick,  adAmnced  about  half  a 
mile  in  that  manner,  and  took  shelter  behind  a ridge  of  sand  from  200 
to  2r}0  yards  from  the  largest  steamer  (Time)  and  the  flat  she  had  in  tow, 
and  which  at  that  time  was  aground,  and  remained  so  for  full  fifteen 
minutes.  I at  once  opened  fire,  cautioning  the  men  to  take  cool  and 
deliberate  aim.  Never  was  an  order  better  obeyed.  The  men  delivered 
their  fire,  lay  down  and  loaded,  then  rose,  took  aim,  and  fired  with  as 
much  coolness  as  on  an  ordinary  drill  of  the  company.  For  the  fifteen 
minutes  that  the  flat  was  aground,  and  nearly  up  to  the  time  that  you 
arrived  with  the  remainder  of  your  column,  the  enemy  returned  our  fire 
A^ery  briskly,  but  owing  to  the  almost  perfect  cover  behind  which  my 
men  were  placed  1 have  no  casualties  to  report.  During  the  whole 
fire  my  attention  was  particularly  attracted  to  one  man,  PriAmte  Michael 
M.  O’Doud,  of  Company  H.  First  placing  himself  behind  a small  pine 
tree,  turning  his  side  to  load,  he  would  then  step  out,  rest  his  piece 
against  the  side  of  the  tree,  take  deliberate  aim,  and  fire,  almost  eA^ery 
time  remarking  that  There  goes  another  of  them  down.”  While  load- 
ing he  would  frequently  remark  ^‘AVell,  my  tree  saA-ed  me  that  time.” 
He  afterwards  informed  me  that  he  fired  sixteen  rounds.  After  the 
action  was  over  I examined  the  tree  behind  which  O’Doud  stood,  and 
found  seven  musket-balls  buried  in  it  in  front  of  where  his  body  was. 
When  all  the  men  behaved  as  well  as  the  men  of  Company  H did  the  whole 
time  while  under  fire,  it  is  hard  to  particularize.  I cannot,  howcA’^er, 
pass  this  occasion  to  give  special  thanks  to  Sergt.  Charles  Wendall,  and 


452  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

John  Keegan,  for  the  efficient  manner  in  which  they  assisted  me  duriog 
the  whole  morning  by  their  cool  and  steady  bearing  and  prompt  actioo. 

I cannot  close  this  communication  without  paying  a well-deserved 
compliment  to  Capt.  J.  H.  Dobie,  Sixth  Kegiment  of  Volunteers,  and 
tendering  him  my  most  sincere  thanks  for  his  most  able  assistance. 
Captain  Dobie,  having  been  separated  from  his  company  before  daylight, 
joined  me  as  a volunteer,  and  was  with  me  until  after  the  close  of  the 
action,  and  was  of  the  greatest  assistance  in  restraining  the  men  while 
on  the  march  and  encouraging  them  by  his  cool  manner  and  voice  while 
under  fire.  From  my  observation,  the  cool  manner  of  my  men,  the 
length  of  time  and  distance  of  fire,  the  loss  of  the  enemy  must  have  been 
very  considerable  both  on  the  steamer  and  flat-boat. 

Kespectfully  submitted. 

J.  M.  EOBERTSOK, 

Captain^  Second  Artillery^  Commanding  Company  S, 
Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

Commanding  Column  on  morning  October  9,  1861. 


Battery  Lincoln,  Santa  Rosa  Island, 

October  26,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  to  request  that  in  my  report  of  the  affairs  of  the  morning 
of  the  9th  instant  the  name  of  Private  Michael  M.  O’Doud,  of  Company 
H,  Second  Artillery,  be  erased,  and  that  of  Private  John  Gannon  (same 
company)  inserted  in  its  place.  At  the  time  of  the  affair  spoken  of  I 
had  been  but  a few  days  (since  the  1st  instant)  with  the  company,  and 
knew  none  of  the  men.  When  writing  my  report  I directed  the  first 
sergeant  to  bring  me  the  name  of  the  man  referred  to,  which  he  did  as 
O’Doud,  and  I have  supposed  him  to  be  the  man  till  yesterday,  when 
Gannon  informed  me  of  my  error,  and  I at  once  recognized  him  as  the 
man  I had  noticed.  Since  then  I have  made  further  inquiries,  and  find 
from  the  statements  of  my  non-commissioned  officers  and  others  that 
O’Doud  was  behind  another  tree  and  did  good  service.  Should  a copy 
of  my  report  have  been  forwarded  to  Headquarters  of  the  Army  before 
the  receipt  of  this,  I respectfully  request  that  a copy  of  this  note  may 
also  be  forwarded,  to  be  placed  on  file  with  it. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  ROBERTSOK, 

Captain^  Second  Artillery^  Comma'nding  Company  S, 
Lieut.  F.  W.  Seeley, 

Adjutant^  Fort  Ficlcens,  Fla, 


No.  8. 

Beport  of  Capt.  Richard  C.  Buryea,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  October  10, 1861. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  instructions,  I have  the  honor  to  make  the 
following  report  of  the  attack  and  repulse  of  the  rebel  troops  yesterday 
morning: 

A detachment  of  Company  A,  First  Artillery,  consisting  of  30  men 
and  1 corporal,  under  Lieutenant  Taylor,  formed  on  the  parade  ground. 


Chap.  XVI.]  ACTION  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA.  453 

The  main  part  of  my  company  being  at  the  guns  on  the  ramparts,  was 
ordered  by  Major  Vogdes,  without  my  being  informed  of  the  fact,  to 
join  Company  E,  Third  Infantry,  and  proceed  to  the  assistance  of  Colo- 
nel Wilson.  As  soon  as  I was  informed  of  the  detachment  leaving  I 
immediately  left  the  fort  and  proceeded  to  join  it.  On  my  way  meeting 
Lieutenant  Eeese,  who  had  been  sent  with  orders  from  Colonel  Brown 
to  the  major,  1 received  his  orders  and  pushed  on  to  communicate  them. 
I arrived  at  the  scene  of  action  when  the  firing  first  commenced,  and 
found  the  enemy  drawn  up  between  our  command  and  myself  and  the 
fort.  Making  a short  detour,  I again  came  upon  the  enemy.  The  action 
had  been  sharp  and  of  short  duration,  and  at  this  time  the  enemy  were 
retiring  up  the  beach.  I was  then  joined  by  Lieutenant  Langdon,  and 
picking  up  8 or  10  men  who  had  been  cut  off  from  the  command,  we 
followed  the  enemy  to  the  first  boat,  the  men  firing  upon  them  while 
embarking  5 it  is  of  course  impossible  to  say  with  what  effect.  Your  col- 
umn soon  after  coming  up,  I joined  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  C.  DUEYEA, 

First  Lieutenant^  First  Artillery, 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Regiment  Artillery, 


Ko.  9. 

Report  of  Lieut,  Alexander  N,  Shipley ^ Third  U,  S,  Infantry, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  October  10,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that,  in  obedience  to  orders,  I left  this 
fort  at  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  instant  with  Company  C, 
Third  Infantry,  consisting  of  3 sergeants,  3 corporals,  and  51  privates. 
Attached  to  my  company  were  4 privates  of  Company  A,  First  Infan- 
try, also  3 unassigned  recruits,  making  a total  of  64  enlisted  men.  We 
proceeded  up  the  island  by  way  of  Batteries  Camerqn  and  Lincoln.  At 
the  latter  battery  I was  joined  by  Captain  Eobertson,  with  a portion  of 
his  company  (H,  Second  Artillery),  from  which  point  we  marched  as 
rapidly  as  possible  to  near  a place  known  as  the  Four  Mile  Point,  where 
we  were  halted,  and  ordered  to  open  fire  upon  a small  barge  which  had 
left  our  shore  and  distant  probably  1,200  yards.  My  company  fired 
two  volleys  at  the  barge.  Many  of  the  shots  must  have  taken  effect.  1 
saw  the  ricocheting  of  many  of  the  balls  on  the  water  in  front  and  close 
to  the  barge. 

From  this  place  I was  ordered  up  the  beach  at  a double-quick  after  a 
large  body  of  rebels  seen  at  a distance  of  at  least  1 mile.  On  arriv- 
ing near  the  place  where  they  were  seen  I deployed  my  company,  as 
directed,  and  moved  rapidly  up  the  island  to  a point  opposite  where  the 
rebels  had  embarked.  On  seeing  them  I immediately  ordered  my  com- 
pany at  double-quick  in  the  direction  of  the  steamers  and  scows.  The 
latter  were  being  towed  by  a large  steamer  and  distant  from  the  beach 
about  500  yards.  I formed  my  men  under  shelter  of  the  sand  hills  imme- 
diately on  the  beach  and  opened  fire  upon  the  rebels.  An  incessant  fire 
was  kept  up  for  some  twenty  minutes,  when  the  vessels  got  out  of  range 
of  my  guns  and  the  firing  ceased  for  a few  minutes,  when  a small  boat  was 
seen  off'  to  our  right  and  distant  some  1,200  yards.  I ordered  my  com- 
pany to  fire  upon  it.  They  fired  two  well-directed  volleys.  The  firing 


454  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 

ppoQ  tlie  rebels  on  leaving  onr  shore  was  very  effective,  throwing  them, 
in  their  crowded  state,  into  great  confusion.  I was  then  ordered  to  pro- 
ceed with  my  company  to  the  fort,  deploying  them  so  as  to  scout  the 
island  from  the  south  beach  to  near  its  center.  On  my  way  down  I found 
2 dead  bodies  and  1 wounded  man,  all  rebels.  The  dead  bodies  I 
had  carried  to  the  south  beach  (the  dead  were  to  be  collected  on  that 
beach).  The  wounded  man — Private  Furguson,  Seventh  Alabama  Eegi- 
ment — was  sent  in  a cart  to  the  upper  hospital.  I also  captured  Lieuten- 
ant Farley,  of  the  Florida  volunteers,  and  2 privates — viz,  Moore, 
Seventh  Alabama  Eegiment,  and  Goodley,  of  the  Seventh  Florida  Eegi- 
meut  Volunteers — whom  I brought  into  this  fort  and  turned  over  to  the 
guard. 

It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  for  me  to  testify  to  the  good  conduct  and 
coolness  of  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  of  my  company, 
as  well  as  those  attached,  as  from  the  time  of  leaving  the  fort  to  the  time 
the  firing  ceased  they  were  under  your  personal  observation. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  SHIPLEY, 

First  Lieutenant^  Third  Infantry^  Commanding  Company  C, 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  U.  S.  Artillery^  Commanding  Column^ 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Capt.  Loomis  L.  Langdon,  First  U,  S.  Artillery. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  Oetoher  10,  1861. 

Sir  : Pursuant  to  instructions,  I have  the  honor  to  report  my  action 
in  the  engagement  yesterday  morning  between  the  Federal  troops  and 
the  rebels  near  the  camp  of  the  Sixth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers. 

About  an  hour  before  daybreak  I was  ordered  by  Colonel  Brown  to 
go  up  the  island,  find  Colonel  Wilson,  and  give  him  the  order  to  follow 
the  rebels,  then  believed  to  be  retreating,  and  attack,  and,  if  compelled 
to  himself  fall  back,  to  do  so  slowly  and  in  good  order.  After  passing 
through  a number  of  volunteers  gathered  at  the  fork  of  the  two  tram- 
ways about  musket-shot  from  the  fort  (and  whom  I now  understand  to 
have  been  Wilson’s  command  that  I was  searching  for),  I arrived  at 
the  commissary  store,  which  was  burning.  The  camp  was  in  flames  and 
the  tents  of  four  companies  almost  consumed.  Two  or  three  corpses . 
lay  in  the  camp,  but  the  place  was  utterly  deserted.  I then  hastened 
on  to  the  hospital,  where  I found  and  got  8 of  them  from  Dr.  Suth- 
erland to  put  out  the  fire  in  the  commissary  store-shed.  Eeturning,  I 
passed  through  the  camp,  and  found  about  6 volunteers  with  muskets, 
apparently  guarding  2 officers’  tents.  I added  them  to  my  8,  and 
l)ut  them  to  work  extinguishing  the  fire  and  saving  the  stores,  which 
was  soon  done.  I then  crossed  the  island,  still  searching  for  Colonel 
Wilson,  whom,  it  seems,  I had  passed  before.  I had  a mounted  man 
out  also  looking  for  him.  , 

' On  arriving  on  the  north  side  of  the  island  I met  Lieutenant  Duryea, 
of  the  First  Eegiment  Artillery,  who  was  carrying  orders  from  Colonel 
Brown  to  Major  Vogdes.  We  heard  a smart  tiring  about  200  yards  up 
the  beach,  and  supposing  that  the  major  and  Captain  Hildt  were  there 
engaged  we  hurried  up,  but  soon  finding  a soldier  who,  when  questioned, 
answered  “ Second  Alabama,”  and  ascertaining  that  the  men  in  front 


Chap.  XVI.] 


ACTION  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA. 


455 


aud  very  near  us  were  enemies,  we  came  back  a little  and  made  a detour 
to  reach  our  friends,  who  had  the  enemy  between  them  and  tlie  fort. 
Proceeding  slowly,  we  saw  the  rebels  slowly  retreating  from  tlie  sand 
hills  and  up  the  beach.  We  here  gathered  about  8 stragglers  from 
the  regulars,  who  were  in  advance,  and  with  them  we  pushed  on,  and, 
deploying  the  men,  soon  found  ourselves  before  the  enemy  in  force. 
They  fired  on  us  and  commenced  shoving  ofi*  a small  boat.  We  returned 
the  lire  on  the  boat,  but,  a large  force  preparing  to  cut  us  off,  we  came 
back  slowly  for  about  half  a mile,  where  we  met  Major  Arnold’s  com- 
mand. Informing  him  of  the  position  of  the  enemy  and  asking  for 
orders,  I was  sent  to  the  fort  to  report  and  bring  up  a field  piece. 

Eeturning  to  the  field,  I overtook  a battalion  of  volunteers  acting  as 
a reserve,  but  at  too  great  a distance  to  be  of  any  service.  I advised 
the  officer  in  command  to  get  closer  to  the  advance,  which  he  was  sub- 
sequently doing  when  there  was  no  occasion  for  his  services.  Lieutenant 
Jackson  having  brought  him  the  order  to  move  on,  which  was  obeyed. 
Then  I joined  Lieutenant  Jackson,  who  had  gathered  about  80  volun- 
teers from  Colonel  WTlson’s  camp  and  including  2 or  3 regulars,  the 
latter  being  taken  from  the  guard.  I assisted  Lieutenant  Jackson  in 
deploying  his  men.  Here  we  got  ahead  of  the  reserve  and  were  going 
on,  when  we  met  Major  Arnold  returning,  the  enemy’s  steamboats 
having  taken  the  boats  in  tow,  and,  after  suffering  a fire  from  Captain 
Eobertson’s  immediate  command,  retreated  to  the  other  side.  The 
command  was  then  rested  and  ordered  into  the  fort. 

Lieutenant  Duryea  and  myself  took  prisoner  a wounded  marine  offl-* 
cer  and  had  him  conveyed  to  the  hospital.  I sent  2 wounded  rebels 
also  to  the  hospital,  and  spent  the  rest  of  the  forenoon  collecting  the 
dead  and  wounded  and  conveying  them  to  the  hospital  and  fort.  It 
may  be  well  to  mention  that  so  much  time  was  lost  in  fitting  harness  to 
the  mules  for  the  field  piece,  that  by  the  time  it  arrived  within  2 miles 
of  the  place  of  embarkation  the  enemy  were  gone,  the  horses  for  the 
gun  being  in  use  for  the  officers. 

I am,  sh?,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LOOMIS  L.  LANGDON^, 

First  Lieutenant^  Fifth  Artillery^  A.  A,  Q,  M, 
Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery^  U,  S.  Army, 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Francis  W,  Seeley^  Fourth  JJ,  S.  Artillery, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  October  11,  1861. 

Major  : In  obedience  to  your  directions,  I have  the  honor  to  report 
that  about  3.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  tbe  9th  of  October,  soon  after 
the  firing  was  heard  at  Camp  Brown,  I was  sent  by  the  colonel  com- 
manding to  give  some  orders  to  Captain  Eobertson,  commanding  Bat- 
teries Lincoln  and  Cameron.  On  my  return  I met  Major  Yogdes  and 
his  command.  The  major  requested  me  to  take  command  of  his  advance 
guard,  consisting  of  about  20  men,  and  to  keep  along  the  north  beach 
about  15  rods  in  advance  of  the  main  body.  With  this  request  I com- 
plied, and  marched  quietly  along  the  beach,  keeping  a sharp  lookout  in 
advance  and  on  my  right  flank.  After  advancing  about  IJ  miles  from 
the  fort  I saw  a squad  of  men  in  front  of  my  party.  I immediately 


456  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYL 

pushed  iny  guard  forward  at  double-quick,  and  succeeded  in  capturing 
2 of  them.  They  proved  to  be  a party  of  stragglers  from  the  main 
body  of  the  enemj^  No  sooner  were  my  prisoners  secured  than  I heard 
sharp  bring  in  rear,  showing  that  our  command  was  engaged  with  the 
enemy.  I immediately  fell  back  with  my  party  and  joined  our  main 
body,  which  I found  under  command  of  Captain  Hildt,  Third  Infantry, 
Major  Vogdes  having  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  enemy,  whose  whole 
force  was  posted  about  25  or  30  yards  in  front  of  our  command.  By 
direction  of  Captain  Hildt  I then  took  command  of  our  right,  and,  ably 
assisted  by  Lieutenant  Taylor,  First  Artillery,  i)osted  our  men  as  ad- 
vantageously as  the  ground  would  permit.  The  enemy  then  opened  a 
pretty  sharj)  lire  on  us,  which  our  men  returned  with  spirit. 

Our  force  actually  engaged  at  this  time  was  about  75  or  80  men,  while 
that  of  the  enemy  was  about  1,000,  as  we  have  since  ascertained.  Not- 
withstanding this  disparity  of  numbers,  our  men,  under  the  able  com- 
mand of  Captain  Hildt,  bravely  held  their  ground  until  the  enemy  made 
a movement  evidently  with  the  intention  of  attacking  our  left  flank, 
when  Captain  Hildt  gave  orders  to  fall  back  gradually  tow  ards  the 
south  beach,  which  our  men  executed  in  good  style,  carrying  olf  our 
wounded,  facing  about  occasionally  and^  delivering  their  fire.  Soon 
after  we  took  3 army  surgeons  and  8 enlisted  men  belonging  to  the 
enemy  prisoners,  and  Captain  Hildt  sent  them  under  proper  guard  to 
the  fort.  As  soon  as  the  enemy  found  his  front  clear  he  continued 
his  retreat  up  the  island.  We  remained,  collecting  and  caring  for  our 
wounded,  until  your  command  came  up.  We  had  4 men  killed,  20 
wounded,  and  1 officer  (Major  Yogdes)  and  8 men  missing.  During  the 
whole  action  our  men  behaved  admirably,  loading  and  firing  with  per- 
lect  coolness.  Of  those  who  were  particularly  distinguished  for  their 
coolness  and  bravery  mention  has,  I believe,  been  made  by  Captain 
Hildt  in  his  official  report  of  the  aftair. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  SEELEY, 

Mrst  Lieutenant^  Fourth  Artillery, 

Maj.  Lewis  O.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery^  IT,  8,  Army, 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Lieutenant  Richard  H,  Jaehson,  First  U,  S,  Artillery, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  October  10,  1861. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  your  directions  I have  the  honor  to  report 
that  a little  after  daybreak  yesterday  morning  I was  ordered  by  Colonel 
Brown  to  follow  your  command  and  take  any  men  that  I could  find  who 
in  the  darkness  of  the  night  might  have  become  separated  from  Major 
Yogdes’  command,  as  well  as  any  of  Colonel  Wilson’s  men  who  could  be 
picked  up,  and  with  them  proceed  to  join  your  command,  and  to  give 
instructions  to  the  officers  commanding  detachments  who  might  be  in 
your  rear  to  follow  promptly  to  your  support.  I proceeded  at  once  to 
Colonel  Wilson’s  encampment  and  collected  about  80  men  of  his  regi- 
ment and  3 officers.  I immediately  formed  them  and  proceeded  at  their 
head  to  join  you.  After  marching  at  double-quick  for  about  a mile,  I 
heard  heavy  firing  on  the  beach,  and  seeing  a swamp  in  front  of  me,  I 
galloped  ahead  of  my  detachment  in  order  to  select  the  shortest  route 


Chap.  XVI.1  ACTION  ON  SANTA  EOS  A ISLAND,  FLA.  457 

to  tlie  scene  of  action.  About  300  yards  in  front  of  iny  command  I fell 
in  with  and  captured  two  of  the  rebels,  who  were  guarding  3 men  of 
Colonel  Wilson’s  regiment,  who  had  been  made  i)risoners  a short  time 
before.  I disarmed  them,  and  sent  them  under  guard  to  the  fort. 
After  proceeding  a short  distance  I came  up  with  about  150  men  of  the 
ifew  York  regiment,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Creighton.  They  were 
halted.  I ordered  him  to  advance  at  once  to  your  support.  Ue  accord- 
ingly did  so.  I went  in  advance  of  him  at  the  double-quick  and  soon 
came  on  the  beach.  I then  saw  that  the  rebels  had  taken  to  their  boats. 
I heard  heavy  firing  from  our  troops  in  advance  of  me  on  the  beach, 
and  saw  a great  many  of  the  enemy  fall  on  one  of  their  large  flat-boats. 
They,  however,  succeeded  in  getting  oft'  before  1 could  get  close  enough 
to  tire  on  them.  I in  a few  minutes  afterwards  joined  your  command. 

I am  sorry  to  have  to  state  that  on  my  arrival  at  Colonel  Wilson’s 
camp  I was  greatly  surprised  to  see  so  many  men  wandering  around, 
some  of  them  without  arms  (although  there  were  plenty  to  be  had),  and 
to  And  in  camp  with  them  3 or  4 officers,  who  did  not  even  attempt  to 
organize  the  men  or  move  forward  with  them.  A great  many  of  the 
men  said  that  they  would  have  been  glad  to  have  gone  forward  before 
my  arrival  if  they  had  had  any  person  to  organize  and  lead  them. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  H.  JACKSON, 

First  Lieutenant^  First  Artillery, 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Aenold, 

Major,  First  Artillery,  U,  S.  Army,- 


No.  13. 

Congratulatory  orders  from  Major-Ge7ieral  McClellan,  U,  S,  Army, 

Geneeal  Oedees,  ) Hdqes.  of  the  Aemy,  a.  G.  O., 

No.  109.  i Washington,  December  21,  18G1. 

The  Commanding  General  has  the  satisfaction  of  announcing  to  the 
Army  another  instance  of  skill  and  good  conduct  on  the  part  of  the 
beleaguered  garrison  of  Fort  Pickens,  harbor  of  Pensacola,  under  the 
command  of  Col.  Harvey  Brown,  Fifth  Eegiment  U.  S.  Artillery. 

On  the*  night  of  October  9 an  attempt  was  made  by  a large  body  of 
rebels  to  burn  the  camp  of  Wilson’s  Zouaves,  spike  the  guns  of  the 
outer  batteries,  and  take  Fort  Pickens  by  assault.  The  enemy  were 
signally  repulsed  from  Santa  Eosa  Island,  with  heavy  loss  on  their  side, 
after  firing  a few  of  our  tents. 

A subsequent  attempt  to  make  a lodgment  on  the  island  was  defeated 
by  well-delivered  fire  from  one  of  our  ships  of  war. 

To  put  a stop  to  such  aggressions  a combined  fire  was  opened  upon 
the  enemy’s  batteries  from  Fort  Pickens  and  the  ships  of  our  squadron 
in  Pensacola  Harbor,  which  was  kept  up  throughout  the  22d  and  23d 
of  November.  On  the  first  day  Fort  McEee  and  several  guns  in  the 
other  hostile  batteries  were  silenced;  and  this  was  followed  by  the 
destruction,  under  our  heavy  cannonade,  of  nearly  two-thirds  of  the 
towns  of  Warrington  and  Woolsey,  adjoining  the  navy-yard,  and  by  .very 
serious  damage  to  the  navy-yard  and  its  buildings.  Fortunatelj^  but 
little  loss  was  s<ustained  by  us  in  men  or  in  the  condition  of  our  works. 

It  is  with  pride  and  gratification  that  the  Commanding  General  finds 


458  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

in  the  official  reports  the  most  honorable  mention  of  each  and  every 
officer,  as  well  as  of  the  enlisted  men,  engaged  on  these  occasions. 

By  command  of  Major-General  McClellan : 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  G eneral. 


Ko.  14. 

Reports  of  Maj,  Gen,  Braxton  Bragg^  C.  8,  Army,  commanding  at  Ben- 
sacola,  with  congratulatory  orders. 

Barrancas,  October  9,  1861. 

We  chastised  the  enemy  on  Santa  Eosa  last  night  for  his  annoyances; 
drove  him  from  his  camps,  burned  his  tents  and  many  stores,  sjiiked 
some  of  his  guns,  and  retired  in  good  order.  Our  loss  was  30  or  40 
killed  and  wounded.  The  enemy’s  supposed  to  be  larger,  as  he  was 
completely  surprised.  General  Anderson  commanded  and  was  dis- 
abled. Gan  I retain  General  Buggies  a few  days  'I  It  may  be  very  im- 
l)ortant.  Major  Vogdes  is  our  prisoner,  with  several  others;  Am  I 
authorized  to  exchange  ? 

BEAXTON  BEAGG, 

Major-General, 

General  S.  Cooper. 


Hdqrs.  Troops  of  the  Confederate  States, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.,  October  10,  1861. 

Sir:  Satisfied  from  information  received  that  the  enemy  contem- 
plated opening  fire  upon  us  very  soon,  and  desirous  of  avenging  the 
annoyances  he  had  recently  caused  my  command,  an  expedition  was 
projected  against  his  outposts  on  Santa  Eosa  Island.  It  was  executed 
on  Tuesday  night,  by  1,000  men,  under  Brig.  Gen.  E.  H.  Anderson,  in  a 
very  handsome  manner.  W e attacked  and  drove  in  his  pickets  and  out- 
posts, routed  a regiment  of  Xew  York  volunteers,  Col.  Billy  Wilson; 
burned  the  camp  and  stores  in  the  vicinity,  including  a large  quantity 
of  stores  and  provisions;  inflicted  a loss  of  about  50  killed,  including  a 
number  of  officers,  from  the  best  information  we  can  get;  wounded  a 
number  unknown ; made  some  20  prisoners,  Major  I.  Vogdes,  First  Artil- 
lery, with  them,  and  retired  within  our  lines. 

Our  loss  is  more  severe  than  at  first  reported.  The  men  became  much 
exhausted  from  the  long  and  fatiguing  march  through  the  deep  sand  of 
the  island,  and  no  doubt  a considerable  iiortion  of  the  loss  was  from 
this  cause.  W e might  have  easily  defended  ourselves  against  the  troops 
on  the  island,  but  it  was  necessary  to  leave  before  the  ^enemy’s  shipping 
should  open  and  destroy  our  transportation,  and  our  means  would  not 
enable  us  to  keep  them  off.  Thus  far  I hear  of  about  20  killed  on  our 
side,  including  3 officers.  Many  of  them  have  undoubtedly  been  massa- 
cred after  being  captured,  from  the’  appearance  of  their  bodies  which 
were  delivered  to  us.  The  enemy  also  have  about  40  of  our  party  pris- 
oners, several  of  them  wounded. 

The  exact  state  of  affairs  will  be  communicated  more  in  detail  as  soon 
as  the  reports  of  subordinates  are  received,  when  I will  take  occasion 
to  do  full  justice  to  individuals  for  special  acts  of  gallantry.  Each  State 
and  corps  represented  in  the  army  participated  in  the  affair,  and  the 
gallantry  and  good  conduct  of  the  troops  were  conspicuous.  Brig.  Gen. 


# 

Chap.  XVI.]  ACTION  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA.  459 

E.  H.  Anderson  conducted  the  expedition  with  a zeal  and  gallantly 
worthy  of  high  commendation.  At  the  close  he  received  a painful 
wound  in  the  left  elbow,  temporarily  disabling  him  j but  it  is  trusted 
we  shall  not  long  be  deprived  of  his  valuable  services. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major-  G eneral^  Commanding, 

Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

liichmondj  Va. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Aeur  Fensacolaj  Fla.,  October  29,  18C1. 

Sir  : Owing  to  the  disability  of  Brigadier-General  Anderson  from  his 
wound  1 have  been  unable  to  procure  earlier  a detailed  report  of  the 
affair  with  the  enemy  on  Santa  Rosa  Island  on  the  night  of  the  8th  and 
9th  instant,  with  a tabular  statement  of  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners. 
It  is  herevdth  inclosed.  [No.  15.]  The  circumstances  attending  this 
little  expedition  rendered  it  a most  daring  and  successful  feat  of  arms. 

Lauding  from  steamers  and  flats  on  the  enemy^s  shore  within  sight 
of  his  fleet,  marching  some  3 or  4 miles  in  the  darkness  of  night  over 
an  unknown  and  almost  impassable  ground  under  his  guns,  killiug  his 
pickets,  storming  his  intrenched  camp  of  600  or  700  meij,  driving  the 
enemy  oft*  in  utter  confusion  and  dismay,  and  burning  every  vestige  of 
clothing,  equipage,  and  provisions,  leaving  them  individually  in  a state 
of  destitution,  and  this  under  the  close  range  of  the  guns  of  his  strong- 
hold, Fort  Pickens,  without  his  discovering  our  object  or  firing  a gun, 
is  an  achievement  worthy  of  the  gallant  men  who  executed  it.  Our  loss 
was  almost  entirely  the  result  of  exhaustion  from  the  fatigue  of  the 
march  and  from  the  over-zeal  of  the  hosijital  guard  left  to  protect  the 
enemy’s  sick  when  they  were  captured. 

From  the  nature  of  the  service  and  the  necessity  of  rapidly  retiring 
with  our  small  force  before  the  enemy  could  rally  from  his  surprise  some 
of  our  wounded  were  left  on  the  field,  and,  I regret  to  say,  indications 
show  they  were  brutally  murdered  by  the  enemy.  Of  13  dead  bodies 
recovered  11  were  shot  through  the  head,  having  at  the  same  time  dis- 
abling wounds  in  the  body.  This  fact  admits  of  but  one  inference. 

Brigadier-General  Anderson  commends  in  very  just  terms  the  gallan- 
try of  his  little  band,  who  have  fully  justified  the  high  estimate  I had 
formed  of  this  excellent  little  army.  They  have  shown  it  is  only  neces- 
sary to  order  and  they  will  promptly  execute,  however  desperate  the 
undertaking.  The  general  modestly  omits  to  mention  that  at  the  close 
of  the  affair  he  received  a painful  wound  in  the  left  arm  from  a musket- 
ball,  which  will  disable  him  for  several  weeks. 

In  commending  the  troops  generally  for  their  good  conduct  I cannot 
omit  to  mention  the  separate  commanders  of  the  three  small  columns — 
Col.  J.  Patton  Anderson,  First  Florida  Volunteers ; Col.  J.  K.  Jackson, 
Fifth  Georgia  Volunteers,  and  Col.  J.  R.  Chalmers,  Ninth  Mississippi 
Volunteers.  The  darkness  and  nature  of  the  service  rendered  it  neces- 
sary for  each  one  to  act  an  independent  part.  They  proved  themselves 
not  only  gallant  leaders,  but  competent  commanders. 

To  Capt.  W.  R.  Boggs,  engineer,  C.  S.  Army,  and  First  Lieut.  J.  E. 
Slaughter,  C.  S.  Artillery,  acting  inspector-general,  I am  indebted  for  the 
l)erfect  knowledge  of  the  enemy’s  iiickets  and  positions,  obtained  by 


460  OPEEATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVT. 

close  reconnaissances,  on  wliich  the  expedition  was  based,  and  for  the 
secret  and  complete  organization  which  insured  its  success. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXT0:N  BRAGG, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 

Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

EicJimondy  Ya. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Troops  C.  S., 

NTo.  108.  ) Near  Pensacola^  Fla.,  Oetoher  10,  1861. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  R.  H.  Anderson  and  the  officers  and  men  of  his  com- 
mand will  accept  the  thanks  of  the  major-general  commanding  for  their 
gallant  expedition  of  Tuesday  night.  The  object  was  attained,  and  the 
enemy  taught  a severe  lesson  for  his  marauding  parties,  which  have 
recently  annoyed  us.  The  sacritice  which  must  be  made  in  such  ex- 
ploits was  not  unexpected,  and  we  can  only  mourn  the  loss  of  our  gal- 
lant comrades,  whilst  we  prepare  to  meet  their  fate  and  deserve  their 
honors. 

II.  The  circumstances  attending  this  affair  should  teach  us  the  neces- 
sity of  vigilance,  our  success  being  greatly  aided  by  the  want  of  it  on 
the  part  of  the  enemy,  and  especially  as  an  attempt  at  retaliation  may 
be  expected. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg : 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  15. 

Eeport  of  Brig.  Gen.  BicJiard  H,  Anderson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 

expedition. 

Pensacola,  Ela.,  October  23,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  affair  on 
Santa  Rosa  Island  on  the  night  of  the  8th  and  morning  of  the  9th  of 
October : 

The  detachments  which  had  been  ordered  to  assemble  at  the  navy- 
yard  arrived  at  the  hour  appointed,  and  were  embarked  in  good  order 
on  the  steamer  Time.  Whilst  proceeding  from  the  navy-yard  to  Pensa- 
cola the  troops  were  divided  into  battalions,  as  follows : 

The  First  Battalion,  350  strong,  to  the  command  of  which  Col.  James 
R.  Chalmers,  Ninth  Mississippi  Regiment,  was  assigned,  was  composed 
of  detachments  from  the  Ninth  and  Tenth  Mississippi  and  First  Ala- 
bama Regiments.  Three  companies  of  the  Seventh  Regiment  Alabama 
Volunteers,  two  companies  of  Louisiana  infantry,  and  two  companies 
of  the  First  Regiment  of  Florida  Volunteers,  composed  the  Second 
Battalion,  400  strong,  to  the  command  of  which  Col.  J.  Patton  Ander- 
son, First  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers,  was  assigned.  The  Third 
Battalion,  260  strong,  under  command  of  Col.  John  K.  Jackson,  Fifth 
Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers^  was  composed  of  detachments  from  the 
Fifth  Georgia  Regiment  and  the  Georgia  Battalion.  An  independent 
company  of  53  men,  selected  from  the  Fifth  Georgia  Regiment,  and 
Captain  Homer's  company  of  artillery,  lightly  armed  with  pistols  and 
knives,  carrying  materials  for  spiking  cannon,  burning  and  destroying 


Chap.  XVI.  ] 


ACTION  ON  SANTA  EOSA  ISLAND,  FLA. 


4G1 


buildings,  gnu-carriages,  &c.,  were  placed  under  command  of  Lieuten- 
ant HalloiKinist,  acting  ordnance  otiicer.  Lieutenant  Xelms,  adjutant 
Fifth  Georgia  Kegiment,  was  attached  to  this  command. 

The  medical  officers  who  accompanied  the  expedition  were : Dr. 
Micks,  of  the  Louisiana  infantry ; Dr.  Tompkins,  of  the  Fifth  Georgia 
Eegiment;  Dr.  Gholson,  of  the  Ninth  Mississippi  Kegiment;  Dr.  Lips- 
comb, of  the  Tenth  Mississippi  Kegiment,  and  Dr.  Gamble,  of  the  First 
Florida  Kegiment,  and  a detail  of  20  men  was  made  to  attend  on  and 
assist  them. 

Arriving  at  Pensacola  at  about  10  o’clock  p.  m.,  the  transfer  of  the 
troops  to  the  steamer  Ewing  and  the  barges  and  flats  which  had  been  pro- 
vided was  pushed  on  as  rapidly  as  possible,  but  not  without  some  unavoid- 
able delay.  It  was  found  absolutely  necessary  to  employ  the  Neaflie  to 
assist  in  towing,  and  at  length,  all  preparations  having  been  completed, 
the  boats  departed  from  Pensacola  at  a little  after  12  o’clock,  crossed 
the  bay,  and  eflected  a landing  at  the  point  which  had  been  indicated 
by  instructions.  Disembarkation  was  rapidly  executed  in  good  order 
and  silence,  and  the  battalions  were  formed  upon  the  beach  at  a little 
after  2 o’clock  a.  m. 

To  effectually  accomplish  the  object  of  the  expedition  Colonel  Chal- 
mers was  directed  to  advance  rapidly  along  the  north  beach.  Colonel 
Anderson  along  the  south  beach,  and  Colonel  Jackson,  following  a few 
hundred  yards  in  rear  of  Colonel  Chalmers,  was  to  push  his  command  to 
the  middle  of  the  island,  and  deploy  it  as  soon  as  he  should  hear  firing 
from  either  of  the  other  battalions  or  should  perceive  from  any  other 
indications  that  the  enemy’s  camp  was  approached  or  assailed  by  the 
other  columns.  Colonels  Chalmers  and  Anderson  had  been  further  di- 
rected to  endeavor  to  restrain  their  men  from  firing,  to  capture  guards 
and  sentinels,  and  to  place  their  commands,  if  possible,  between  Fort 
Pickens  and  the  camp  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenant  Hallonquist  followed 
in  rear  of  Colonel  Jackson’s  battalion,  with  orders  to  do  whatever 
damage  he  could  to  the  batteries,  buildings,  and  camps  from  which  the 
enemy  might  be  driven. 

After  a march  of  3 or  4 miles,  rendered  toilsome  and  fatiguing  by  the 
nature  of  the  ground,  the  head  of  Colonel  Chalmers’  column  came  sud- 
denly upon  a sentinel,  who  fired  ineffectually  at  our  troops,  and  was  him- 
self instantly  shot  down.  The  alarm  having  been  thus  given,  and  it 
becoming  impossible  to  conceal  our  further  advance  from  the  enemy,  I 
ordered  Colonel  Jackson  to  push  his  way  through  the  thickets  to  the 
middle  of  the  island,  and  advance  as  rapidly  as  possible.  The  guards 
and  outposts  of  the  Zouaves  were  now  rapidly  driven  in  or  shot  down, 
and  the  progress  of  a few  hundred  yards,  quickly  accomplished  by 
Colonel  Jackson,  brought  him  upon  the  camp  of  the  enemy  in  advance 
of  either  of  the  other  battalions.  Without  a moment’s  delay  he  charged 
it  with  the  bayonet,  but  met  with  no  resistance.  The  camp  was  almost 
entirely  deserted,  and  our  troops  speedily  applied  the  torch  to  the  tents, 
store-houses,  and  sheds  of  Wilson’s  Zouaves. 

In  the  mean  time  Colonels  Chalmers  and  Anderson,  advancing  along 
the  shores  of  the  island,  encountered  pickets  and  outposts,  with  which 
they  had  some  sharp  skirmishing,  but  quickly  beat  them  off,  and  joined 
in  the  work  of  destroying  the  camp.  This  ha^dng  been  most  thor- 
oughly executed,  the  troops  were  reassembled,  with  a view  to  proceed- 
ing against  and  destroying  the  batteries  which  lay  between  the  camp 
and  Fort  Pickens ; but  daylight  appearing,  and  there  being  no  longer 
a possibility  of  a surprise  of  the  batteries,  I directed  the  signal  ior 
retufing  to  be  sounded  and  the  troops  to  be  put  in  march  for  the  boats. 


462  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

At  about  half  way  between  the  Zouave  camp  and  the  point  of  disem- 
barkation of  our  troops  we  encountered  two  companies  of  United  States 
regulars,  which  had  passed  us  under  cover  of  the  darkness,  and  posted 
themselves  behind  a dense  thicket  to  intercept  our  retiring  column, 
and  a vxry  sharp  but  short  skirmish  ensued.  The  enemy  was  speedily 
driven  olf,  and  our  troops  resumed  their  march.  The  re-embarkation 
was  successfully  accomplished,  and  the  order  given  to  the  steamers  to 
steer  for  Pensacola,  when  it  was  discovered  that  a hawser  had  become 
entangled  in  the  propeller  of  the  Neaffie,  and  that  she  could  not  move. 

After  some  delay,  from  ineffectual  attempts  to  extricate  the  propeller, 
she  and  the  large  flat  which  she  had  in  tow  were  made  fast  to  the  Ewing. 
It  was  soon  found,  however,  that  with  this  incumbrance  the  Ewing 
would  not  obey  her  helm,  and  that  a change  in  the  manner  of  towing 
the  Xeaffie  was  necessary.  While  attempting  to  make  this  change  the 
flats  and  barges  which  the  Ewing  had  in  tow  became  detached  from 
her,  and  still  further  delay  was  occasioned  in  recovering  them.  By  the 
time  this  had  been  done  the  hawser  was  cut  aAvay  from  the  propeller, 
and  the  Keaffie  proceeded  on  her  way.  The  enemy,  taking  advantage 
of 'these  circumstancies,  appeared  among  the  sand  Jiills  near  the  beach, 
and  opened  a fire  upon  the  masses  of  our  troops  densely  crowded  upon 
our  transports,  but  without  doing  much  execution,  and  we  were  soon 
out  of  range  of  their  rifles.  The  necessity  of  using  the  Keaffie  as  a tug 
and  the  accident  which  for  some  time  disabled  her  prevented  her  guns 
from  being  brouglit  into  play,  otherwise  she  might  have  rendered  effect- 
ual service  in  driving  back  the  enemy  who  harassed  us  from  the  beach. 

Our  loss  in  this  affair  was  as  follows : Killed,  2 commissioned  offi- 
cers, 4 non-commissioned  officers,  11  privates,  and  1 citizen  volunteer ; 
wounded,  2 commissioned  officers,  5 non-commissioned  officers,  and  32 
privates  j taken  prisoners,  5 commissioned  officers,  2 non-commissioned 
officers,  and  23  privates.  The  larger  portion  of  the  officers,  non-com- 
missioned officers,  and  privates  captured  by  the  enemy  were  the  guard 
left  for  the  protection  of  their  hospital  and  sick  and  the  medical  officers 
who  had  remained  in  the  building  to  attend  to  such  of  our  wounded  as 
might  be  carried  there.  Notwithstanding  that  I caused  the  signal  for 
retiring  to  be  repeatedly  sounded  during  the  return  of  the  troops  it  was 
not  heard  at  the  hospital,  and  the  guard  and  medical  officers  were  cut 
off  and  taken  prisoners. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  in  killed  and  wounded  has  not  been  precisely 
ascertained,  but  is  certainly  known  to  have  much  exceeded  our  own. 
From  such  imperfect  observation  as  I made  in  passing  over  parts  of 
the  ground  I will  estimate  his  loss  at  50  or  60  killed  and  100  wounded. 
Twenty  prisoners  were  taken,  among  them  Maj.  Israel  Yogdes,  of  the 
United  States  artillery. 

The  destruction  of  property  in  the  conflagration  was  very  great. 
Large  stores  of  provisions,  supplies  of  clothing,  camp  and  garrison 
equipage,  arms,  and  ammunition  were  entirely  consumed.  Some  arms 
were  brought  away  by  our  men,  and  in  a few  instances  mouey  and 
clothing,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  report  of  Colonel  Jackson,  and  I would 
respectfully  recommend  that  the  captors  be  permitted  to  retain  what- 
ev^er  private  property  they  have  taken. 

It  is  with  pride  and  pleasure  that  I bear  testimony  to  and  call  to  the 
notice  of  the  general  commanding  the  admirable  conduct  of  the  troops 
throughout  the  expedition  and  conflict.  The  alacrity,  courage,  and 
discipline  exhibited  by  them  merit  the  highest  commendation,  and  gKe 
assurance  of  success  in  any  future  encounters  which  they  may  have 
with  the  enemies  of  our  country. 


Chap.'XVI.]  occupation  OF'  SHIP  ISLAND,  MISS.  4G3 

I beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  the  accompanying  reports  of  commanders 
of  battalions  and  of  Lieutenant  Hallonquist  for  particulars  concerning 
casualties,  incidents,  and  individual  instances  of  meritorious  conduct. 
I inclose  the  rej^ort  of  Captain  Brent,  C.  S.  Navy,  who  was  charged 
with  the  entire  arrangements  for  the  transportation  of  my  command,* 
under  whose  direction  this  important  matter  was  very  successfully 
managed.* 

The  report  of  Major  Lovell,  C.  S.  Army,  chief  of  harbor  police,  and  in 
command  of  the  steamer  Neaffie,  is  also  submitted.*  The  members  of 
my  staff,  Capt.  T.  S.  Mills,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Oapt.  Hugh 
M.  King,  Fifth  Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers  5 Lieuts.  Calvin  L.  Sayre 
and  Wilber  Johnson,  C.  S.  Marines,  who  volunteered  their  services  and 
acted  as  my  aides,  rendered  me  active  and  efficient  assistance  through- 
out the  whole  of  the  operations.  Captain  Mills,  who  was  with  Colonel 
Anderson’s  battalion  in  its  first  encounter  with  the  enemy,  received  a 
severe  contusion*  in  the  chest  from  a partially-spent  ball,  but  neverthe- 
less continued  energetically  to  perform  his  duties,  and  Lieutenant  Sayre, 
while  fearlessly  using  his  revolver  with  effect,  had  his  thigh  bone  shat- 
tered just  above  the  right  knee  by  a musket-ball,  and,  being  left  upon 
the  ground,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Capt.  Hugh  M.  King,  in 
conveying  orders  and  superintending  the  destruction  of  the  camp,  dis- 
played commendable  zeal  and  activity,  and  the  ardor  and  intreindity  of 
Lieutenant  Johnson,  while  deserving  especial  notice,  give  promise  of 
this  young  officer’s  future  success  and  distinction. 

The  officers  of  the  medical  staff'  rendered  to  the  wounded  every  service 
which  under  the  circumstances  was  possible. 

Colonels  Anderson  and  Jackson  pay  graceful  tribute  to  the  memory 
of  Captain  Bradford  and  Lieutenant  Nelms,  of  their  regiments,  to  which 
I desire  to  add  my  respectful  admiration  for  them  and  for  every  brave 
X)atriot  who  fell  with  them  in  defense  of  their  country’s  liberties. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  vour  most  obedient  servant, 

R.  H.  ANDERSON, 
Brigadier-General^  Provisional  Army. 

Maj.  G.  G.  Garner, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  C.  A.,  Edqrs.  Army  of  Pensaeola. 


DECEMBER  3,  1861. — Occupation  of  Ship  Island,  Miss. 

REFORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F,  Butler,  of  the  departure  of  the  expedition. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  of  the  arrival  of  the  expedition  at  Ship  Island. 
No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Phelps,  commanding. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler  of  the  departure  of  the  expedition. 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  England, 

Boston,  December  2,  18G1. 

General  : I beg  leave  to  report  that  the  steamship  Constitution  sailed 
from  Boston  to  Portland,  in  the  State  of  Maine,  upon  Thursday,  the  21st 
ultimo,  with  two  regiments  of  infantry — the  Ninth  Connecticut  and  the 


None  of  these  subordinate  reports  have  been  found. 


464  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

# 

Twenty  sixth  Eeg^ment  of  Massachusetts  Volunteers — together  with  the 
Fifth  Massachusetts  Light  Battery,  in  all  numbering  about  1,900  men. 
One  compajiy  of  the  Ninth  Connecticut  was  allowed  to  remain  at  Camp 
Chase,  in  Lowell,  to  recruit  for  the  regiment,  where  it  is  now  stationed. 
Subsistence  stores  for  thirty  days  for  300  men  were  taken  on  board  at 
Boston.  It  was  my  intention  to  have  placed  on  board  this  ship  at  Port- 
land the  Twelfth  Maine  Ltegiment,  this  coming  within  the  chartered 
capacity  of  the  vessel,  but  upon  arriving  at  that  place  the  captain  became 
uneasy  and  doubtiul  of  tbe  capacity  of  the  ship,  entered  a written  pro- 
test against  taking  it  on  board,  and  upon  the  23d  ultimo  sailed  from  that 
port  with  the  freight  taken  at  Boston.  I have  since  had  the  Twelfth 
Maine  Kegiment  brought  to  this  State  and  encamped  at  Camp  Chase, 
where  it  now  remains,  waiting  the  remainder  of  vessels  to  carry  it  on, 
and  undergoing  instruction. 

By  the  action  of  the  captain  of  the  Constitution  he  made  forfeit  his 
charter-party  and  leaves  the  claim  of  the  owners  to  be  adjusted  upon 
the  principles  of  equity. 

On  the  26th  ultimo  I forwarded  the  bark  Kingfisher,  of  Boston,  for 
the  same  destination  from  Boston,  with  extra  clothing  for  three  regi- 
ments and  other  quartermasters  stores,  including  parts  of  a floating 
bridge  half  a mile  long,  lumber,  &c.,  for  building  wharf,  &c.,  carriages 
for  field  battery,  subsistence  and  sutler  stores,  and  130  horses  and  for- 
age, details  of  which  bill  of  lading  are  in  Schedule  A. 

1 liave  the  George  Green,  Idaho,  and  Black  Prince  now  loading,  all 
from  1,000  to  1,400  tons  register,  all  sailing  vessels.  The  George  Green 
is  loading  with  lumber,  subsistence  stores,  and  horses,  and  will  be  ready 
to  sail  about  the  10th  instant.  The  Idaho  and  Black  Prince  will  take 
on  board  the  Twelfth  IMaiiie  Kegiment,  with  subsistence  stores,  lumber, 
horses,  and  forage.  They  will  be  ready  to  sail  about  the  10th  instant. 
I am  loading  the  bark  with  lumber,  cement,  horses  and  forage,  and  surf- 
boats.  It  will  be  ready  to  sail  about  tlie  10th  instant.  I have  chartered 
the  steam-tug  Saxon,  to  take  out  a company  of  artillery,  with  their  guns 
and  subsistence  stores,  and  intend  that  it  shall  sail  as  convoy  and  tug 
to  the  above  vessels. 

The  Constitution  touched  at  Fortress  Monroe,  and  on  the  27th  ultimo, 
having  taken  on  board  Brigadier-General  Phelps,  sailed  for  Slip  Island, 
where  it  becomes  due  upon  the  3d  instant.  If  it  succeeds  in  unloading 
to  leave  there  on  the  7th,  it  will  be  due  here,  in  ordinary  course,  upon 
the  15th  instant,  ready  for  further  service. 

1 have  been  obliged  to  use  sailing  ships  for  transporting  the  men 
because  of  the  impossibility  of  getting  steamers,  being  informed  by 
those  in  whose  judgment  confidence  may  be  placed  that  they  are  equally 
safe. 

I have  in  process  of  recruitment — ^more  of  which  will  be  ready  by  the 
time  of  the  return  of  the  Constitution  than  can  be  taken  on  board  of 
her — two  regiments  in  Massachusetts,  one  regiment  in  Vermont,  and  one 
regiment  in  Connecticut,  a squadron  of  mounted  men,  and  three  bat- 
teries, of  full  complement.  I have  secured  and  in  process  of  beiiig  ready 
arms,  ammunition,  uniforms,  and  equipments  for  all  of  these.  I have 
in  my  report  of  the  ::d  instant  given  a complete  list  of  ordnance  and  ord- 
nance stores  which  can  be  obtained  for  the  objects  of  the  expedition.  I 
do  not  send  herewith  lists  of  commissary  stores  purchased,  but  these 
may  be  stated  generally  to  be  sufficient  for  5,000  men  for  three,  months, 
besides  the  fresh  provisions  for  the  voyage.  I have  also  such  stores  aiid 
])iovision  of  materials  as  may  be  necessary  to  a post  fortified  on  Ship 
Island  in  a reasonable  state  of  defense. 


Chai'.  XVI.]  occupati5>n  of  ship  island,  miss.  4G5 

Schedule  B contains  the  list  of  quartermaster’s  stores  shipped  on 
hoard  the  Constitution. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLEE, 
Major- Genera ?,  Commanding. 
To  the  Adjutant  General  U.  S.  Army. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler  of  the  arrival  of  the  expedition 

at  Ship  Island. 

Washington,  December  19,  18G1. 

I have  the  honor  to  forward  to  the  Commanding  General  a copy  of 
the  report  of  Brigadier-General  Phelps  of  the  landing  of  a portion  of 
my  division  upon  Ship  Island,  together  with  details  of  the  state  of  the 
island  and  its  needs  for  a defensive  position. 

I have  not  received  from  General  Phelps  any  official  copy  of  the  proc- 
lamation to  which  he  refers,  but  from  other  sources  have  such  informa- 
tion as  renders  it  certain  that  the  printed  copies  are  substantially  cor- 
rect. I need  hardly  say  that  the  issuing  of  any  iiroclamation  upon  such 
occasion  was  nei  ther  suggested  nor  authorized  by  me,  and  most  certainly 
not  such  a pne.  With  that  important  exception  I commend  the  report, 
and  ask  attention  to  its  clear  and  business-like  statements. 

'I  have  the  honor  .to  be,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 

To  the  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Phelps,  commanding. 

Ship  Island,  Mississippi  Sound, 

December  5,  18G1. 

Sir  : A part  of  the  Middlesex  brigade,  consisting  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Twenty-sixth  and  Connecticut  Ninth  Infantry  Volunteers,  with 
Captain  Manning’s  battery  of  artillery  (volunteers),  numbering  in  all 
(servants  included)  1,908,  arrived  offi  Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  on  board  steam- 
transport  Constitution,  on  the  2Gth  November.  In  compliance  with  pre- 
vious orders  and  instructions  I relieved  Colonel  Jones,  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Twenty-sixth,  in  command,  and  we  stood  out  to  sea  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  27th.  After  a pleasant  passage  we  reached  Ship  Island 
Harbor,  Mississippi  Sound,  on  the  evening  of  the  3d  December.  Dis- 
patches for  Flag-Officer  McKean,  with  which  I was  intrusted  were  sent 
by  Lieutenant  Winslow,  of  the  E.  E.  Cuyler,  the  same  evening,  to  Pen- 
sacola Station,  where  the  flag-officer  then  was,  and  to  whom  I made 
known  my  arrival. 

Captain  Smith,  of  the  Massachusetts,  offered  us  all  the  means  within 
his  power  to  facilitate  our  landing — an  operation  which  we  have  not  yet 
completed,  and  which  we  should  have  found  very  difficult,  if  not  impos- 
sible, were  it  not  for  the  zealous  assistance  rendered  by  Lieutenant  Buch- 
30  R R— YOL  VI 


466  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  g.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


auau  and  other  officers  of  his  command,  aided  by  two  high-pressure 
steamers  which  the  Navy  had  recently  captured.  We  found  in  the  har- 
bor on  our  arrival  the  United  States  war  vessel  Massachusetts  and  the 
E.  E.  Cuyler,  besides  several  prizes;  and  not  long  afterwards  the  steam 
gunboat  New  London  and  an  armed  schooner,  a part  of  the  Gulf  Block- 
ading Squadron,  came  in. 

Some  six  or  more  steam  gunboats,  if  not  drawing  more  than  G or  7 
feet,  could  be  well  employed  here  in  stopping  a considerable  trade  and 
in  otherwise  annoying  the  enemy.  Without  them  the  enemy’s  light- 
draught  boats  can  pass  in  view  between  New  Orleans  and  Mobile  with 
impunity.  On  no  part  of  our  coast  could  gunboats  be  better  at  this 
time  employed.  Upon  the  west  end  of  the  island  a partially-finished 
fort  is  occupied  by  about  170  sailors  and  marines,  commanded  by  Lieu- 
tenant Buchanan,  of  the  Navy,  who  has  several  Dahlgren  large- caliber 
guns  in  position  on  navy  carriages.  The  rebels,  by  whom  the  island 
was  held  several  months,  abandoned  it  in  September  last,  and  destroyed 
nearly  everything  which  they  could  not  carry  off.  The  fort  and  light- 
house, with  keeper’s  lodgings,  remain,  the  former  unfinished  and  the 
latter  injured  to  some  extent  by  fire.  The  walls  of  the  fort  have  been 
carried  up  to  a sufficient  height  by  the  rebels  to  form  nearly  a tier  of 
casemates,  and  partly  covered  over  with  some  considerable  mason  work; 
and  with  material  now  on  the  ground,  except  lime,  it  might  receive 
some  twenty  guns  on  casemate  carriages.  I would  recommend  that 
number,  one-half  or  part  Sawyer’s  24-pounder  rifles,  the  other  half  8 or 
10  inch  columbiads.  Traverse  circles,  traverse  blocks  of  stone  or  wood, 
and  iron  pintles  to  hold  the  tongue  of  the  chassis,  would  be  necessary. 
A magazine  would  have  to  be  constructed,  for  which  more  brick  would 
be  needed.  For  immediate  use  a large  number  of  sand  bags  might  not 
be  out  of  place.  For  the  purpose  of  landing  guns,  coal  for  the  Navy, 
and  other  heavy  materials,  a large  convenient  wharf  will  be  necessary, 
with  some  quarter  or  a half  mile  of  railway,  the  iron  for  which,  and 
perhaps  the  lumber,  would  have  to  be  brought  from  the  North,  together 
Avith  a pile-driver  and  other  tools  for  construction;  though  perhaps 
timber  partly  enough  might  be  found  here. 

The  island  is  a long,  narrow  strip  of  land  running  north  of  east. 
Some  6 or  7 miles  towards  the  west  end,  where  the  harbor  lies,  and 
where  we  are  encamped,  it  consists  of  sand  hummocks  of  pure  white 
sand,  interspersed  with  sedgy  spots  of  water.  It  bears  evidence  of  hav- 
ing been  overflowed  in  some  extraordinary  storms,  large  trunks  of  trees 
having  drifted  on  some  of  its  higher  hummocks.  The  east  end  widens 
out  in  a triangular  shape,  embracing  about  1 square  mile,  and  is  cov- 
ered with  pine  trees.  I made  an  unsuccessful  effort  to  have  it  examined 
on  the  day  of  our  arrival,  and  regret  having  been  too  much  occupied 
since  to  repeat  it.  From  appearances,  it  would  be  well  to  have  the 
camp  there,  with  a wharf,  and  a small  steamer  to  ply  between  the  two 
points.  For  the  present,  and  to  expedite  the  return  of  the  Constitution, 
I concluded  to  land  here,  where  I can  place,  though  indifferently  well, 
one  or  two  more  regiments.  The  land  is  in  no  respects  suitable  for  a 
camp,  especially  in  view  of  such  instructions  as  one  of  the  regiments 
present  particularly  needs.  Should  the  stay  here  be  of  long  continu- 
ance, huts  with  floors  will  be  necessary. 

While  writing  this  report  I learn,  much  to  my  regret,  that  in  trans- 
ferring the  baggage  from  the  Constitution  to  the  lighter  one  of  Captain 
Manning’s  6-pounder  rifled  guns  has  been  lost  overboard  in  4 fathoms 
of  water.  How  such  an  unpleasant  accident  could  have  happened  I 
have  not  yet  been  informed. 


Chap.  XVI.J  OCCUPATION  OF  SHIP  ISLAND,  MISS.  467 

Deeming  it  proper  to  make  known  to  the  people  of  this  region  the  re- 
moter  objects  of  this  expedition,  I have  prepared  a proclamation,  which 
I shall  endeavor  to  have  disseminated  as  early  and  widely  as  possible, 
consistent  with  the  more  pressing  demands  of  the  servce.* 

December  6. — The  work  upon  the  fort  would  require  the  superintend- 
ence of  a military  engineer.  For  present  purposes  the  walls  now  stand- 
ing, though  built  of  brick,  may  answer,  but  for  future  use  a granite 
work  of  solid  foundation  and  three  tiers  of  guns  might  be  necessary. 
It  might  be  weU  for  the  present  to  have  three  Sawyer’s  mounted  outside 
the  work,  on  entire  traverse  circles,  to  be  covered  by  sand  bags.  For 
this  purpose  suitable  platforms  will  be  needed.  I have  to-day,  in  accord- 
ance with  my  instructions,  held  an  interview  with  Captain  Smith,  of  the 
Massachusetts,  Flag-Of&cer  McKean  not  having  yet  arrived.  Captain 
Smith  thinks  that  there  is  water  enough  on  the  island  and  in  the  vicinity 
to  supply  gunboats  and  other  vessels  of  the  station,  although  procuring 
it  will  be  slow  and  difficult.  He  says  that  the  flag-officer  has  ordered 
more  guns  for  the  fort,  and  that  they  are  daily  expected.  He  suggests 
that  there  should  be  a coal  depot  established  here  on  the  island,  and 
that  a regular  steam  packet  should  ply  between  the  island  and  Fort 
Monroe,  Va.,  or  some  other  Northern  port.  He  also  proposes  the  occu- 
pation of  other  points  upon  the  islands  along  the  sound,  with  a view  to 
the  more  complete  cutting  off  of  communication  between  New  Orleans 
and  Mobile,  which  has  been  to  a great  extent  unimpeded  from  the  want 
of  proper  gunboats  and  sufficient  force.  He,  moreover,  suggests  a plan 
of  driving  piles  across  several  of  the  mouths  of  the  Mississiplii,  leaving 
but  one  open. 

The  discharging  of  the  cargo  of  the  Constitution  is  still  going  on  by 
means  of  the  two  steamers  before  mentioned  and  a temporary  wharf. 
The  wind  since  our  arrival  has  prevailed  from  north  of  east,  and  the 
water  last  night  rose  to  such  a height  that  a considerable  portion  of  the 
island  between  the  fort  and  light-house  was  overflowed,  leaving  a thin 
sheet  of  water  there  5 an  event  which  I am  informed  is  not  unfrequent. 
The  narrow  strip  of  sand,  about  a quarter  or  third  of  a mde  in  width, 
which  forms  the  western  extremity  of  the  island,  is  but  ill-suited  for  a 
camp,  either  regulars  or  volunteers. 

The  Connecticut  regiment  (the  Ninth)  has  never  yet  received  its  arms, 
nor  is  it  supplied  with  a proper  allowance  of  tents.  It  is  new,  and 
requires  a great  deal  of  instruction.  Of  quartermaster’s  stores,  such 
as  spades,  shovels,  axes,  camp  hatchets,  carpenters’  and  masons’  tools, 
a large  supply,  I understand  from  Captain  Butler,  has  been  ordered, 
and  they  will  iirobably  be  needed. 

This  afternoon  a dispatch  from  Flag-Officer  McKean  has  arrived  by 
the  De  Soto,  by  which  I learn  that  he  will  soon  be  here,  and  make  this 
point  his  headquarters. 

On  board  the  New  London,  Captain  Eeed,  I ha  ve  visited  the  eastern 
extremity  of  the  island  5 the  part  that  lies  bej^ond  the  lagoon.  There 
is  space  sufficient  there  for  5,000  men,  but  the  land  is  so  interspersed 
with  marshes  that  I consider  a camp  there  for  that  number  to  be  out  of 
the  question.  The  water  along  the  northern  shore  for  some  distance  is 
so  shallow  that  our  row-boats  dragged  bottom.  The  beach  is  lined  by 
a ridge  of  sand  hummocks  some  10  feet  in  height,  but  beyond  these  the 
land  is  generally  low,  and  covered  with  pines,  scrub  oak,  scrub  palmetto, 
and  marsh  grass  in  patches.  Mosquitoes  would  be  troublesome  there 
at  all  seasons,  and  in  rainy  weather  much  of  the  ground  would  be  under 


Proclamation  not  found. 


468  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 

water.  The  process  of  reclamation  seems  still  to  be  going  on  with  an 
activity  as  if  it  had  but  just  begun,  though  the  island  is  probably  as  old 
as  the  main-land.  The  animals  seen  are  snakes,  toads,  birds,  raccoons, 
pigs,  and,  it  is  said,  alligators. 

The  NTew  London,  with  four  long  32s  and  one  rifle,  appears  to  be, 
under  her  present  commander,  a very  effective,  well-managed  craft. 
Since  her  arrival  here,  some  fifteen  days  ago,  she  has  captured  over 
five  i^rizes  and  given  the  enemy  great  annoyance.  The  enemy’s  gun- 
boats are  of  light  draught,  and  are  armed  with  rifles,  and  it  is  folly  in 
us  to  allow  them  such  an  unnecessary  advantage.  With  such  an  advan- 
tage on  our  side  we  could  make  ourselves  felt  in  this  quarter  in  a way 
calculated  to  produce  an  effect. 

December  7. — The  land  on  this  side  of  the  lagoon  has  been  examined 
by  several  persons,  and  it  represented  as  better  fitted  for  a camp  than 
the  part  beyond  the  lagoon,  being  higher  and  drier,  but  the  water  is 
so  shallow  that  a long  wharf  would  have  to  be  built,  and  even  then  the 
space  would  hardly  be  Suitable  for  a camp  of  5,000  men.  Nor  are  the 
islands  in  the  neighborhood  apparently  much  better.  I shall  endeavor 
to  make  the  most  of  our  position  for  the  public  service. 

2 o^cloch  p.  m. — The  Constitution  has  been  completely  discharged, 
and  will  sail  before  dark.  While  reperusing  this  report,  the  De  Soto 
and  New  London  have  been  engaging  the  enemy’s  boats  in  the  direc- 
tion of  New  Orleans.  • 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier ‘ General^  Commanding. 

MaJ.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  New  England^  Boston,  Mass, 


NOVEMBEK  22-23,  1861. — Bombardment  of  the  Confederate  lines  about 

Pensacola,  Fla. 

RET»OI?,TS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Col.  Harvey  Brown,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Department  of 
Florida. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  batteries. 

No.  3.— Capt.  Richard  C.  Duryea,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  Richard  H.  Jackson,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  5. — Capt.  James  M.  Robertson,  Second  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  6. — Capt.  Harvey  A.  Allen,  Second  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  A.  C.  M.  Pennington,  Second  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  8. — ^Lieut.  Francis  W.  Seeley,  Fourth  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  9. — Capt.  Samuel  F.  Chalfin,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  10. — Capt.  Loomis  L.  Langdon,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  11. — Capt.  John  McL.  Hildt,  Third  U.  S.  Infantry. 

No.  12. — Lieut.  Alexander  N.  Shipley,  Third  U.  S.  Infantry. 

No.  13. — Capt.  Matthew  M.  Blunt,  Twelfth  U.  S.  Infantry. 

No.  14. — Lieut.  Walter  McFarland,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

No.  15. — Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Army  of  Pensacola,  with 
congratulatory  orders. 

No.  16. — Brig.  Gen.  Richard  H.  Anderson,  C.  S.  Army, 


CuAP.  XVL]  BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA.  469 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Col,  Harvey  Browrij  Fifth  U.  S,  Artillery^  Commanding  De- 
partment of  Florida. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pickens,  November  25,  180  J. 

General  : That  Fort  Pickens  has  been  beleaguered  by  the  rebels 
for  the  last  nine  months,  and  that  it  was  daily  threatened  by  the  boast- 
ing rebels  with  the  fate  of  Sumter,  is  a fact  notorious  to  the  whole 
world.  Since  its  occupancy  by  Lieutenant  Slemmer  the  rebels  have 
been  surrounding  it  with  batteries  and  daily  arming  them  with  the 
hea'sdest  and  most  efficient  guns  known  to  our  service — guns  stolen 
from  us — until  they  considered  this  fort  as  virtually  their  own,  its  occu- 
pancy being  only  a question  of  time.  I have  been  in  command  since 
the  16th  of  April,  and  during  the  whole  of  that  time  their  force  has 
averaged,  so  far  as  I can  learn,  from  eight  to  ten  times  the  number  of 
mine.  The  position  in  which  I have  thus  been  placed  has  been  suffi- 
ciently trying,  and  I have  at  three  separate  times  intended  to  free 
myself  from  it  by  opening  my  batteries  on  them;  but  imperious  cir- 
cumstances, over  which  I had  no  control,  have  unexpectedly  in  each 
instance  prevented. 

Affairs  were  in  this  state  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  of  October,  when 
the  enemy,  1,500  strong,  attacked  by  surprise  a portion  of  my  command 
on  an  intensely  dark  night.  They  were  defeated  and  driven  from  the 
island  with  great  loss  b^y  less  than  200  regulars  and  50  volunteers,  all 
the  efficient  force  I had  disposable  for  the  purpose.  An  insult  so  gross 
to  the  flag  of  my  country  could  not  by  me  be  passed  unnoticed,  and  I 
designed  immediately  to  take  appropriate  notice  of  it,  but,  as  I said 
before,  circumstances  over  which  I had  no  control  prevented.  I make 
these  prefatory  remarks  to  explain  why  I have  now  opened  my  batteries 
on  the  enemy,  when  from  the  smallness  of  my  forces — about  one-sixth 
of  his,  1,300  to  8,000 — I have  not  the  means  of  producing  any  decisive 
results,  and  as  evidence  of  my  having  accomplished  what  I designed — 
the  punishing  the  perpetrators  of  an  insult  on  my  country’s  flag. 

Having  invited  Flag-Officer  McKean  to  co-operate  with  me  in  attack- 
ing the  rebels,  and  to  which  he  gave  a ready  and  cordial  assent,  I on 
the  morning  of  the  22d  opened  my  batteries  on  the  enemy,  to  which 
in  the  course  of  half  an  hour  he  responded  from  his  numerous  forts 
and  batteries,  extending  from  the  navy-yard  to  Fort  McEee,  a distance 
of  about  4 miles,  the  whole  nearly  equidistant  from  this  fort,  and  on 
which  line  he  has  two  forts,  McEee  and  Barrancas,  and  fourteen  sepa- 
rate batteries,  containing  from  one  to  four  guns,  many  of  them  being 
10-inch  columbiads  and  some  12  and  13  inch  sea-coast  mortars,  the 
distance  varying  from  2,100  to  2,900  yards  from  this  fort.  At  the 
same  time  of  my  opening  Flag-Officer  McKean,  in  the  Niagara,  and 
Gaptain  Ellison,  in  the  Eichmond,  took  position  as  near  to  Fort  McEee 
as  the  depth  of  water  would  permit,  but  which,  unfortunately,  was  not 
sufficiently  deep  to  give  full  effect  to  their  powerful  batteries.  They, 
however,  kept  up  a spkited  fire  on  the  fort  and  adjacent  batteries  dur- 
ing the  whole  day.  My  fire  was  incessant  from  the  time  of  opening 
until  it  was  too  dark  to  see,  at  the  rate  of  a shot  for  each  gun  every 
fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  the  fire  of  the  enemy  being  somewhat  slower. 
By  noon  the  guns  of  Fort  McEee  were  all  silenced  but  one,  and  three 
hours  before  sunset  this  fort  and  the  adjoining  battery  ceased  to  fire. 
I directed  the  guns  of  Batteries  Lincoln,  Cameron,  and  Totten  xirinci- 


470  OPERATIONS  IN  \V.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

pally  on  the  batteries  adjacent  to  the  navy-yard,  those  of  Battery  Scott 
to  Fort  McEee  and  tlie  light-house  batteries,  and  those  of  the  fort  to 
all.  W e reduced  very  perceptibly  the  fire  of  Barrancas,  entirely  silenced 
that  in  the  navy-yard  and  in  one  or  two  of  the  other  batteries,  the  efti- 
ciency  of  our  fire  at  the  close  of  the  day  not  being  the  least  impaired. 

The  next  morniug  I again  opened  about  the  same  hour,  the  Navy^ 
unfortunately  (owing  to  a reduction  in  the  depth  of  water,  caused  by\a 
change  of  wind),  not  being  able  to  get  so  near  as  yesterday,  conse- 
quently the  distance  was  too  great  to  be  effectual.  My  fire  this  day 
was  less  rapid  and,  I think,  more  efficient  than  that  of  yesterday.  Fort 
McEee,  so  effectually  silenced  yesterday,  did  not  fire  again  to-day.  We 
silenced  entirely  one  or  two  guns,  and  had  one  of  ours  disabled  by  a 
shot  coming  through  the  embrasure.  About  3 o’clock  fire  was  com- 
municated to  one  of  the  houses  in  Warrington,  and  shortly  after  to  the 
church  steeple.  The  church  and  the  whole  village  being  immediately 
in  rear  of  some  of  the  rebel  batteries  (they  apparently  having  placed 
them  purposely  directly  in  front  of  the  largest  and  most  valuable  build- 
ings), the  fire  rapidly  communicated  to  other  buildings  along  the  street, 
until  probably  two-thirds  of  it  was  consumed,  and  about  the  same  time 
fire  was  discovered  issuing  from  the  back  part  of  the  navy-yard,  probably 
in  Woolsey,  a village  to  the  north  apd  immediately  adjoining  the  yard, 
as  Warrington  does  on  the  west.  Finally  it  penetrated  to  the  yard, 
and,  as  it  continued  to  burn  brightly  all  night,  I concluded  that  either 
in  it  or  in  Woolsey  many  buildings  were. destroyed.  Very  heavy  dam- 
age was  also  done  to  the  buildings  of  the  yard  by  the  avalanche  of  shot, 
shell,  and  spEnters  showered  unceasingly  on  them  for  two  days,  and 
as  they  were  nearly  fire-proof  (being  built  of  brick  and  covered  with 
slate),  I could  not  succeed  in  firing  them,  neither  my  hot  shot  nor  shells 
having  any  power  of  igniting  them.  The  steamer  Time,  which  was  at 
the  wharf  at  the  time,  was  abandoned  on  the  first  day  and  exposed  to 
our  fire,  which  probably  entirely  disabled  her. 

The  fire  was  again  continued  until  dark,  and  with  mortars  occasion- 
ally, until  2 o’clock  the  next  morning,  when  the  combat  ceased.  This 
fort  at  its  conclusion,  though  it  has  received  a great  many  shot  and  shell, 
is  in  every  respect,  save  the  disabling  of  one  gun-carriage  and  the  loss 
of  service  of  6 men,  as  efficient  as  it  was  at  the  commencement  of  the 
combat,  but  the  ends  I proposed  in  commencing  having  been  attained, 
except  one,  which  I find  to  be  impracticable  with  my  present  means,  I 
do  not  deem  it  advisable  further  to  continue  it,  unless  the  enemy  thinks 
proper  to  do  so,  when  I shall  meet  him  with  alacrity.  The  attack  on 

Billy  Wilson’s”  camp,  the  attempted  attack  on  my  batteries,  and  the 
insult  to  our  glorious  flag  have  been  fully  and  fearfully  avenged.  I 
have  no  means  of  knowing  the  loss  of  the  enemy,  and  have  no  disposi- 
tion to  guess  at  it.  The  firing  on  his  batteries  was  very  heavy,  well- 
directed,  and  continuous  for  two  days,  and  could  hardly  fail  of  ha^ing 
had  important  results.  Our  losses  would  have  been  heavy  but  for  the 
foresight  which,  with  great  labor,  caused  us  to  erect  elaborate  means  of 
X)rotection,  and  which  saved  many  lives.  I lost  1 private  killed,  1 ser- 
geant, 1 corporal,  and  4 privates  wounded,  only  1 severely.  My  of6cers, 
non-commissioned  officers,  and  privates  were  everything  I could  desire. 
They  one  and  all  performed  their  duty  with  the  greatest  cheerfulness 
and  in  the  most  able  and  efficient  manner. 

I am  much  indebted  to  Major  Arnold,  my  executive  officer,  for  his 
valuable  assistance.  His  whole  conduct  was  admirable,  and  Captains 
Allen,  Chalfin,  Blunt,  Eobertson,  Hildt,  and  Durjxa,  and  Lieutenants 


Chai>.  XVL] 


BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA. 


471 


McFarland,  Langdon,  Closson,  Shipley,  Jackson,  Pennington,  Seeley, 
and  Taylor,  merit  my  warmest  encomiums  for  the  coolness  and  delibera- 
tion with  which  they  performed,  without  one  exception,  tlieir  duty  under 
a heavy  and  continuous  shower  of  shot,  shells,  and  splinters  for  two  suc- 
cessive days.  Lieutenant  Todd,  ordnance  otlicer,  had  full  supplies  of 
all  required  articles  which  were  on  hand  at  the  post,  and  his  department 
was  conducted  with  system  and  etfeciency.  Major  Tower,  Surgeon  Camp- 
bell, and  Assistant  Surgeon  Sutherland,  in  their  respective  duties,  sus- 
tained their  high  reputations.  Captains  Eobertson,  Duryea,  and  Blunt, 
and  Lieutenants  Pennington  and  Seeley,  respectively,  commanded  Bat- 
teries Lincoln,  Scott,  Totten,  and  Cameron,  and  a small  battery  at 
Spanish  Fort,  and  the  other  officers  batteries  in  the  fort,  with  distin- 
guished ability.  Captains  Dobie’s  and  Bailey’s  companies  were  with 
the  batteries  at  Lincoln  and  Cameron,  and  did  their  duties  faithfully 
and  efficiently.  The  companies  of  Captains  Henberer  and  Duffy,  of  the 
Sixth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers,  were  successively  on  duty  at  the 
fort,  and  rendered  cheerfully  important  assistance  to  me.  The  regular 
companies  engaged  at  the  batteries,  all  of  whom  performed  their  duty  so 
efficiently  as  to  preclude  my  making  a distinction,  are  Companies  A,  F, 
and  L,  First  Artillery ; C,  H,  and  K,  Second  Artillery ; C and  E,  Third 
Infantry,  and  Companies  G and  I,  Sixth  Eegiment  New  York  Volun- 
teers. 

In  closing,  I tender  to  Flag-Officer  McKean  and  Captain  Ellison,  of 
the  Navy^  and  to  their  officers  and  crews,  my  best  thanks  for  their  able 
co-operation,  which  would  have  had  the  happiest  results  but  for  the 
unfortunate  fact  that  the  great  draught  of  water  prevented  their  suffi- 
ciently near  approach  to  the  works  of  the  rebels. 

I am,  general,  A^ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAEVEY  BEOWN, 
Colonel^  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S,  Army^  Washington,  D.  G. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Fichens,  December  3,  1861. 

General  : I intended  to  haA^e  made  out  a list  of  meritorious  non- 
commissioned officers  and  privates  on  the  22d  and  23d,  but  on  looking 
over  the  sub-reports  of  the  officers  I find  some  are  not  noticed  by  name 
who  under  my  own  personal  observation  behaved  with  great  gallantry 
and  coolness.  Indeed,  I think  where  all  really  showed  such  cool,  deliber- 
ate courage  that  distinction  can  hardly  be  made  without  doing  injustice. 
I heartily  indorse  the  recommendations  of  Major  Arnold  and  the  officers, 
and  extend  my  approbation  to  every  one  engaged.  I would  respectfully 
pggest  that  by  submitting  these  reports  to  the  Ordnance  Department 
it  might  give  information  which,  if  acted  on,  would  very  much  benefit 
the  service,  particularly  those  parts  relating  to  shells  and  rifled  i)ro- 
jectiles,  and  to  the  fuses,  which  were  detestable. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAEVEY  BEOWN, 
Colonel,  Commanding, 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant  General  U.  8.  Army,  Washington,  D,  G. 


472  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pickens^  Becember  2,  1861. 

General  : I lierewitli  forward  you  tlie  report  of  Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold 
of  tlie  bombardment  on  the  22d  and  23d  ultimo,  with  the  sub-reports  of 
the  officers  commanding  batteries,  and  which  could  not  be  prepared  so 
as  to  be  forwarded  with  my  own.  The  J)ombardment  having  discovered 
to  us  the  position  and  number  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  and  of  the  num- 
ber and  caliber  of  the  guns,  and  which  we  find  to  be  more  and  hea^der 
than  we  supposed,  and  one  or  two  of  them  so  placed  as  to  take  us  in 
rear  in  case  of  a night  attack  in  front,  I have,  by  the  unanimous  opinion 
of  my  officers,  though,  I acknowledge,  not  entirely  in  accordance  with 
my  own,  in  consideration  of  the  reduced  number  and  our  receiving 
no  re-enforcements,  decided  very  considerably  to  contract  my  lines  of 
defense.  The  safety  of  the  fort  being  paramount  to  every  other  con- 
sideration, I have  brought  the  Sixth  Eegiment  near  the  fort,  partially 
abandoned  Batteries  Lincoln,  Cameron,  and  Totten,  and  greatly  strength- 
ened the  fort  and  Battery  Scott.  When  the  proposed  change  now  being 
made  is  effected,  the  fort  will  be  entirely  secure  under  any  and  every 
contingency.  I must,  however,  repeat  that  my  present  force  is  entirely 
inadequate  to  the  defense  of  the  island,  and  that  I cannot  prevent  a 
landing  of  the  enemy  at  some  distance  and  his  erecting  batteries  against 
tbe  ships,  and,  doing  so,  with  one  rifled  gun  he  could  drive  them  all 
away. 

The  enemy  have  two  regiments  at  Deer  (City)  Point  and  are  erecting 
batteries  there,  which,  in  case  of  our  taking  the  offensive  and  occupy- 
ing the  harbor,  will  give  us  great  annoyance.  Two  contrabands  came 
in  this  morning.  They  state  the  loss  of  the  enemy  in  killed  at  40  j 
wounded  not  known.  Colonel  Villepigue  severely  wounded  by  a splinter 
at  Fort  McEee.  About  two -thirds  of  Warrington  and  of  Woolsey  are 
burned,  and  the  navy -yard  buildings  with  a great  many  holes  in  them. 
If  I had  had  carcasses  and  rock-tire,  which  I have  been  vainly  trying  to 
get  ever  since  my  first  arrival  here,  I think  I could  have  destroyed  many, 
if  not  the  most,  of  the  buildings.  I tried  them  with  hot  shot  and  with 
shells  having  pieces  of  port-fire  in  them,  but  could  not  succeed  in  firing 
them. 

I forward  a list  of  the  casualties  on  the  22d  and  23d  November.*  Two 
of  the  men  wounded  by  the  unfortunate  accident  of  the  25th  have  died, 
and  I fear  one  more  will  die. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

HAEVEY  BEOWN, 
Colonel^  Commanding, 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U,  S.  Army, 


No.  2. 

Pe^ort  of  Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold.,  First  U,  S.  Artillery^  Comma^iding 

Batteries, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25,  1861. 
Colonel  ; In  obedience  to  your  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  re- 
port the  service  of  the  batteries  in  the  fort  proper,  and  of  Batteries 

* The  list  shows  1 killed  and  7 wounded. 


CiiAi*.  XVL]  BOMBARDMENT  AT  BENSACOLA,  FLA.  473 

Scott,  Lincoln,  Cameron,  Totten,  and  tlie  battery  at  tbe  old  Spanish 
Fort,  and  the  operations  of  the  troops  engaged  in  the  bombardment  ol 
the  22d  and  23d  of  November,  1861,  specially  under  my  command,  per 
Special  Orders,  No.  208,  headquarters  Fort  Pickens,  Fla.  The  guns  in 
the  fort  proper  were  divided  into  seven  distinct  batteries,  each  battery 
having  a separate  commander.  A one-gun  battery  in  the  covered  way, 
10-inch  columbiad  en  harhette,  manned  by  a detachment  from  Company 
O,  Second  Artillery,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  McFarland,  Engiueer 
Corps  5 the  battery  manned  by  Company  A,  First  Artillery,  com- 
manded by  Captain  Chalfin,  Fifth  Artillery,  assisted  by  Lieutenant 
Taylor,  First  Artillery,  consisted  of  one  10-inch  columbiad,  one  42- 
pounder  rifled  gun  and  seven  32-pounders  en  harhette,  and  one  42- 
pounder  rifled  gun  and  two  8-inch  columbiads  in  casemates ; the  bat- 
tery manned  by  Company  L,  First  Artillery,  commanded  by  Lieutenant 
Jackson,  First  Artillery,  consisted  of  one  .1 0-inch  columbiad  and  five 
32-pounders  en  harhette,  one  42-pounder  rifled  gun,  one  8-inch  colum- 
biad (unchambered),  and  two  42-pounders  (smooth  bore)  in  casemates; 
the  battery  manned  by  Company  K,  Second  Artillery,  commanded 
by  Captain  Allen,  Second  Artillery,  consisted  of  10-inch  columbiad  en 
harhette  and  three  42-pounder  rifled  guns  in  casemates;  the  battery 
manned  by  Company  E,  Third  Infantry,  commanded  by  Captain  Hildt, 
Third  Infantry,  consisted  of  one  10  inch  columbiad  and  one  42-pounder 
rifled  gun  en  harhette  and  two  8-inch  columbiads  (one  chambered  and 
one  unchambered)  in  casemates ; the  battery  manned  by  Company  C, 
Third  Infantry,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Shipley,  Third  Infantry,  con- 
sisted of  one  10-inch  columbiad  en  harhette  and  two  42-pounder  rifled 
guns  and  one  8-inch  columbiad  (unchambered)  in  casemates ; the  mor- 
tar battery  in  the  ditch,  curtain  A to  B,  manned  by  detachments  from  the 
command  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Langdon,  Fifth  Artillery,  consisted 
of  four  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars ; Battery  Scott,  manned  by  Company  F, 
First  Artillery,  commanded  by  Captain  Duryea,  First  Artillery,  assisted 
by  Lieutenant  Closson,  First  Artillery,  consisted  of  two  10-inch  colum- 
biads and  one  42-pounder  rifled  gun  en  harhette  and  two  10-inch  sea- 
coast  mortars ; Battery  Lincoln,  manned  by  Company  H,  Second  Artil- 
lery', commanded  by  Captain  Eobertson,  Second  Artillery,  consisted  of 
four  8-inch  sea  coast  howitzers  and  one  42-pounder  rifled  gun  en  harhette 
and  two  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars ; Battery  Totten,  manned  by  Com- 
pany C,  Second  Artillery,  commanded  by  Captain  Blunt,  Twelfth  In- 
fantry, consisted  of  one  13-inch  and  one  12 -inch  sea- coast  mortars ; Bat- 
tery Cameron,  manned  by  Company  I,  Sixth  Eqgiment  New  York  Vol- 
unteers, the  gunners  and  purveyors  from  Company  H,  Second  Artillery, 
commanded  by  Lieutenant  Pennington,  Second  Artillery,  consisted  of 
two  10-inch  columbiads  en  harhette  and  one  10-pounder  Parrott  rifled 
gun  (the  second  day);  the  battery  at  the  old  Spanish  Fort,  manned  by 
a detachment  detailed  from  the  command  commanded  by  Lieutenant 
Seeley,  consisted  of  one  10-pounder  Parrott  rifled  gun  (the  first  day). 
The  guns  fired  from  the  fort  and  the  batteries  outside  against  the 
enemy’s  line  of  forts  and  batteries,  including  the  town  of  Warrington 
and  the  navy-yard,  were  ten  10-inch  columbiads,  six  8-inch  columbiads, 
eleven  42-pounder  James  rifled  guns,  and  two  42-pounder  smooth  bore, 
four  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzers,  eight  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars,  one  13- 
inch  and  one  12-inch  sea-coast  mortars,  and  twelve  32-pounders  en  har- 
hette. 

The  bombardment  opened  at  10  o’clock  a.  m.,  November  22,  1861, 
when  a signal  gun  at  the  flag-staff  was  fired  under  your  personal  direc- 
tion. I ordered  those  guns  that  could  conveniently  be  brought  to  bear 


474  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

» 

to  fire  on  two  rebel  steamboats  lying  at  the  navy-yard  wharf  and  a 10- 
inch  columbiad  sand  battery  established  on  the  same  wharf.  The  effect 
of  the  firing  was  apparent,  by  driving  the  rebels  from  the  sand  battery 
on  the  wharf,  disabling  the  steamboat  Time,  and  injuring  the  iron  steani- 
tug  Neaffie,  which  escaped  by  steaming  off  and  being  a small  boat. 
After  firing  for  a short  time  I directed  the  most  of  these  guns  to  fire  on 
the  enemy^s  forts  and  batteries,  particularly  Forts  McEee  and  Barrancas, 
the  light-house  batteries.  Wheat’s  and  the  church  batteries,  which  soon 
attracted  attention  by  their  superior  armament  (10-inch  columbiads)  and 
superior  firing,  having  the  range  and  time  of  flight  very  accurately  from 
previous  practice  with  the  same  guns  at  the  same  distance.  Our  fire 
from  10-inch  columbiads  on  these  batteries,  &c.,  was  well  directed  and 
effective,  but  our  fire  from  James  rifled  guns  in  casemate  was  not  effect- 
ive, owing  to  the  long  range  and  probably  inherent  defect  in  the  prin- 
ciple by  which  a rotary  motion  is  given  to  these  shot  and  shell,  for  I 
observed  that  the  firing  from  these  guns  was  very  irregular  and  uncer- 
tain for  ranges  over  2,000  yards. 

I ordered  Captain  Duryea,  First  Artillery,  commanding  Battery  Scott, 
ably  assisted  as  he  was  by  Lieutenant  Closson,  of  the  same  regiment,  fo 
direct  the  fire  of  his  powerful  battery,  consisting  of  two  10-inch  colum- 
biads, one  42-f)ounder  rifled  gun,  and  two  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars,  to 
fire  on  Fort  McKee  and  sand  battery  south  of  it.  I at  the  same  time 
ordered  the  four  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars  in  the  ditch,  commanded  by 
Lieutenant  Langdon,  and  one  13-inch  and  one  12-inch  sea-coast  mortars, 
Battery  Totten,  commanded  by  Captain  Blunt,  and  one  8-inch  colum- 
biad and  two  42-pounders  in  casemate,  of  Lieutenant  Jackson’s  battery, 
to  fire  on  Fort  McKee  and  sand  battery  south  of  it,  for  the  purpose  of 
co-oiierating  with  the  Navy  in  endeavoring  to  take  and  destroy  that 
important  fort  and  its  outworks,  which  guard  the  enemy’s  right  flank 
and  the  entrance  to  the  harbor  of  Pensacola.  The  direct  fire  of  these 
guns  was  excellent,  and,  together  with  the  heavy  firing  from  United 
States  steamships  Niagara  and  Kichmond,  produced  a marked  impres- 
sion on  this  stronghold  of  the  enemj^,  by  silencing  the  guns  of  the  fort 
and  by  driving  the  detachments  from  the  guns  in  the  sand  battery, 
which  would  no  doubt  have  decided  the  fate  of  Fort  McKee,  by  enabling 
the  command  from  the  Navy  to  take  the  fort,  but  for  the  opening  of  an 
unexpected  and  concealed  battery,  armed  with  rifled  cannon  of  large 
(.‘aliber  or  possibly  a 10-inch  columbiad,  which  was  served  with  effect, 
on  the  Kichmond. 

I will  conclude  my  report  of  the  first  day’s  firing  on  our  part  by  re- 
marking that  in  the  afternoon  it  was  good  and  effective,  both  from  the 
batteries  inside  the  fort  as  also  those  outside,  and  reflected  great  credit 
on  the  skill  and  coolness  of  the  officers  commanding  the  several  batter- 
ies and  their  assistants  and  the  enlisted  men  serving  the  guns.  I will 
add,  the  firing  from  our  batteries  was  kept  up  till  dark,  when  it  ceased 
by  my  orders,  in  accordance  with  those  of  the  colonel  commanding,  to 
enable  the  magazines  of  the  batteries  outside  of  the  fort  as  well  as  the 
service  magazines  of  those  inside  to  be  replenished  with  powder,  shot, 
and  shell. 

Our  batteries  opened  fire  on  the  enemy  the  second  day  about  the  same 
hour  as  the  day  x)revious,  the  ten  10-inch  columbiads  each  firing  a shffil 
every  fifteen  minutes  and  the  rifled  42  pounders  a solid  shot  at  the 
same  rate.  The  10-inch  columbiad  en  barbette^  bastion  C,  was  under  the 
command  of  Lieutenant  Seeley,  Fourth  Artillery,  who  was  assigned  to 
it  at  his  own  request.  The  mortars  were  fired  every  half  hour.  Our 


Chap.  XYL]  BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA.  475 

firing  tlie  second  day  was  better  than  that  of  tbe  first.  We  succeeded 
in  silencing  for  two  hours  Wheat’s  and  the  church  batteries,  Fort  Bar- 
rancas, and  all  the  guns  on  the  front  lino  of  the  enemy  excepting  one 
gun  at  the  Fort  McEee  sand  battery  and  the  famous  battery  on  the 
height  between  Fort  Barrancas  and  the  light-house  battery.  Tlie  flag- 
staSs  at  Forts  McEee  and  Barrancas  were  shot  away.  The  fire  continued 
till  dark,  more  than  an  hour  after  the  Magara  had  ceased  firing.  The 
effect  of  our  fire  on  the  23d  Avas  destructive  5 a portion  of  Warrington 
and  the  navy-yard  was  burned,  either  ignited  from  the  hot  shot  fired 
from  32-pounders  or  the  shells  from  10-inch  columbiads.  The  navy- 
yard  was  much  damaged  by  the  fire  of  our  10-inch,  12-inch,  and  13-inch 
sea-coast  mortars. 

Our  loss  during  the  bombardment  was  small,  owing,  doubtless,  to  the 
defensive  arrangements  of  your  chief  engineer.  Major  Tower,  in  erect- 
ing the  traverses  to  protect  the  guns  en  barbette,  the-  shell-proofs,  or 
covers  for  the  men,  &c. 

Private  Cooper,  Company  H,  Sixth  EegimentFTew  York  Volunteers, 
detailed  to  carry  ammunition  mr  the  batteries,  was  mortally  wounded, 
on  the  22d,  while  standing  in  one  of  the  casemates,  by  a fragment  of  a 
shell,  which  exploded  about  the  center  of  the  fort.  Corporal  Beeler, 
Company  L,  First  Artillery,  was  severely  wounded  by  a fragment  of 
sheU  whilst  serving  a 10-inch  columbiad  en  barbette ; his  fore-arm  has 
been  amputated.  Sergeant  Massey,  Privates  Fitzsimmins  and  White 
were  wounded  slightly,  and  Corporal  Moran  and  Privates  Galbreth  and 
Purcell  severely — all  of  Company  E,  Third  Infantry.  Those  men  were 
wounded  whdst  serving  an  8-uich  columbiad  in  casemate  by  a 10-inch 
shell  penetrating  the  embrasure,  which  disabled  the  carriage. 

The  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  was  heavy  and  well  directed. 
There  were  many  marvelous  escapes  from  wounds.  Among  the  most  nota- 
ble was  that  of  Lieutenant  Shipley,  Third  Infantry,  and  the  detachment 
serving  the  10-inch  columbiad  en  barbette  of  his  battery.  A 10-inch  shell 
struck  the  shell-proof  and  burst  among  his  men  and  himself  without 
wounding  any  one,  although  the  sand  and  saud  bags  were  knocked  down 
OA^er  and  around  them.  I will  remark  in  this  connection  that  I observed 
with  admiration  the  gaUant  and  efficient  manner  that  Lieutenant  Ship- 
ley  commanded  his  battery  the  two  days  of  the  bombardment.  My 
thanks  are  especially  due  to  the  officers  serAung  with  the  batteries  for 
the  valuable  services  rendered  by  them  and  the  cool  and  efficient  man- 
ner they  commanded  their  guns.  They  were  as  follows : Lieutenant  Mc- 
Farland, Engineer  Corps;  Captain  Duryea  and  Lieutenants  Closson, 
Jackson,  and  Taylor,  First  Artillery;  Captains  Allen,  Eobertson,  and. 
Lieutenant  Pennington,  Second  Artillery ; Lieutenant  Seeley,  Fourth 
Artillery ; Captain  Chalfin  and  Lieutenant  Langdon,  Fifth  Artillery ; 
Captain  Hildt  and  Lieutenant  Shipley,  Third  Infantry,  and  Captain 
Blunt,  Twelfth  Infantry.  I take  pleasure  in  stating  that  Major  Tower, 
Engineer  Corps,  and  Lieutenant  Todd,  Ordnance,  i^erformed  the  duties 
of  their  departments  Avith  ability. 

I respectfully  refer  the  colonel  commanding  to  the  report  of  com- 
manders of  batteries,  herewith  inclosed,  for  individual  instances  of  good 
conduct  and  valuable  serAdces  rendered  by  the  enlisted  men.  As  Pri- 
A’ate  John  D.  Hickey,  of  Company  C,  Second  Artillery,  was  detached 
from  his  company,  acting  as  my  orderly,  I take  this  occasion  to  recom- 
mend him  to  notice  for  signal  courage  displayed  during  the  bombard- 
ment. I am  under  obligations  to  Captain  Henberer,  Company  H,  and 
Captain  Duffy’s  company  (D),  Sixth  Eegiment  Hew  York  Volunteers,. 


476  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

for  valuable  services  in  purveying  shot,  shell,  and  powder,  and  for  per- 
forming guard  duty  the  two  days  of  the  bombardment. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

L.  G.  AENOLD, 

Majorj  U.  S.  Army^  Coinmandmg  Batteries, 

Col.  Harvey  Brown, 

Commanding  Fort  Ficicens,  (&c. 


No.  3. 

Beport  of  Capt  Richard  G,  Buryea,  First  U.  8.  Artillery, 

• Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25,  1861. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  the  instructions  of  the  colonel  commanding  I 
have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  in  the 
bombardment  of  the  22d  and  23d  instant  by  Battery  Scott,  consisting  of 
one  rifled  42-pounder,  two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  10-inch  sea-coast  mor- 
tars, and  one  10-inch  siege  mortar,  manned  by  Company  F,  First  Eegi- 
ment  of  Artillery. 

Throughout  the  entire  day  (the  22d)  the  fire  from  all  these  pieces  ex- 
cept the  siege  mortar  (the  range  of  this  not  being  sufficiently  great)  was 
directed  upon  Fort  McEee  and  the  batteries  in  its  immediate  vicinity*. 
The  return  fire  from  Fort  McEee  continued  throughout  the  day,  but 
much  slackened  towards  night,  and  on  the  following  day  it  did  not  return 
our  fire.  The  sand  batterj^  near  McEee  ceased  firing  about  3 p.  m.  on 
the  first  day,  but  reopened  on  the  second  and  continued  until  nearly 
night. 

From  my  own  observation  and  from  others  who  had  opportunities  of 
observing  I should  judge  the  fire  from  our  battery  (particularly  of  the 
columbiads)  was  quite  effective,  but  what  damage  was  done  besides  the 
mere  driving  of  the  enemy  from  their  gunsT  cannot  say. 

The  following  is  the  practical  results  of  the  firing : With  the  rifled  gun, 
distance  2,060  yards,  elevation  the  fire  was  effective ; beyond  that 
range,  uncertain.  With  columbiads,  distance  2,060  yards,  charge  12 
pounds,  elevation  to  8®,  fuse  8 seconds,  very  effective.  From  the 
mortars,  on  account  of  the  inequality  of  powder,  several  shells  were 
thrown  away.  The  most  satisfactory  results  are  as  follows  : For  a dis- 
tance of  2,060  yards,  a charge  of  3 pounds  6 ounces,  and  fuse  21  to.22 
• seconds ; for  distance  of  2,560  yards,  a charge  of  4 i)ounds  12  ounces,  and 
fuse  24  to  25  seconds. 

In  conclusion,  I cannot  too  highly  speak  of  the  invaluable  assistance 
rendered  me  by  Lieutenant  Closson.  The  gunners — Sergeants  Morgan, 
Alahon,  Ohilcutt,  and  Grimes ; Corporals  Burdell,  Cronin,  Harris,  Ca- 
pron;  and  Musician  Walker,  Artificers  Gilbert  and  Connerty,  and  Pri- 
vates Lavery,  McCormick,  Mack,  and  Moore — behaved  with  admirable 
coolness,  while  all  others  in  their  less  responsible  positions  did  well  their 
duty. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  C.  DUEYEA, 

Captain^  First  Artillery , Comdg,  Co,  F and  Battery  Scott, 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Regiment  of  A rtillery. 


Chap.  XYI.]  BOMBARDMENT  AT  PI:NSAC0LA,  FLA.  477 

No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Richard  IT.  Jaclcson^  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25,  18G1. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  your  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  sub- 
mit the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  the  battery  under  my  com- 
mand during  the  bombardment  of  the  22d  and  23d  November,  18G1 : 

The  battery  consisted  of  one  10-inch  columbiad  and  four  32-pounders 
en  barbette  in  the  flag-staff  bastion  (A),  one  8-inch  unchambered  colum- 
biad and  two  42-pounders  in  casemate,  curtain  B 0,  and  one  42-pounder 
rifled  gun  in  casemate  in  bastion  0.  The  guns  were  served  by  Company 
L,  First  Artillery. 

At  10  o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  22d  I was  directed  by  the  colonel  command- 
ing to  open  the  bombardment,  and  in  obedience  thereto  I pointed  and 
fired  the  10-inch  columbiad  at  the  rebel  steamer  Time,  then  lying  at  the 
navy-yard  wharf.  The  shell  exploded  directly  over  the  steamer.  All  of 
the  guns  from  the  fort  and  batteries  immediately  opened  on  the  enemy’s 
position,  and  the  steamer  and  navy-yard  were  quickly  abandoned  by  the 
rebels.  The  fire  from  the  10-inch  columbiad  and  32-pounders  was,  dur- 
ing the  bombardment,  principally  directed  at  the  navy-yard  and  tlie 
wharf  and  church  batteries.  It  was  very  effective.  Two  of  the  shells 
from  the  columbiad  exifloded  in  the  wharf  battery,  the  remainder  in  the 
buildings  in  the  navy-yard.  The  fire  from  the  casemate  guns  in  curtain 
B and  0 was  directed  against  Fort  McKee  and  the  sand  battery  west- 
ward of  it.  The  shells  from  the  8-inch  columbiad  were  seen  to  explode 
over  Fort  McKee,  and  when  directed  at  the  sand  battery  were  very  accu- 
rate, one  of  them  exploding  within  the  embrasure.  The  firing  from  the 
42-pounders  was  effective.  The  rifled  gun  in  bastion  G was  in  position 
against  the  light-house  battery.  The  James  projectile  was  used.  The 
firing  from  this  gun  was  very  inaccurate,  particularly  when  shells  were 
used,  nearly  all  of  them  either  falling  short  of  or  passing  over  the  enemy’s 
battery.  The  lateral  deviation  was  considerable.  On  the  second  day 
solid  shot  were  projected  from  this  gun,  a few  of  which  struck  the  bat- 
tery and  light-house.  The  range  was  about  2,855  yards.  I attribute 
the  inaccuracy  of  fire  with  this  projectile  to  the  stripping  of  the  lead 
and  canvas  packing  or  wrappers  on  the  cylindrical  portion  of  it  during 
its  flight. 

I respectfully  ask  to  call  particular  attention  to  Sergeant  Conroy  for 
his  coolness  and  zeal  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty  j Sergeant  Newton, 
who  distinguished  himself  as  an  efficient  practical  artillerist  j Corporal 
Beeler,  for  his  coolness  (he  was  wounded  while  serving  his  gun  and 
has  since  had  his  arm  amputated)  j First  Sergt.  Lewis  Keller,  Sergeant 
Becker,  Corporals  Wicks  and  Spangler,  and  Privates  Jacl^el  and  Han- 
ney.  To  mention  other  names  would  be  invidious,  for  all  the  enlisted 
men  behaved  well. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  H.  JACKSON, 

First  Lieutenant^  Gomdg.  Go.  L,  First  Artillery. 

Maj.  Lewis  G-.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery^  U.  S.  Army^  Gommanding  Batteries. 


478  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Gapt,  James  31.  Robertson j Second  JJ.  S.  Artillery. 

Battery  Lincoln,  Santa  Eosa  Island,  Fla., 

November  25,  18G1. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  instructions  of  this  date  I have  the  honor 
to  make  the  following  report  of  the  service  of  my  battery  (Lincoln) 
during  the  bombardment  on  the  22d  and  23d  of  November,  1861 : 

The  battery  consists  of  the  following  guns,  viz : One  42-pounder  gun 
(rifled),  four  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzers,  and  two  10-inch  sea-coast  mor- 
tars. At  the  firing  of  the  signal  gun  from  Fort  Pickens,  about  9.30 
o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  22d,  I opened  fire  with  my  entire  battery  upon  the 
rebel  steamer  Time,  then  lying  at  the  Warrington  navy-yard,  and  kept 
it  up  briskly  for  about  two  hours.  About  11.30  a.  m.,  by  your  order,  I 
directed  the  fire  from  my  mortars  upon  Fort  Barrancas  and  the  howitz- 
ers on  the  navy-yard,  and  kept  up  a steady  fire,  as  directed,  till  about 
an  hour  before  sunset,  when  by  your  order  I again  concentrated  all  my 
fire  on  the  steamer  and  continued  till  ordered  to  cease  firing  at  dark. 
During  the  day  I saw  several  shots  strike  the  steamer,  but  owing 
to  her  hull  (except  a very  small  portion)  being  covered  by  a project- 
ing pier,  I think  very  little  material  damage  was  done.  During  the 
entire  day  the  firing  from  my  42-pounder  was  very  unsatisfactory. 
With  the  same  charge,  same  elevation,  and  pointed  with  the  greatest 
care,  one  shot  would  fall  far  short,  and  others  would  go  wild  and  entirely 
over  the  mark.  During  the  day  forty-five  shots  were  fired  from  this 
gun. 

On  the  firing  of  the  signal  gun  from  Fort  Pickens,  about  10.30  a.  m. 
on  the  23d  (the  rebel  steamer  having  been  removed  during  the  night  of 
the  22d),  I opened  fire,  as  directed,  with  the  rifled  gun  on  the  one-gun 
sand  battery  on  the  head  of  the  navy-yard  pier,  firing  one  shot  every 
fifteen  minutes  with  the  howitzers  and  mortars  on  the  navy -yard,  firing 
oach  of  the  first  once  in  forty  and  the  latter  once  in  thirty  minutes. 
During  this  day’s  and  night’s  firing  my  mortar  shells  were  loaded  with 
IJ  pounds  of  port-fire  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  charge  of  powder. 
During  the  day  I saw  many  shell  strike  and  explode  in  the  navy-yard, 
but  no  perceptible  impression  was  made  upon  it.  At  2.30  o’clock  p.  m. 
a fire  was  lighted  in  a wooden  building  in  the  southwest  portion  of  the 
town  of  Warrington,  either  by  a gun  from  the  fort  or  Battery  Cameron. 
I then  directed  my  mortars  on  the  northeast  part  of  the  town,  near  the 
navy-yard.  Soon  after  that  portion  of  the  town  was  also  on  fire,  and  I 
again  directed  my  mortars  to  the  navy-yard. 

At  dark,  firing  having  ceased,  except  from  mortars,  I left  to  go  to 
Fort  Pickens.  After  I left.  Sergeant  Eoder,  of  Company  H,  Second 
Artillery,  fired  two  shots,  when  you  ordered  the  firing  to  cease  for  the 
night.  On  my  way  to  the  fort  I stopped  at  Battery  Cameron  to  inspect. 
After  being  there  about  fifteen  minutes  I discovered  a fire  had  broken 
out  in  the  navy-yard,  and  men  were  distinctly  seen  endeavoring  to  put 
it  out.  I ordered  Lieutenant  Pennington  to  load  and  fire  one  of  his 
nolumbiads,  whicli  he  did  with  such  good  effect  that  the  rebels  instantly 
left,  and  the  building  was  soon  in  a bright  blaze. 

At  7 o’clock  p.  m.,  by  your  order,  I again  opened  with  one  of  my 
mortars,  dropping  a shell  into  the  navy-yard  every  fifteen  minutes.  At 
S.30  1).  m.  a large  fire  was  started  near  the  north  gate  of  the  yard,  which 
burned  furiously  till  after  midnight.  At  11.30  p.  m.  another  fire,  still 


Chap.  XVI.] 


BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA. 


479 


larger  than  the  first,  broke  out  about  one-fourth  of  a mile  to  the  east  of 
the  first  and  was  still  raging  at  2 o’clock  a.  m.  the  24th.  At  1 a.  m.  the 
24th  a third  fire  was  started  between  the  two  first,  but  it  burned  only 
a short  time.  At  2 o’clock  a.  m.  the  24th,  by  your  order,  I stopped  firing. 
Whether  the  fires  on  the  night  of  the  23d  and  24th  were  in  the  northern 
portion  of  the  navy-yard  or  in  the  town  of  Woolsey  I am  unable  to  say, 
but  from  the  size  of  the  fires  several  large  buildings  must  have  been 
burned.  During  the  night  I had  good  opportunity  of  observing  the  fall- 
ing of  my  shell,  and  found  the  practice  admirable ; every  shell  either 
burst  just  above  or  within  one  second  after  striking  the  ground,  and 
scattered  the  pieces  of  port-fire  in  every  direction.  In  many  instances 
pieces  of  port-fire  were  seen  to  light  on  the  roof  of  the  buildings  and 
burn  as  long  as  five  seconds,  but,  the  roofs  being  entirely  of  slate,  it  was 
impossible  to  ignite  the  buildings,  unless  when  a shell,  after  passing 
through  the  roof,  burst  inside.  The  firing  from  my  42-pounder  rifle  on 
the  23d  was  much  more  satisfactory  than  the  previous  day.  Five  shots 
were  seen  to  strike  the  battery,  but  with  what  effect  I am  unable  (owing 
to  the  great  distance)  to  say.  During  the  first  day’s  firing  many  of  the 
rebel  shell  burst  near  my  battery  and  several  splinters  came  inside. 
Several  round  shot  and  unexploded  shell  from  the  direction  of  Fort 
McEee,  after  passing  over  Pickens,  came  into  the  left  of  my  battery,  and 
passed  down  the  whole  line,  but  without  doing  the  slightest  damage. 

During  the  second  day  only  a few  shell  burst  near  me.  After  night 
on  the  23d  no  fire  was  returned  from  the  rebels,  except  from  the  one- 
gun  battery  on  the  pier-head,  and  that  only  once  an  hour.  This  fire 
was  apparently  directed  on  Fort  Pickens,  but  every  shell  burst  far  short. 
During  the  whole  bombardment  all  the  non-commissioned  officers  and 
men  of  my  command  (Company  H,  Second  Artillery)  and  Captain  Dobie’s 
company  (G,  Sixth  Eegiment  jSTew  York  Volunteers)  worked  and 
behaved  in  that  cool,  cheerful,  and  deliberate  manner  which  makes  it 
impossible  for  me  to  mention  any  one  in  particular.  All  deserve,  and 
I take  this  occasion  to  give  them,  my  most  sincere  thanks.  I have  no 
casualties  or  damage  to  my  battery  to  report,  either  from  carelessness 
on  the  part  of  my  own  men  or  from  the  fire  of  the  rebels.  I have  made 
no  mention  of  the  operations  of  Battery  Cameron  except  in  the  one  in- 
stance, as  Lieutenant  Pennington  was  in  immediate  charge,  and  wiU, 
I presume,  make  a special  report. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

J.  M.  EOBEETSOil, 

Capt,  Second  Art.,  Comdg.  Batteries  Lincoln  and  Cameron, 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Art.,  Comdg,  Batteries  Fort  PicJcens  and  Santa  Rosa  Island, 


Eo.  6. 

Report  of  Capt,  Harvey  A,  Allen^  Second  U,  S,  Artillery. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  Hoveml)er25j  1861. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  duties  of  Company  K,  Second 
Artillery,  which  I commanded  during  the  bombardment  on  the  22d  and 
23d  of  the  present  month.  Eight  men  were  detached,  7 serving  a mor- 
tar under  Lieutenant  Langdon,  and  1 on  the  first  day  with  Lieutenant 
Seeley’s  rifled  gun  at  the  old  Spanish  Fort.  The  columbiad  in  bastion 


480  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

C,  barbette,  was  served  by  14  men,  two  detaclimeiits,  relieved  every  two 
hours,  and  the  three  rifled  guns  in  bastion  D,  casemate,  by  the  remain- 
der of  the  company;  the  columbiad  firing  every  fifteen  minutes  and  each 
rifled  gun  at  the  same  rate  a greater  portion  of  the  time  and  every  half 
hour  the  remainder.  The  columbiad  was  pointed  first  on  the  navy-yard, 
but  on  account  of  the  smoke,  which  concealed  it  entirely,  an  opening 
was  made  in  the  epaulement,  and  the  gun  turned  on  Fort  Barrancas, 
where  it  continued  to  fire  the  first  day.  On  the  second  day  Lieutenant 
Seeley  had  charge  of  it,  with  the  same  detachments.  The  rifled  guns 
were  fired  at  two  batteri^Ts  near  the  light  house  with  the  same  charges 
and  elevations.  Shot  were  observed  to  fall  in  the  water,  to  strike  the 
battery,  and  sometimes,  not  being  seen,  were  believed  to  pass  over  the 
object.  The  guns  or  shot  appear  to  be  defective,  and  not  to  be  relied 
on.  Great  care  was  taken  in  pointing,  and  every  shot  watched  by  men 
on  the  parapet  as  well  as  below.  The  whole  company  were  zealous  and 
active,  and  gave  entire  satisfaction. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  A.  ALLEN", 
Ca])tai7iy  Second  Artillery. 

Major  Arnold, 

First  Artillery^  Commanding  Batteries. 


NTo.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut.  A.  C.  31.  Bennington^  Second  U.  S.  Artillery. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25,  1861. 

Pursuant  to  your  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  follow- 
ing report  of  the  service  done  by  Battery  Cameron,  which  I commanded 
during  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Pickens  on  the  22d  and  23d  of  N’ovem- 
ber.  My  battery  consisted  of  two  10  inch  columbiads  on  the  first  day, 
and  of  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  a 10-pounder  Parrott  rifled  gun, 
on  the  second  day.  With  one  of  my  columbiads  I had  a lateral  field  of 
fire  from  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  navy-yard  to  a point  a short  dis- 
tance west  of  a battery  known  as  the  church  battery  (a  haxo-casemate, 
containing  a heavy  shell  gun).  With  the  other  I had  a field  of  fire  from 
a point  above  the  Marine  Barracks,  at  the  west  end  of  the  uavy  yard, 
to  a short  distance  below  a battery,  consisting  of  three  guns,  known  as 
WheaPs  battery. 

The  steamer  Time  making  her  appearance  at  the  navy-yard  about 
9.30  o’clock  a.  m.,  I pointed  my  right-hand  gun  at  it,  and  my  other  I 
directed  at  the  church  battery.  At  the  signal-  gun  from  the  fort  I opened 
the  fire  from  my  battery,  but  from  the  great  number  of  shot  fired  I 
could  not  determine  the  effect  of  my  fire.  I kept  up  my  fire  with  one 
gun  on  the  steamer  for  some  time,  and  I think  with  good  effect,  as 
several  shells  burst  near  her  smoke-stacks,  and  others,  I think,  struck 
and  burst  near  her  bow.  As  Battery  Lincoln  was  keeping  up  a fire 
upon  her  with  rifled  shell  I turned  this  gun  upon  the  church  battery 
and  the  other  I directed  upon  the  Wheat  battery,  not,  however,  tiU  it 
had  done  good  service  in  doing  considerable  damage  to  the  church 
battery  while  the  other  was  firing  on  the  steamer.  IJntil  late  in  the 
afternoon  I kept  the  two  guns  on  these  batteries,  keeping  up  a well- 
directed  and  very  effective  fire  upon  them.  About  an  hour  before  sun- 
down I again  directed  my  right-hand  gun  upon  the  steamer,  one  shot 


Chap.  XVI.]  BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA.  ’ 481 

striking  in  lier  stern.  Wlietlier  any  serious  daniage  was  done  to  the 
guns  in  the  batteries  or  the  men  serving  them  I am  unable  to  state, 
owing  to  the  great  distance  from  my  battery. 

On  the  second  day  my  guns  were  directed  on  the  same  batteries  as  the 
day  previous  almost  uninterruptedly  till  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  1 
fired  with  one  gun  upon  the  battery  at  the  end  of  the  wharf,  near  the 
shears,  with  some  effect.  I fired  with  the  10-pounder  rified  gun  upon  the 
two  batteries  alternately,  nearly  every  shot  striking  in  and  around  the 
battery  at  which  it  was  directed  as  near  as  I could  determine. 

I had  no  casualties  at  the  battery,  which  was  ably  and  zealously 
served  by  Company  I,  Sixth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers.  All  the 
men  behaved  with  great  coolness  and  did  good  service  at  the  guns. 
My  thanks  are  due  to  Captain  Bailey  and  Lieutenants  Kaufman  and 
Spence,  of  Company  1,  Sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  for  their  efficient 
co-operation  during  the  two  days^  firing.  Lieutenant  Kaufman  had 
charge  of  one  of  the  columbiads  and  made  very  effective  shots.  1 had 
two  privates  and  a corporal  of  Company  H,  Second  U.  S.  Artillery,  to 
attend  to  the  service  at  the  magazines,  which  duty  they  jSerformed 
admirably.  The  corporal  (Corporal  Nolan)  acted  as  gunner  of  one  of 
the  guns,  directing  his  gun  with  great  care  and  making  effective  shots. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  C.  M.  PENNINGTON, 

First  Lieutenant^  Seeond  Artillery^  Gomdg.  Battery  Cameron, 
Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Regiment  Artillery^  U.  S.  Army,  Gomdg,  Batteries, 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Francis  W.  Seeley^  Fourth  TJ,  S.  Artillery, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25,  1861. 

Major  : Pursuant  to  your  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 
following  report  of  the  participation  of  the  guns  which  I commanded  in 
the  bombardment  of  the  enemy^s  position  on  the  22d  and  23d  of  Novem- 
ber, 1861 : 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  pursuant  to  orders  received  from  you,  I 
took  up  my  position  with  a Parrott  10-pounder  rifled  gun,  a detachment 
of  11  artillery-men,  and  one  company  of  New  York  volunteers,  com- 
manded by  First  Lieut.  Jacob  Silloway,  as  a supporting  force,  at  the  old 
Spanish  Fort  opposite  the  navy-yard.  At  8 o’clock  a.  m.,  on  hearing  the 
first  gun  from  the  fort,  I opened  fire  on  the  steamer  Time,  then  lying  at 
the  navy-yard,  as  were  also  the  Neaf&e  and  another  armed  tug-boat.  I 
fired  about  fifteen  shells  in  rapid  succession,  putting  nearly  every  one 
of  them  into  the  steamer  Time.  Several  shots  from  the  fort  also  struck 
her,  by  which  time  she  seemed  completely  disabled.  One  of  my  shots 
must  have  penetrated  her  boilers,  as  immediately  after  it  was  delivered 
the  steam  was  seen  escaping  in  dense  clouds  from  under  her  guards.  I 
also  put  a shell  through  each  of  her  wheels.  Two  of  the  steamers  (the 
Time  and  one  of  the  tugs)  were  then  abandoned  by  the  enemy,  but  the 
Neaffie  succeeded  in  making  her  escape  up  the  bay  towards  Pensacola, 
although  I think  she  must  have  been  seriously  injured,  as  she  moved 
very  slowly  and  I distinctly  saw  two  shots  strike  her. 

The  enemy  by  that  time  ajipeared  to  have  abandoned  the  navy-yard, 
31  R R — VOL  VI 


482  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

and  I contented  myself  with  firing  one  shot  every  fifteen  minutes,  nearly 
every  one  of  which  took  efiect  either  on  the  buildings  or  steamers.  At 
about  12  o’clock  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  the  10-inch  coliimbiad 
stationed  in  batteiy  on  the  large  stone  wharf  of  the  navy-yard,  and  suc- 
ceeded in  firing  two  shots.  I immediately  fired  three  percussion  shells  in 
quick  succession.  Each  one  exploded  inside  of  the  battery  and  effectu- 
ually  silenced  it  for  the  remainder  of  that  day.  I continued  firing  until 
sunset,  having  fired  during  the  day  sixty-two  shells  into  the  steamers, 
the  buildings,  and  the  battery. 

My  men  deserve  great  credit  for  their  coolness  and  soldierly  bearing 
during  the  whole  day,  especially  Sergt.  John  J.  Driscoll,  of  Company  A, 
First  Artillery,  who  about  2 p.  m.  was  injured  by  a fall  from  his  horse 
when  riding  through  the  shower  of  shot  and  shell  then  falling  about  the 
fort,  where  I had  sent  him  with  a message  to  the  colonel  commanding ; 
also  Private  George  W.  Doyle,  of  Company  H,  Second  Artillery,  who 
was  gunner  of  my  piece,  and  by  his  skill  as  an  artillerist  and  his  cool- 
ness greatly  contributed  to  render  our  fire  effective. 

It  may  •not  be  amiss  here  to  state  that  from  my  experience  with  the 
Parrott  rifled  gun  I consider  it  to  be  the  most  perfect  rifled  cannon 
that  we  have  in  our  service,  i.  c.,  when  the  percussion  shell  (Reed’s)  is 
used,  which  explodes  on  striking  the  object  fired  at.  Shells  fired  from 
this  gun  with  time  fuses  seldom  explode.  The  reason  tof  this  is,  as  near 
as  I can  ascertain,  that  when  fired,  from  the  sudden  expansion  of  the 
rim  attached ’to  the  ball,  there  is  not  sufficient  windage  left  to  permit 
the  flame  to  communicate  with  and  ignite  the  fuse.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, therefore,  the  shells  are  no  better  than  solid  shot. 

On  the  23d  November  I was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  10-inch 
columbiad  in  bastion  C^  with  a detachment,  consisting  of  a sergeant, 
corporal,  and  14  privates,  from  Company  K,  Second  Artillery.-  At  11 
o’clock,  on  the  signal  being  made  to  open  fire  from  our  batteries,  I 
directed  my  piece  on  Fort  Barrancas,  and  fired,  as  directed,  one  shot 
every  fifteen  minutes,  exploding  a great  number  of  shells  immediately 
in  and  about  the  work.  About  12  m.  the  flag  on  Fort  Barrancas  was 
shot  away,  whether  by  one  of  my  own  shots  or  not  I cannot  say,  as  sev- 
eral guns  besides  mine  were  also  firing  on  the  fort  at  the  time.  About  1 
o’clock  p.  m.,  Fort  Barrancas  having  ceased  to  reply,  only  at  long  inter- 
vals, to  the  fire  of  our  guns,  I directed  my  fire  on  the  battery  stationed 
on  the  rising  ground  to  the  right  of  Fort  Barrancas,  and  which  had  by 
the  accuracy  of  its  fire  annoyed  us  considerably.  After  the  first  fire  I 
succeeded  in  getting  the  range  of  that  battery  completely,  and  during 
the  remainder  of  the  day  exploded  nearly  every  shell  that  I fired  inside 
of  the  work,  and  before  I ceased  firing  at  night  had  nearly  succeeded  in 
silencing  its  fire,  as  it  only  rephed  at  long  intervals  and  without  much 
accuracy.  There  were  one  or  two  guns  from  the  fort-  besides  my  own 
firing  on  this  battery  during  the  afternoon.  I ceased  firing  by  your 
order  about  6 o’clock  p.  m. 

My  men  all  behaved  well,  especially  Sergeant  Jones,  of  Company  K, 
Second  Artillery,  who,  notwithstanding  that  the  shot  and  shells  from 
the  enemy’s  guns  were  flying  in  every  direction,  many  of  them  explod- 
ing immediately  in  our  bastion,  maintained  his  position  on  the  parapet 
during  the  whole  time  that  he  was  on  duty,  watching  the  effect  of  our 
shot  on  the  enemy’s  batteries.  I have  no  casualties  to  report. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  SEELEY, 

First  Lieutenant^  Fourth  Artillery, 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery^  TJ.  JS.  Army,  Commanding  Batteries, 


Chap.  XVI.]  BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA.  483 

No.  9. 

Report  of  Capt,  Samuel  F.  Chalfiu,  Fifth  U.  S.  .Artillery. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25,  18G1. 

Major  : In  obedience  t&  instructions  from  the  colonel  commanding 
I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  re])ort  of  tlie  operations  of  the 
two  batteries  under  my  direction  during  the  bombardment  of  the  22d 
and  23d  instant : 

One  battery  is  in  barbette,  the  other  in  casemate.  The  barbette  bat- 
tery consists  of  one  10-incli  columbiad  along  the  capital,  one  42-pounder 
rifled  gun  and  two  32-pounders  on  the  north  flank  of  bastion  E,  and  ot‘ 
seven  32-])Ounders  on  curtain  D E.  The  casemate  battery  comprised 
two  8-inch  columbiads,  one  unchambered  and  one  42-pounder  rifled 
gun.  Both  these  batteries  were  served  by  Company  A,  First  Keginient 
of  Artillery.  After  the  signal  gun  was  fired,  at  10  o’clock  a.  m.  on 
the  morning  of  the  22d,  all  the  guns  of  the  barbette  battery  except  tlie 
rifle  were  opened  on  the  navy-yard  and  the  enemy’s  boats  lying  at  the 
wharves.  Owing  to  the  dense  smoke  which  arose  after  the  first  dis- 
charge, and  to  the  great  distance  (If  miles),  it  was  almost  impossible  to 
observe  with  any  certainty  the  eftect  of  the  32-pounders.  Before  the 
firing  commenced  with  these  guns  the  elevating  screws  and  their  beds 
had  been  removed  and  quoins  substituted,  by  means  of  which  an  eleva- 
tion of  12^  and  13^  could  be  obtained.  From  an  occasional  observation 
it  could  be  seen  that  the  shots  were  not  falling  short.  After  about  two 
hours’  firing  with  the  32-pounders  the  cannoneers  were  taken  away  from 
them  and  placed  at  the  casemate  guns  and  barbette  rifle.  The  10-inch 
columbiad,  under  charge  of  Second  Lieut.  F.  E.  Taylor,  First  Artillery, 
maintained  a steady  and  effective  fire  throughout  the  day.  The  bar- 
bette rifle  opened  on  Fort  Barrancas  about  12  m.,  and  did  good  execu- 
tion. The  casemate  guns  opened  about  the  same  time,  the  rifle  on  Fort 
Barrancas  and  the  columbiads  on  the  enemy’s  batteries  near  the  Marine 
Hospital.  The  firing  from  these  guns  was  generally  very  effective,  and 
kept  up  steadily  at  the  prescribed  intervals  until  ordered  to  cease. 

About  4 o’clock  p.  m.  a shell  from  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  lodged 
and  exploded  in  the  parapet  immediately  in  frout  of  the  10-inch  colum- 
biads, by  which  one  of  the  cannoneers,  Private  Theodore  Shauer,  was 
slightly  wounded  on  the  head. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d  the  barbette  rifle  and  10-inch  columbiad 
opened  when  the  signal  was  given,  the  first  on  the  barbette  gun  on  the 
east  face  of  Barrancas,  the  second  on  the  Haxo,  Boggs’,  or  Church  bat- 
tery (for  it  has  been  called  by  all  these  names).  The  fire  from  this 
latter  gun  was  steady  and  efiectively  kept  up  throughout  the  day.  The 
fire  from  the  rifle  was  maintained  steadily,  but  many  of  the  shots  fell 
short,  and  towards  evening  became  decidedly  uncertain,  owing  in  a 
great  measure,  doubtless,  to  the  giving  way  of  the  stone  work  under 
the  traverse  circle.  After  thp  fire  opened  in  the  morning  six  of  the  32- 
pounders  were  used  for  throwing  hot  shot  at  the  buildings  in  Warring- 
ton and  the  vicinity.  About  12.30  o’clock  the  cannoneers  were  taken 
from  five  of  these  guns  and  put  at  the  casemate  guns,  which  they  con- 
tinued to  serve  regularlj^  until  night.  About  3 o’clock  p.  m.  tlie  32- 
pounder,  still  used  for  hot  shot,  burst  the  chase,  throwing  the  fragments 
into  bastions  D and  E,  as  well  as  amongst  its  own  cannoneers,  without, 
however,  doing  any  injury. 

About  4 o’clock  a building  in  rear  of  the  church  battery  was  observed 
to  be  on  fire,  and  soon  after  the  steeple  of  the  church  was  seen  in  flames. 


484  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI.' 

From  tliese  tlie  fire  spread  rapidly  towards  the  navy-yard,  and  some 
buildings  in  its  immediate  vicinity  are  known  to  be  burned.  The  firing 
from  the  casemate  columbiads  was  steadily  kept  up  with  good  effect  on 
the  same  battery  as  the  day  before.  The  unchambered  gun  was  used 
for  throwing  solid  shot.  The  casemate  rifle  was  admirably  served  by 
First  Sergt.  Edward  O’Brien,  of  Company  •V,  First  Artillery,  and  dil^^ 
good  execution. 

In  conclusion,  I take  great  pleasure  in  calling  the  attention  of  the 
colonel  commanding  to  the  zealous  and  efficient  manner  in  which  Second 
Lieut.  F.  E.  Taylor,  First  Artillery,  performed  his  duties  throughout 
the  bombardment.  He  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  10-inch  columbiad 
and  the  barbette  rifle,  where  he  displayed  great  coolness  and  remained 
constantly  at  his  post.  I have  also  the  pleasure  of  directing  the  colonel’s 
attention  to  the  good  conduct,  coolness,  and  excellent  services  of  First 
Sergt.  Edward  O’Brien  and  of  Corporals  John  Feeney  and  John  Clancy, 
of  Company  A,  First  Artillery.  All  of  the  men  of  the  company  behaved 
so  well  that  it  would  be  invidious  to  make  a distinction  between  them. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  F.  CHALFm, 

Captain^  Fifth  Artillery,  Comdg.  Company  A,  First  Artillery. 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery,  Commanding  Batteries,  Fort  Pickens,  Fla. 


Ko.  10. 

Report  of  Capt.  Loomis  L.  Langdon,  First  U.  B.  Artillery. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25,  1801. 

Sir:  Pursuant  to  instructions  from  the  colonel  commanding,  I have 
the  honor  to  report  as  correctly  as  I can  the  service  rendered  by  the 
battery  under  my  command  during  the  bombardment  of  the  22d  and 
23d  of  ISTovember. 

This  battery,  consisting  of  four  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars,  was  directed 
at  the  opening  of  the  firing  on  the  steamers  lying  at  the  navy-yard 
wharf.  One  or  two  effective  shots  were  made,  but  the  result  of  the 
firing  being  unsatisfactory,  the  mortars  were  directed  to  Fort  Barrancas 
and  the  sand  battery  to  the  left  of  Fort  McKee.  The  firing  at  the  latter 
was  the  best.  So  many  shots  were  being  thrown  at  Fort  Barrancas 
from  other  guns  that  I was  unable  to  mark  the  effect  of  mine.  In  the 
afternoon  the  mortars  were  fired  more  slowly  and  greater  care  taken 
to  distinguish  the  shots.  A marked  improvement  in  the  firing  was 
observed.  The  last  shots  were  fired  after  dark,  during  the  rain-storm, 
and  were  thrown  at  Fort  Barrancas. 

On  the  second  day  (the  23d)  I had  a table  of  fire  carefully  kept,  and 
the  range,  charge,  length  of  fuse,  and  etfect  of  each  shot  accurately 
noted.  The  navy-yard  and  sand  battery  near  Fort  McKee  received  all 
my  attention,  two  mortars  being  directed  at  each  iioint  the  whole  day, 
and  the  firing  slow  and  regular.  The  effect  was  very  satisfactory,  and 
after  the  signal  was  hoisted  on  the  Niagara  ^^Too  great  a range, I suc- 
ceeded in  placing  the  shells  with  good  effect. 

The  men  behaved  admirably,  exjiosed  as  they  were  without  a splinter- 
proof  and  to  the  falling  bricks  and  earth  from  the  parapet  above.  The 
fragments  of  bursting  shells  frequently  came  among  them,  and  a shell 


Chap.  XVI.] 


BOMBARDMENT  AT  RENSACOLi' FL 


485 


fell  in  their  midst,  but  burst  without  injuring  any  one.  The  most  ex- 
posed man  was  Private  Arthur  ll.  Kenner,  oi  Ocmpany  0.  Tnird  infantry, 
(piartermastePs  clerk,  who,  assisted  by  P6riK)ral  Seim n:bonx,Mif  f Com- 
pany K,  Second  Artillery,  remained  on  the  parapet  tlie  wliole  of  tlie 
second  day  recording  the  shots,  and  they  both  rendo^’^d;,  good*,service. 
Oorporal  Mulvihill,  of  Company  0,  Third  Infantry;  Corporal  Baby,  Com- 
pany L,  First  Artillery;  Sergeant  Magnitzky,  Company  C,  Second  Artil- 
lery, and  Privates  De  Bleeckere  and  De  Meyers,  of  Company  A,  First 
Artillery,  I would  mention  for  their  care,  attention,  and  coolness.  The 
non-commissioned  officers  l ore  the  fatigue  without  being  relieved  during 
the  whole  time,  and  deserve  much  credit. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

LOOMIS  L.  LAKGDOK, 

First  Lieutenant^  Fifth  Artillery,  Commanding  Battery, 
Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery,  TJ.  8.  Army,  Commanding  Batteries. 


Ko.  11. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  McL.  Hildt,  Third  TJ.  8.  Infantry, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  Novemher  25,  1861. 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  instructions,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  fol- 
lowing report  of  the  service  of  the  guns  under  my  charge  on  the  22d 
and  23d  of  November : 

These  guns,  viz,  one  10-inch  columbiad  en  harhette,  bastion  B ; one 
42-pounder  rifled  gun  en  harhette,  bastion  D,  and  two  8-inch  columbiads 
{one  new  and  one  old  iiattern)  in  casemate,  curtain  0 D,  opened  fire 
about  9.30  on  the  morning  of  the  22d.  The  rifled  gun  and  8-inch  colum- 
biads were  directed  exclusively  at  the  light-house  and  adjacent  batteries. 
The  10-inch  columbiad,  after  firing  a few  shells  at  the  steamer  Time, 
was  directed  at  Fort  Barrancas,  and  so  continued  almost  the  entire  time. 
The  most  accurate  firing  was  made  by  and  probably  the  best  results 
obtained  from  the  10-inch  columbiads.  Many  good  shots  were  made, 
the  shell  exploding  immediately  over  and  near  the  barbette  guns  of  Fort 
Barrancas.  Any  statement  of  results  must,  however,  be  mere  siiecu- 
lation.  I regret  being  obliged  to  report  6 men  wounded,  caused  by  a 
10-inch  shell  entering  the  embrasure  of  the  casemate  battery.  The 
shell  knocked  off  a considerable  quantity  of  brick  from  each  side  of 
the  embrasure,  and  wedged  between  the  carriage  and  chassis  of  the  8- 
inch  chambered  columbiads,  destroying  the  carriage.  The  shell,  fortu- 
nately, did  not  explode,  the  wounds  being  inflicted  by  brick.  My  men, 
non-commissioned  officers  and  privates,  performed  their  appropriate 
duty  cheerfully  and  well.  Being  the  only  officer  with  the  company, 
and  my  batteries  being  widely  separated,  the  duties  devolving  on  First 
Sergt.  David  Grier  were  necessarily  such  as  usually  fall  to  a commis- 
sioned officer.  He  x^erformed  them  intelligently,  and  the  ability  dis- 
played by  him  on  this  and  other  occasions  merits  advancement. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  McL.  HILDT, 

Captain,  Third  Infantry,  Commanding  Company  F, 

Major  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery,  TJ,  8.  Army. 


486  oPEFATioys  m w.  fla.,  s.  ala.,  s.  miss.,  and  la.  [Chap,  xvi: 

' ' - ^ N-Q.  12. 

Beport  oj'LleuL' Alexander  N.  Shipley^  Third  U.  S.  Infantry. 

;;^^>roRT  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  26, 1861. 

Sir  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  the  services  rendered  by  the  bat- 
teries under  my  command  during  the  bombardment  of  the  22d  and  23d 
instant. 

I had  charge  of  one  10-inch  columbiad  in  bastion  D,  barbette ; two 
rifled  guns,  42-pounders,  James  projectiles,  in  casemate  in  curtain  D 
E,  also  one  8-inch  columbiad,  old  pattern,  in  same  curtain.  The  signal 
gun  was  fired  at  about  10  o’clock  a.  m.  of  the  22d,  and,  in  obedience  to 
instructions,  the  fire  from  the  rifled-gun  battery  was  directed  on  the 
rebel  steamers  lying  at  the  navy-yard  wharf.  I used  shells  at  an  eleva- 
tion of  6^  30' ; charge  of  powder, *8 J pounds ; range,  3,220  yards ; fire  in- 
efficient; increased  elevation  to  8^,' and  subsequently  to  9°  and 
before  the  steamers  could  be  reached,  it  being  necessary  to  break  the  arch 
of  the  embrasures  to  procure  this  last  elevation.  With  these  last  data, 
so  far  as  I could  judge,  the  fire  was  elfective.  The  firing  from  the  rifled- 
gun  battery  was  directed  during  the  remainder  of  the  first  day  and  all 
of  the  second  at  the  rebel  batteries  on  the  beach  betwixt  Barrancas  Bar- 
racks and  the  navy-yard;  the  charge  of  powder  same  as  before  ; range, 
from  2,235  yards  to  3,220  yards  ; elevation,  6Jo  to  9Jo.  Projectiles  dur- 
ing the  first  day  were  shells,  and  during  the  second  solid  shot,  except  an 
occasional  shell.  The  firing  generally,  I think,  was  efiective. 

The  8-inch  columbiad  was  directed  on  the  same  batteries  both  days  f 
charge,  8 pounds;  range  as  above;  projectiles,  shells;  fuses  varying  from 
10"  to  14".  The  firing  from  this  gun  was  much  more  accurate  than  that 
of  the  rifled  battery.  My  10-inch  columbiad  en  barbette.,  bastion  D,  was 
directed  on  Fort  Barrancas  for  the  greater  portion  of  the  first  day ; range, 
2,654  yards;  charge,  12  pounds;  projectiles,  shells;  fuse  13",  and  the 
firing  satisfactory.  During  the  rest  of  the  first  day  and  all  ot  the  sec- 
ond 1 directed  its  fire  on  the  rebel  batteries  adjacent  to  Fort  Barrancas; 
range  nearly  the  same ; charge  the  same  ; fuse  varying  from  12"  to  15", 
and  firing  satisfactory. 

I wish  to  speak  well  of  the  conduct  of  all  my  men,  particularly  my 
first  sergeant,  Francis  0.  Choate,  and  Sergts.  William  McOlenzey  and 
John  Morris,  and  Corporals  Theodore  Kutcher  and  Nicholas  Harper.  I 
am  glad  to  notice  the  coolness  under  a very  heavy  fire  of  the  cannoneers  of 
the  columbiad  en  barbette  and  the  alacrity  and  skill  with  which  they  dis- 
charged their  duties.  One  of  the  rebel  shells  fell  beside  the  gun,  but 
fortunately  failed  to  explode.  A second  buried  itself  in  the  magazine 
cover  and  exploded,  setting  fire  to  the  sand  bags  and  canvas  cover.  A 
third  came  through  the  splinter-proof  erected  for  the  shelter  of  the  men, 
and,  exploding,  destroyed  it,  fortunately  doing  no  serious  injury  to  my- 
self or  the  men  beneath  it.  The  firing  of  the  casement  gims  1 left  princi- 
pally in  charge  of  Sergeants  McClenzey  and  Morris.  The  magazine 
duties  of  the  barbette  gun  1 intrusted  to  my  first  sergeant,  Choate. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  SHIPLEY, 

First  Lieutenant^  Third  Infantry.,  Commanding  Company  C. 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

' First  U,  S.  Artillery.,  Commanding  Batteries. 


Chap.  XVL]  BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA.  487 

Iso.  13. 

Report  of  Capt.  Matthe^v  M.  Blunt.,  Ticelfth  TJ.  S.  Infantry. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25 j 18G1. 

Major  : In  compliance  with  orders  from  the  colonel  commanding  I 
have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the  service  of 
the  battery  under  mj^  charge  during  the  22d  and  23d  of  this  month : 

The  battery  consists  of  one  13-inch  and  one  12-inch  sea-coast  mortar. 
Both  mortars  were  ready  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  and  at  the  signal 
gun  opened  fire  on  the  steamboat  at  the  navy-yard,  at  which  a rapid  fire 
was  kept  up  for  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  each  mortar  being  dis- 
charged as  soon  as  loaded.  The  majority  of  the  shells  then  thrown  went 
into  the  navy-yard,  but  on  account  of  the  very  heavy  fire  in  that  direc- 
tion *(a  large  number  of  our  guns  and  mortars  firing  at  the  steamboat  at 
that  time)  I could  not  tell  the  effect  of  the  shells  thrown,  but  am  confi- 
dent that  very  few  were  lost  by  falling  into  the  water.  After  firing  at 
the  steamboat  for  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  my  fire  was  directed, 
according  to  your  orders,  on  Fort  McEee,  and  was  continued  during  the 
day  at  intervals  of  twenty  minutes.  Several  shells  went  inside  the  fort 
and  others  near  the  batteries  on  either  side  of  it.  This  fire  was  continued 
until  sundown,  when  a sudden  thunder-storm  put  a stop  to  all  firing. 
Early  in  the  day  the  elevating  screws  began  to  bend,  and  by  means  of 
blocks  and  quoins  the  13-inch  mortar  was  kept  at  an  elevation  of  about 
40°,  aud  was  fired  at  that  elevation  during  the  afternoon,  when  the  screw 
broke  off'  entirely. 

About  3 p.  in.  the  elevating  screw  of  the  12-inch  mortar  broke  off*,  and 
the  mortar  rested  on  the  bolster,  and  was  not  used  lor  the  rest  of  the 
day.  At  5 a.  m.  on  the  23d  a party  was  set  to  work  to  airange  means 
for  elevating  the  mortars,  and  by  7 a.  m.  everything  was  ready  for  action. 
During  the  23d  our  fire  was  directed  entirely  on  the  navy-yard,  and,  with 
the  exception  ol  the  first  shell,  which  bursted  at  the  edge  of  the  water, 
all  the  others  lodged  within  the  yard,  and  several  were  observed  to 
strike  and  enter  the  buildings  in  it.  The  fire  was  at  an  interval  of  haff 
an  hour  aud  was  continued  until  after  sunset,  and,  having  ceased  for 
about  an  hour  and  a half,  was  renewed  by  your  order,  to  prevent  the 
enemy  from  putting  out  the  fire,  which,  commencing  in  the  village  of 
Warrington,  had  then  reached  the  vicinity  of  the  yard.  Our  firing  was 
continued  until  11.30  p.  m.,  when,  the  fire  being  well  under  way,  I thought 
it  useless  to  throw  any  more  shells. 

With  respect  to  the  conduct  of  the  enlisted  men  under  my  command 
I can  only  speak  well  of  all,  as  all  did  their  duties  jiromptly  and  effi- 
ciently. The  service  was  of  such  a nature  as  not  to  call  out  any  acts  of 
daring  or  bravery,  for  though  the  enemy  directed  at  least  two  mortars 
at  us  during  the  greater  part  of  both  days,  the  majority  of  the  shells  fell 
short  or  went  to  our  right.  Many  of  the  columbiad  shells  intended  for 
our  fort  passed  over  it  and  burst  in  our  vicinity. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  M.  BLUNT, 
Captain.,  Twelfth  Infantry, 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Artillery,  U.  S.  Army,  Commanding  Batteries. 


488  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Xo.  14. 

Report  of  Lieut  Walter  McFarland^  TJ.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  November  25,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  as  follows  concerning  the  operations 
of  the  10-inch  columbiad  in  the  salient  of  the  covered  way  under  my 
command  daring  the  bombardment  of  the  22d  and  23d  of  November : 

Firing  was  commenced  about  10  o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  22d,  directed 
upon  the  steamer  Time,  lying  at  the  navy-yard  wharf,  3,200  yards  dis- 
tant, and  was  continued  for  about  two  hours,  with  what  effect  I could  not 
ascertain,  other  than  that  the  steamer  was  several  times  hit.  The  piece 
was  then  directed  upon  Wheat’s  battery,  a little  to  the  east  of  the  Ma- 
rine Hosiiital,  and  fired  upon  it  uninterruptedly  during  the  remainder  of 
the  day,  making  for  that  range  (2,200  yards)  some  very  excellent  firing, 
but  whether  or  not  to  the  serious  detriment  of  the  enemy  it  was  impos- 
sible for  me  to  determine.  Firing  ceased  at  dark,  after  we  had  thrown 
59  shell,  50  of  which  were  navy  shell,  the  remainder  10-inch  columbiad 
shell. 

Firing  was  resumed  the  next  morning  at  about  the  same  hour,  directed 
upon  the  same  point  (Wheat’s  battery),  limited  by  order  to  one  round  in 
fifteen  minutes,  and  was  continued  with  similar  results  until  nightfall, 
when  we  stopped,  having  fired  31  rounds. 

The  conduct  of  the  men  was  excellent,  and  though  subjected  to  a 
heavy  direct  fire  from  six  10-inch  guns,  seven  or  eight  guns  of  smaller 
caliber,  and  three  or  four  heavy  mortars,  as  well  as  a reversed  fire  from 
Fort  McKee  and  the  batteries  adjoining,  I have  no  casualties  to  report. 
Sergeant  Ohlenroth,  of  Company  0,  Second  Artillery,  acted  as  gunner 
during  the  entire  bombardment,  and  the  excellent  firing  of  the  piece  is 
chiefly  due  to  his  exertions. 

I beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  neither  the  colum- 
biad shells  nor  the  fuses  furnished  were  of  the  proper  quality ; the  shells 
breaking  so  uniformly  in  the  piece  that  I was  compelled  to  reduce  the 
charge  1 pound,  making  it  11  pounds,  and  the  fuses,  in  perhaps  a ma- 
jority of  cases,  failing  to  ignite,  though  treated  with  the  utmost  care. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WALTER  MCFARLAND, 

First  Lieutenant^  Engineers^  Comdg.  Battery  in  covered  way. 

Maj.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

First  Artilleryj  Commanding  Batteries. 


No.  15. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg ^ C.  S.  Army^  Commanding  Army 

of  Pensacola. 

Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.,  November  25,  1861. 
Sir  : As  you  were  advised  by  telegraph  at  9.30  a.  m.,  on  the  22d  the 
enemy  opened  fire  on  our  lines,  without  notice,  from  Fort  Pickens  and 
his  sand  batteries.  Shortly  thereafter  his  two  Targe  naval  steamers  off 
our  harbor  took  up  position  and  joined  in  the  conflict.  We  responded 
from  such  of  our  guns  as  were  best  calculated  to  damage  him  in  a con- 


Chap.  XVI.  1 


BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA. 


489 


test  at  long  range.  Ills  fire  was  first  directed  on  the  nacy-.yard,  wliero 
oar  transportation  steamer  had  just  arrived  heavily  loaded,  but  in  a 
short  time  our  whole  line  was  enveloped  in  a terrific  fire,  wliich  was  kept 
lip  without  intermission  until  darkness  put  an  end  to  it.  kort  McEee 
seemed  to  be  the  main  point  of  attack,  the  shifis,  the  heaviest  out-bat- 
teries, and  a large  portion  of  Fort  Pickens  devoting  their  entire  time  to 
it.  Knowing  the  condition  of  it,  I felt  great  apiirehension,  but  was 
strengthened  in  my  hope  by  the  confidence  1 had  in  its  noble  com- 
mander, Colonel  Villepigue,  and  his  brave  garrison  of  Georgians  and 
Mississippians. 

Our  casualties  for  the  day,  thanks  to  the  enemy’s  wild  firing,  were 
only  9 wounded,  2 mortally,  2 severely,  and  5 slightly^  Colonel  Yille- 
pigue  among  the  latter.  Five  valuable  lives  were  lost  in  addition  near 
Fort  McKee  bj^  an  unfortunate  accident. 

The  conflict  was  renewed  at  10  a.  m.  the  next  day,  and  continued  on 
our  part  until  dark,  by  the  enemy  until  12  at  night,  a few  random  shots 
only  being  tired  after  that  until  4 a.  m.,  when  a single  10-inch  shell  from 
our  side  announced  our  wakefulness,  but  respect  for  the  Sabbath  and 
quiet  reigned.  The  firing  was  steady  and  regular  for  the  whole  day, 
only  one  ship  being  engaged,  the  other  apparently  crippled.  Thanks  to 
the  prudent  care  of  their  officers,  the  wild  firing  of  the  enemy,  and,  above 
all,  to  the  visible  and  acknowledged  preservation  of  a merciful  Provi- 
dence, not  a casualty  occurred  for  the  whole  day. 

Yesterday  and  to-day  the  enemy  has  not  renewed  the  contest,  and,  for 
reasons  which  the  Department  will  appreciate,  it  is  not  my  policy  to  do 
so.  Their  ships,  both  crippled,  are  withdrawn  to  their  former  anchor- 
age, a miserable  fiiilure  being  their  reward  for  commencing  an  engage- 
ment without  notice,  by  firing  into  houses  they  knew  to  be  occupied  by 
women  and  children,  and  closing  it  by  disgracefully  violating  the  hos- 
pital flag,  in  accordanc.e  with  a former  barbarous  threat. 

When  the  more  circumstantial  reports  of  subordinates  are  received 
the  Department  shall  have  a detailed  account  of  the  whole,  when  I will 
<mdeavor  to  do  justice  to  individuals  and  corps.  It  will  suffice  to  say 
now  that  the  conduct  of  my  gallant  little  army  fully  equaled  the  high 
expectation  I had  formed  of  it.  To  Brig.  Gens.  K.  H.  Anderson  and 
A.  H.  Gladden  I am  indebted  for  al)le  support  and  prudent  counsel  dur- 
ing the  whole  time,  and  the  army  will  pardon  the  single  exception  I make 
in  giving  credit  at  this  time  to  Col.  John  B.  Villepigue  and  his  Geor- 
gians and  Mississippians,  for  their  heroic  defense  of  Fort  McRee. 

1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

Riehmondj  Ya. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Fensaeola^  Fla..,  Decemher  4,  1861. 

Sir:  The  reports  of  subordinate  commanders  having  been  mostly 
received,*  I am  enabled  to  give  you  a more  detailed  account  of  our 
recent  passage  at  arms  with  the  enemy : 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d  of  November,  about  9.30  o’clock,  he  opened 
fire  from  Fort  Pickens  and  all  his  outer  batteries  without  the  slightest 

^That  of  Brigadier-General  Anderson  the  only  one  found. 


490  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

warning.  His  first  shot  were  directed  principally  upon  the  navy-yard 
and  Fort  McEee,  the  former  known  to  be  occupied  by  women  and  chil- 
dren and  non-combatants,  and  used  by  us  for  defensive  purposes  only. 
In  less  than  half  an  hour  we  were  responding,  and  the  enemy  distributed 
his  fire  on  our  whole  line. 

Soon  after  Fort  Pickens  opened  two  large  naval  steamers,  supposed 
to  be  the  Niagara  and  Hartford  [Richmond],  took  position  due  west  from 
Fort  McRee  and  within  good  range,  from  whence  they  poured  in  broad- 
sides of  the  heaviest  metal  throughout  the  day.  From  the  defective 
structure  of  Fort  McRee  it  was  unable  to  return  this  terrific  fire  with 
any  elfect. 

Assailed  at  the  same  time  from  the  south*  by  Fort  Pickens  and  its 
outer  batteries,  the  devoted  garrison  of  this  confined  work,  under  the 
gallant  Colonel  Yillepigue,  Georgia  and  Mississippi  regiments,  seemed 
to  be  destined  to  destruction.  Three  times  was  the  wood  work  of  the 
fort  on  fire,  threatening  to  expel  its  occupants,  and  as  often  extinguished. 

The  magazines  were  laid  bare  to  the  enemy^s  shells,  which  constantly 
exploded  around  them,  and  a wooden  building  to  the  windward,  on  the 
outside  of  the  fort,  taking  fire,  showers  of  live  cinders  were  constantly 
driven  through  the  broken  doors  of  one  magazine,  threatening  destruc- 
tion to  the  whole  garrison. 

In  the  midst  of  this  terrible  ordeal  the  coolness  and  self-possession  of 
the  commander  inspired  all  with  confidence,  and  enabled  him  to  hold  a 
position  which  seemed  to  others  utterly  untenable. 

Towards  evening  our  sand  batteries  appeared  to  have  crippled  the 
Hartford  [Richmond],  and  she  drew  off,  and  did  not  again  join  in  the  com- 
bat. Darkness  closed  the  contest,  which  had  lasted  for  more  than  eight 
hours  without  an  intermission.  For  the  number  and  caliber  of  guns  and 
weight  of  metal  brought  into  action  it  will  rank  with  the  heaviest  bom- 
bardment in  the  world.  It  was  grand  and  sublime.  The  houses  in 
Pensacola,  10  miles  off,  trembled  from  the  effect,  and  immense  quanti- 
ties of  dead  fish  floated  to  the  surface  in  the  bay  and  lagoon,  stunned 
by  the  concussion.  Our  troops  behaved  with  the  greatest  coolness  and 
gallantry,  and  surprised  me  by  the  regularity  and  accuracy  of  their 
firing,  a result  which  would  have  been  creditable  to  veterans. 

A dark  cloud,  accompanied  by  rain  and  wind,  at  6 o’clock  so  obscured 
the  night  as  to  enable  us  to  withdraw  in  safety  our  transport  steamers, 
which  had  been  caught  at  the  navy-yard.  The  gunboat  Nelms,  Lieu- 
tenant Manston,  Louisiana  infantry,  commanding,  was  also  at  the  yard 
when  the  firing  commenced ; but  she  was  gallantly  backed  out,  and 
proceeded  to  Pensacola  unharmed.  The  fire  of  the  enemy,  though  ter- 
rific in  sound  and  fury,  proved  to  have  been  only  slightly  damaging, 
except  to  McRee.  From  Fort  Pickens  and  the  sand  batteries  we  sus- 
tained very  little  injury.  From  the  shipping,  which  fired  with  much 
greater  accuracy,  the  fort  and  garrison  of  McRee  suffered  more. 

Our  loss  from  the  enemy’s  shot  was  21  wounded — 1 mortally,  who  died 
that  night ; 12  of  the  others  so  slightly  as  not  to  take  them  from  duty. 
By  an  unfortunate  accident — the  caving  in  of  a defective  magazine, 
badly  planned  and  constructed — we  had  6 other  gallant  men  smothered, 
who  died  calling  on  their  comrades  never  to  give  up  the  fort.  Our 
women  and  children  escaped,  through  a shower  of  balls,  without  an 
accident. 

The  rejjorts  brought  in  during  the  night  by  my  staff’  officers,  dis- 
patched to  every  point,  were  very  satisfactory  and  encouraging,  except 
from  Fort  McRee.  Exposed  in  front,  flank,  and  reverse,  with  half  its 
armament  disabled  and  magazines  exposed,  without  the  ability  to  return 


I 


Chap.  XYI.J 


BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA. 


491 


tlie  enemy’s  fire,  it  was  proposed  to  blow  ifc  np  and  abandon  it.  Upon 
mature  reflection  as  to  the  effect  this  would  have  on  the  morale  of  my 
own  troops  as  well  as  the  enemy,  I determined  to  hold  it  to  the  last  ex- 
tremity. An  engineer  officer  and  large  working  party  were  dispatched 
to  Colonel  Villepigue  with  this  decision.  Though  suffering  from  a 
painful  wound,  he  devoted  the  entire  night  to  the  necessary  repairs.  It 
was  not  our  policy  to  keep  up  this  unequal  contest  at  long  range,  so  wo 
awaited  the  enemy’s  fire  the  next  morning. 

At  about  10.30  he  again  opened,  though  much  more  slowly,  and  with 
only  one  ship.  We  responded,  as  before,  with  caution  and  deliberation. 
Their  fire  was  so  much  slackened  that  our  apprehension  about  McRee 
was  greatly  relieved,  and  our  sand  batteries  played  with  a better  pros- 
pect of  success  against  the  remaining  ship.  Towards  evening  the 
enemy,  finding  all  his  efforts  foiled,  that  our  guns  were  not  silenced, 
and  McRee  not  reduced,  as  he  had  i)redicted,  turned  upon  the  hospital, 
and  put  several  shot  into  the  empty  building  (the  sick  having  all  been 
removed  in  anticipation  of  this  barbarous  act).  The  evacuation,  how- 
ever, was  not  known  to  them.  All  the  appearance  of  occupation  was 
kept  up ; the  yellow  flag  was  still  fljdng.  After  this  he  poured  hot  shot 
and  shell  into  the  empty  dwellings  of  non-combatants  in  the  villages  of 
Warrington  and  Woolsey,  by  which  considerable  portions  of  each  were 
burned.  The  navy-yard,  too,  received  a large  supply  of  these  shot  and 
a shower  of  mortar  shells  until  past  midnight,  but  only  one  unimpor- 
tant building  was  fired,  though  many  houses  were  struck  and  more  or 
less  damaged.  Notwithstandiog  thousands  of  shot  and  shell  fell  in  and 
around  our  positions,  not  a casualty  occurred  in  the  whole  army  for  the 
day.  Our  fire  ceased  at  dark,  except  an  occasional  shell,  as  a warning 
that  we  were  on  the  alert,  the  last  shot  being  ours,  about  4 a.  m.,  on  the 
24th. 

We  had  fired  about  1,000  shots,  the  enemy  not  less  than  5,000.  There 
are  no  means  of  knowing  or  conjecturing  the  loss  or  damage  inflicted  on 
them,  but  we  believe  it  to  have  been  very  considerable.  They  certainly 
did  not  accomplish  the  object  they  had  in  view  nor  fulfill  the  ex])ecta- 
tions  of  their  Government.  The  injury  to  our  side  was  the  loss  in  killed 
and  wounded  given  above;  a few  hundred  dollars’  damage  done  the 
navy-yard;  the  burning  of  two  churches  surmounted  by  the  Holy  Cross — 
the  first  buildings  fired — and  some  twenty  humble  habitations  of  poor 
laboring  men  and  women,  mostly  emigrants  from  the  North ; and,  finally, 
a violation  of  our  hospital  flag,  in  accordance  with  a previous  threat. 
This  last  act  stamps  its  author  with  infamy,  and  places  him  beyond  the 
pale  of  civilized  commanders. 

As  they  did  not  renew-  the  action,  and  drew  off  with  their  ships  in  a 
crippled  condition,  our  fire  was  not  reopened  on  Fort  Pickens,  to  dam- 
age which  is  not  our  object.  A fair  challenge,  however,  was  offered  them 
on  the  27th,  when  a small  row-boat,  attempting  to  enter  the  harbor,  was 
fired  on  by  us  and  abandoned  by  them.  Several  of  our  shots  necessa- 
rily passed  very  near  their  works,  but  they  declined  our  invitation. 

The  reports  of  the  brigade  and  regimental  commanders  and  the  chief 
of  artillery  are  inclosed,  with  a tabular  statement  of  killed  and  wounded. 
I can  cordially  indorse  all  that  is  said  by  them  in  commendation  of  the 
troops  generally,  and  specially  of  the  individuals  mentioned.  My  thanks 
are  particularly  due  to  Brig.  Gens.  R.  H.  Anderson  and  A.  H.  Gladden 
for  the  able  support  given  me  throughout  the  engagement.  It  fell  to 
the  lot  of  the  latter  to  have  much  the  largest  number  of  guns  engaged, 
and  in  consequence  a greater  sphere  of  usefulness.  The  efficiency  oi 
the  batteries  shows  the  labor  and  care  which  have  been  bestowed. 


492  OPERATIONS  IN  \V.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  fCHAP.  XVL 

and  fully  sustains  tlieir  reputation  as  gallant  veterans.  Their  reports 
specify  the  particular  corps  whose  good  fortune  it  was  to  he  actively 
engaged.  Col.  H.  D.  Clayton,  First  Eegiment  of  Alabama  Volunteers 
(Gladden’s  brigade),  whose  entu’e  regiment  served  both  days  at  the 
batteries,  has  received  the  just  commendation  of  the  general.  This  gal- 
lant regiment  has  toiled  for  near  ten  months  in  the  construction  and 
garnishment  of  the  works  they  almost  despaired  of  using.  Having  been 
the  first  on  the  ground,  much  the  largest  portion  of  the  labor  fell  to  their 
lot.  When  least  expected  the  opportunity  has  been  offered  to  test  their 
skill,  and  most  nobly  have  they  availed  themselves  of  it. 

A mere  narrative  of  the  events  at  Fort  McEee  and  its  sand  battery 
(Gladden’s  brigade)  expresses  in  eloquent  simplicity  the  heroic  conduct 
of  Col.  J.  B.  Villepigue,  and  his  command  of  Georgians  and  Mississip- 
pians.  An  educated  soldier,  possessing  in  an  emiuent  degree  the  love 
and  confidence  of  his  officers  and  meu,  he  had  been  specially  selected 
for  this  important  and  perilous  post.  The  result  folly  vindicates  the 
fortunate  choice,  and  presents  for  our  admiration,  blended  in  perfect 
harmony,  the  modest  but  heroic  soldier  with  the  humble  but  confiding 
Christian. 

Three  companies  of  the  regiment  of  Louisiana  Infantry  (Anderson’s 
brigade),  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jaquess,  served  as  many  batteries 
throughout  the  action  most  efficiently  and  gallantly,  fully  sustaining 
the  high  reputation  that  excellent  regiment  has  achieved  for  discipline 
and  instruction.  Captain  Van  Benthuysen,  with  his  company  Confeder- 
ate States  Marines,  served  a battery,  with  one  10-incli  columbiad,  at  the 
nav^y-yard,  which  was  constructed  by  them,  in  a handsome  and  efficient 
manner.  All  these  batteries  were  exposed  to  very  heavy  fire  from  the 
enemy  during  the  whole  bombardment,  and  bear  marks  of  having  been 
very  often  struck,  but  not  a man  in  either  was  injured,  owing  in  some 
measure,  no  doubt,  to  the -admirable  manner  in  which  they  have  been 
protected  by  tlie  labor  of  the  officers  and  men  occupying  them.  The 
members  of  my  personal  staff,  who  have  so  long  and  faithfully  served 
in  the  discharge  of  the  important  but  monotonous  duties  at  this  station, 
have  placed  me  under  renewed  obligations,  personal  and  official,  and  it 
is  but  justice  their  names  should  appear  in  this  report.  Ma,].  George 
G.  Garner,  assistant  adjutant-general  j First  Lieut.  J.  E.  Slaughter,  act- 
ing inspector-general,  Towson  Ellis  and  Francis  S.  Parker,  jr.,  aides- 
de-camp,  and  H.  W.  Walter,  Mississippi  volnnteers,  acting  judge-advo- 
cate, were  constantly  vrith  me  throughout  the  engagement,  and  bore 
themselves  most  gallantly  under  the  heaviest  fire  in  carrying  orders  and 
making  observations  for  my  use.  Majs.  L.  W.  O’Bannon,  assistant- 
quartermaster,  and  T.  M.  Jones,  commissary  of  subsistence,  and  Capt. 
W.  E.  Boggs,  Engineers,  when  not  otherwise  engaged  in  their  several 
departments,  were  in  attendance  on  the  field,  sharing  its  dangers  and 
aiding  its  ox^erations. 

The  Hon.  A.  E.  Maxwell,  of  Florida,  a volunteer  aide,  joined  me  on 
the  field  soon  after  the  action  commenced,  and  i^jarticipated  in  all  the 
duties  of  my  staff'  u})  to  the  close.  Caxff.  H.  Oladowski,  0.  S.  artillery, 
chief  of  ordnance,  a veteran  of  many  Euroiieaii  cam])aigns,  was  tem- 
X)orarily  absent  on  duties  of  his  deimrtment,  but  the  results  of  his  val- 
uable services  were  everywhere  conspicuous.  The  admirable  manner  in 
wfiiichhe  had  sui)xffied  the  batteries  and  regulated  the  affairs  of  his  de* 
l)artment  generally  reflects  great  credit  on  liis  skill  and  industry. 

To  First  Lieut.  J.  E.  Slaughter,  0.  S.  Army,  acting  inspector-general, 
an  officer  of  fifteen  years’  unrequited  service,  1 am  more  indebted,  prob- 


Chap.  XVI.'(  BOMBARDMENT  AT  PENSACOLA,  FLA.  493 

ably,  than  to  any  other  in  this  command  for  the  patient  labor  and  nn- 
ceasin^i^  vigil  he  has  given  in  its  organization  and  instruction. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  firing  immediate  steps  v'ere  taken  by 
Surg.  A.  J.  Foard,  medical  director,  in  accordance  with  previous  instruc- 
tions, to  remove  his  sick  and  stores  to  a f)lace  of  security  already  i)re- 
pared  in  anticipation  of  this  outrage  upon  our  hospital  flag.  By  the 
activity  and  energy  of  this  indefatigable  oflicer  every  patient  and  every 
article  of  value  had  been  transferred  before  any  damage  occurred. 
After  sui^erintending  this  important  duty  he  joined  me  in  the  field. 
The  high  professional  attainments  of  this  admirable  officer,  united  to 
his  gentleness  of  manner,  kindness  of  heart,  and  untiring  zeal,  i)ecu- 
liarly  adapt  him  for  the  very  important  post  he  fills  with  so  much  credit 
to  himself  and  satisfaction  to  this  Army.  To  his  labors  have  been  en- 
tirely due  the  admirable  arrangements  by  which  the  sufferings  of  our 
sick  have  been  so  greatly  alleviated.  To  him  and  to  the  officers  of  his 
department  generally,  to  Father  Pont  and  our  good  Sisters  of  Charity, 
who  have  labored  in  our  hospital  without  money  and  without  price,  the 
Army  and  the  country  owe  a debt  of  gratitude. 

At  the  close  of  the  engagement  on  Saturday  night  Maj.  Thomas 
Jones,  commissary  of  subsistence,  with  my  approbation,  volunteered  to 
go  to  the  assistance  of  Colonel  Villepigue  at  Fort  McEee,  who  Tvas 
well-nigh  exhausted  by  his  painfid  wounds,  anxiety,  and  long-continued 
watchfulness.  His  services  were  of  the  utmost  importance  in  restoring 
the  fort  to  its  defensive  condition,  and  in  constructing  an  additional  out- 
work, which  it  is  hoped  will  render  it  less  assailable  in  future.  Colonel 
Yillepigne,  in  his  report,  paj’s  a just  tribute  to  this  excellent  officer, 
vffiose  sense  of  duty  rose  far  above  all  personal  considerations. 

This  would  seem  not  an  improper  occasion  to  place  on  record  an  ex- 
pression of  the  admiration  and  gratitude  I feel  for  the  noble,  self-sacri- 
ficing spirit  which  has  ever  pervaded  the  wliole  of  this  gallant  little 
army.  Called  suddenly'  from  home,  without  preparation,  to  serve  an 
unorganized  Government,  in  the  midst  of  a country  destitute  of  supplies, 
it  has  patiently,  and  without  a murmur,  submitted  to  i)rivations  and 
borne  labors  which  never  can  be  appreciated.  Consigned  by  fate  to 
inactivity  when  their  brothers  elsewhere,  later  in  entering  the  service, 
were  reaping  a harvest  of  glory,  they  have  still  nobly  sustained  their 
commander,  and  maintained  a well-deserved  reputation  for  discipline 
rarely  equaled,  never  surpassed.  With  a people  cai)able  of  such  sacri- 
fices we  may  defy  the  world  in  arms. 

But  in  giving  this  praise  to  human  virtue  let  us  not  be  unmindful  of 
an  invisible  Power,  which  has  ruled  all  things  for  our  good.  The  hand 
of  disease  and  death  has  been  lightly  laid  upon  us  at  a place  and  in  a 
season  when  we  had  reason  to  expect  much  suffering  and  great  mor- 
tality. And  in  the  hour  of  oiu*  trial  the  missiles  of  death,  showered 
upon  us  by  an  infuriated  enemy,  respecting  neither  women,  children,  nor 
the  sick,  have  been  so  directed  as  to  cause  us  to  laugh  at  their  impotent 
rage.  Verily,  “Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  waketh 
but  in  vain.” 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 

^ Major-General^  Commanding, 

Adjutant-General, 

Richmond^  Yd. 


494  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

No.  130.  ) Near  Pensacola^  Fla.j  November  25,  1861. 

The  signal  success  which  has  crowned  our  forty  hours’  conflict  with 
the  arrogant  and  confident  enemy,  whose  Government,  it  seems,  is  hourly 
looking  for  an  announcement  of  his  success  in  capturing  our  position, 
should  fill  our  hearts  with  gratitude  to  a merciful  Providence.  This 
terrific  bombardment,  of  more  than  a hundred  guns  of  the  heaviest  cali- 
ber— causing  the  very  earth  to  tremble  around  us — has,  from  the  wild 
firing  of  the  enemj^,  resulted  in  the  loss  of  only  7 lives,  with  8 wounded, 
but  2 of  them  seriously;  5 of  the  deaths  from  an  accident,  and  but  2 from 
the  enemy’s  shot. 

We  have  crippled  his' ships  and  driven  them  off,  and  forced  the  garri- 
son of  Port  Pickens,  in  its  impotent  rage,  to  slake  its  revenge  by  firing 
into  our  hospital,  and  burning  the  habitations  of  our  innocent  women 
and  children,  who  had  been  driven  therefrom  by  an  unannounced  storm 
of  shot  and  shell. 

For  the  coolness,  devotion,  and  conspicuous  gallantry  of  the  troops 
the  general  tenders  his  cordial  thanks ; but  for  the  precision  of  their 
firing,  in  this  their  first  practice,  which  would  have  done  credit  to 
veterans,  he  is  unable  to  express  his  admiration.  Their  country  and 
their  enemy  will  both  remember  the  22d  and  23d  of  November. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg : 

GEO.  G.  GAENER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Richard  H.  Anderson^  G.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Camp  near  Warrington^  Fla.,  November  28,  1861.. 

Major  : At  10  o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  22d  instant  the  enemy  opened  fire 
upon  the  navy-yard  and  the  batteries  in  the  Second  Brigade.  This 
attack  was  made  suddenly  and  with  great  fury. 

Capt.  J.  T.  Wheat,  Louisiana  infantry,  commanding  Battery  No.  2, 
was  the  first  to  return  the  fire.  Oapt.  S.  S.  Batchelor,  Louisiana  in- 
fantry, commanding  Battery  No.  1,  and  Lieut.  G.  W.  Mader,  of  the  same 
regiment,  commanding  one  of  the  mortar  batteries,  followed  a few 
moments  after,  and  they  all  replied  to  the  attack  as  hotly  as  it  had  been 
begun,  until  the  orders  of  the  general  commanding,  regulating  the  rate 
of  fire,  were  communicated  to  them,  and  it  was  then  more  moderately 
continued  until  after  dark,  when  it  was  suspended  on  both  sides. 

Oapt.  A.  O.  Van  Benthuysen,  0.  S.  Marine  Corps,  who  commanded 
the  battery  on  the  stone  wharf,  misconstruing  an  order  which  had  been 
given  on  the  occasion  of  the  Santa  Eosa  expedition,  did  not  open  until 
he  received  orders  to  do  so.  After  firing  two  shots  he  was  ordered  to 
cease,  on  account  of  the  damage  which  it  was  feared  the  steamer  Time, 
lying  at  t he  wharf,  would  sustain,  by  provoking  a continued  fire  in  that 
quarter  from  the  guns  of  the  enemy.  The  steamer  Time  and  the  steam 
gunboat  Nelms  were  both  at  the  wharf  when  the  attack  began,  and  it 
seemed  to  be  the  design  of  the  enemy  to  damage  or  destroy  tliem,  but 
the  Nelms  made  her  escape  at  once,  and  the  Time,  although  struck  by 
several  balls,  was  not  much  injured,  and  effected  her  escape  after  dark. 

The  enemy  reopened  the  fire  at  about  10  o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  23d,  and 
was  responded  to  until  dark,  when  it  again' ceased,  with  the  exception  of 


OUAP.  XVL] 


495 


FORTS  m’rEE  and  BARRANCAS,  FLA. 

an  occasional  sliell  from  the  other  side,  directed  aginst  the  navy-yard, 
and  a reply  iroin  Van  Ilenthuysen’s  battery.  Near  da;ydight  it  was  dis- 
continued by  both  parties.  The  attack  was  not  resumed  on  tlie  follow- 
ing morning,  and  the  batteries  have  consequently  remained  silent. 

Agreeably  with  instructions  previously  given  the  troops  not  needed 
at  the  batteries  retired  from  the  navy-yard  and  its  vicinity  at  tlie  com- 
mencement of  the  attack  and  took  a position  outside  the  north  wall. 
To  be  i>repared  for  anything  the  enemy  might  attem})t,  Colonel  Adams, 
commanding  the  Louisiana  infantry,  was  ordered  to  post  his  regiment 
near  the  navy-yard.  This  order  was  executed  .with  the  utmost  prompt- 
ness, and  the  most  commendable  zeal  was  exhibited  by  the  regiment, 
which  remained  on  duty  on  the  beach  until  near  midnight. 

The  skill  and  enthusiastic  spirit  displayed  by  the  officers  and  troops 
at  the  batteries  is  worthy  of  all  praise,  and  1 am  happy  to  report  that 
no  casualty  whatever  occurred  amongst  them.  While  the  troops  with- 
drawn from  the  navy-yard  were  standing  near  the  north  wall,  where 
they  had  been  ordered  to  rendezvous,  a shot  penetrated  the  wall,  and 
the  fragments  of  brick  wounded  a soldier  of  Captain  Cropp’s  company, 
of  Florida  Eegiment  Volunteers,  and  two  of  Captain  Thom’s  company 
of  Marines. 

. The  batteries  commanded  by  Captains  Wheat,  Batchelor,  and  Van 
Benthuysen  were  manned  by  the  companies  of  these  officers  respectively. 
Lieutenant  Mader’s  mortar  battery  was  manned  by  a detachment  from 
the  Louisiana  infantry. 

A trunnion  was  knocked  off  one  of  the  8-inch  guns  in  Wheat’s  battery, 
and  slight  damage  was  done  to  the  carriage  of  Batchelor’s  42-pounder. 
One  of  the  mortars  in  Lieutenant  Made'r’s  battery  was  cracked  and  ren- 
dered useless  after  the  seventeenth  discharge.  These  comprise  all  the 
injuries  sustained  by  the  batteries  of  the  Second  Brigade.  Very  little 
damage  has  been  done  to  the  navy-yard.  About  fifty  of  the  buildings 
in  Warrington  and  Woolsey  have  been  burnt. 

The  reports  of  Lieu  tenant- Colonel  Jaquess,  Louisiana  infantry,  and 
Captain  Van  Benthuysen,  C.  S.  Marine  Corps,  are  herewith  submitted.* 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  H.  ANDEESON, 

Brigadier- General,  P.  A.,  Commanding  Second  Brigade, 

Maj.  Geor&e  G.  Garner,  A,  A,  G.,  G.  A, 


JANUARY  1,  1862. — Bombardment  of  Forts  McRee  and  Barrancas,  Fla 

RJEPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Harvey  Brown,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Department  of  Florida. 
No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Army  of  Pensacola. 

No.  1. 

Beport  of  Col.  Barvey  Brown,  Fifth  TT.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Bejgart- 

ment  of  Florida, 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  FicJcens,  January  2,  1862. 

General  : Yesterday  afternoon,  about  3 o’clock,  a steamer  came  to 
the  wharf  at  the  navy-yard  within  range  of  our  guns.  The  enemy 


Not  found. 


496  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  ELA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

having,  under  similar  circumstances,  fired  into  a small  yawl-boat  (which, 
desirous  of  avoiding  continuous  desultory  warfare,  leading  to  no  results, 
I did  not  notice,  although  four  shots  were  fired),  and  this  being  the 
first  instance  of  a boat  of  any  kind  coming  to  the  navy  yard  or  within 
the  range  of  my  guns  since  the  last  bombardment,  I could  only  view  it 
as  bravado,  or  as  done  with  an  intention  of  drawing  my  fire.  I there- 
fore ordered  her  to  be  fired  into,  which  was  done  three  times  while  she 
lay  at  the  wharf  and  was  leaving  it.  A gun  was  fired  from  a neighbor- 
ing battery  at  ours,  which  was  returned,  it  being  directly  in  range  of  the 
departing  steamer,  and  here,  as  I supposed,  the  aftair  would  rest ; but 
in  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  the  enemy  opened  on  me  from  most  of 
his  batteries,  which  was  promptly  returned,  and  a regular  bombardment 
ensued,  and  which  continued  in  our  front  until  too  dark  to  see,  when  I 
ceased,  except  an  occasional  fire  from  two  or  three  mortars,  the  enemy 
continuing  until  about  9 o’clock,  at  which  hour  a bright  light  became 
visible  from  the  yard,  and  in  an  hour  the  whole  firmament  was  illumi- 
nated, several  of  the  largest;  buildings  being  on  fire.  The  fire  continued 
to  burn  until  towards  morning,  and  the  mortar  firing  continued  on  our 
l)art  until  2 and  on  that  of  the  enemy  until  4 o’clock  this  morning. 

I used  only  my  heaviest  guns,  and  not  all  of  them,  with  an  occasional 
fire  from  an  8-inch  columbiad  and  a 42-pounder  rifled  gun.  Our  firing 
was  much  slower  than  before,  and  was  excellent.  I have  rarely  or 
never  seen  better  j the  officers  and  men  being  cool  and  collected,  and 
doing  their  duty  manfully,  such  as  Yankee  soldiers  should  do.  The 
enlisted  men  seemed  to  consider  it  a New  Year’s  amusement. 

Convinced  by  former  experience  of  the  great  difficulty  of  harming  or 
burning  his  buildings  at  so  great  a distance  I took  the  affair  very  coolly 
and  deliberately,  firing  seldom,  but  with  great  care,  and  using  freely 
rock-fire  and  carcasses,  with  both  of  which  I have  been  supplied  since 
the  last  bombardment,  and  to  which  I attribute  our  present  success  in 
firing  the  navy-yard,  and  the  failure  of  my  doing  so  before  to  the  want 
of  them.  The  firing  of  the  rebels  was  not  so  good  as  before,  very  few 
shot  or  shell  having  struck  our  walls  or  entered  the  fort,  although  the 
latter  burst  continuously  all  around  us.  He  probably  expended  very 
considerably  more  ammunition  than  on  either  of  the  previous  days,  and 
with  less  effect. 

I am  impressed  with  the  belief  that  General  Bragg  was  not  ])resent, 
and  that  a less  experienced  and  more  hot-headed  officer  commanded. 
If  he  was,  he  certainly  did  not  in  this  affair  display  his  usual  prudence 
and  caution. 

I had  two  men  slightly  injured — one  a zouave,  by  a splinter  hitting 
the  calf  of  his  leg,  and  the  other  a regular,  by  a contusion — both 
trifling  ; and  the  injury  to  the  fort  is  of  the  most  unimportant  kind — a 
few  shot  on  the  scarp-wall  and  some  few  holes,  made  principally  by  the 
explosion  of  shells  inside,  neither  of  any  consequence;  and  not  a gun 
was  disabled  or  injured,  with  the  excei)tiou  of  one  carriage,  and,  excei)t 
the  2 named,  not  a man  hurt. 

I am  more  than  satisfied  with  the  result,  as  it  has  again  clearly  demon- 
strated that  the  immense  batteries  with  which  Ave  are  nearly  surrounded 
(and  to  the  number  of  which  four  have  been  added  since  the  last  bom- 
bardment) are  unable  to  do  us  any  serious  injury. 

We  have  burned  several  large  buildings  in  the  navy  yard,  and  must 
have  seriously  injured  those  which  are  fire  proof,  giving  the  best  i)OS- 
sible  evidence  of  the  superiority  of  our  fire. 

^ I respectfully  and  earnestly  recommend  to  the  executive  justice  the 
brave  men  who  have  now  three  times  so  faithfully  defended  their  conn- 


Chai-.  XYL]  FORTS  m’rEE  AND  BARRANCAS,  FLA.  497 

try’s  flag,  and  who  for  their  reward  have  in  several  instances  had  the 
mortification  of  seeing  tlieir  juniors  placed  over  their  heads,  and  who 
have  never  heard  the  first  cheering  word  of  approval  for  their  former 
gallant  deeds.  The  conduct  of  all  was  so  uniformly  gallant  and  merito- 
rious that  I will  make  no  discrimination  in  naming  them,  except  to 
express  my  thanks  to  Major  Arnold,  my  executive  officer,  for  his  able 
assistance.  They  are  Surgeon  Campbell j Major  Tower,  Eiigineersj 
Lieutenant  Todd,  Ordnance  Department;  Assistant  Surgeon  Suther- 
land; Lieutenant  McFarland,  Engineers;  Captains  Allen,  Second  Artil- 
lery; Chalfin,  Fifth  Artillery;  Eobertson,  Second  Artillery;  Blunt, 
Twelfth  Infantry;  Hildt,  Third  Infantry;  Duryea,  Closson,  and  Lang- 
don.  First  Artillery;  First  Lieutenants  Shipley,  Third  Infantry;  Jack- 
son,  First  Artillery;  Pennington,  Second  Artillery;  Seeley,  Fourth 
Artillery;  and  Taylor,  First  Artillery;  and  Second  Lieutenants  Heaton 
and  Bradley,  Second  Artillery,  and  Duer,  First  Artillery,  the  three  last 
named  who  now  for  the  first  time  fleshed  their  maiden  swords. 

I also  desire  to  express  my  decided  approbation  of  the  conduct  of  the 
non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  of  my  command.  Every  one 
did  his  duty  manfully.  I commend  the  former  to  the  notice  of  the  com- 
manding general. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  bombardment  the  Sixth  Eegiment  ^ew 
York  Volunteers  took  post  at  Camp  Brown,  and  I ordered  Colonel 
Dodge  to  march  his  regiment  (the  Seventy-fifth  ISTew  York)  beyond  the 
range  of  fire.  He  moved  2 miles  up,  and  guarded  us  from  any  attack 
the  enemy  might  make  during  the  night.  This  is  a fine  regiment,  and 
will,  I doubt  not,  do  good  service  when  they  have  the  chance. 

As  I only  fired  on  the  steamer  to  drive  her  off,  as  the  enemy  had  done 
with  our  boats,  and  as  he  opened  his  batteries  on  me,  I have  not  deemed 
it  advisable  further  to  pursue  the  contest,  and  as  he  has  not  renewed  it, 
I presume  it  for  the  present  to  be  ended. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAEVEY  BEOWN, 

Colonel j Commanding, 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant-  General, 


Eo.  2. 

Eeport  of  Maj,  Gen,  Braxton  Bragg ^ C,  S,  Army,,  commanding  Army 

of  Pensacola, 

Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola,^  Fla,,  January  3,  1862. 

Sir  : On  my  way  to  this  point  from  Mobile  on  the  first  instant  I was 
privately  advised  by  telegraph  that  firing  was  going  on  between  our  bat- 
teries and  Fort  Pickens.  I hastened  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  reached 
here  at  4 a.  m.  the  2d.  It  appears  a small  private  steamer  had  been  im- 
prudently allow^ed  to  run  to  the  navy-yard,  and  was  fired  on  by  the 
enemy  at  Fort  Pickens.  This  fire  was  returned  by  order  of  Brigadier- 
General  Anderson,  in  temporary  command,  and  a brisk  canonnade  was 
keiit  up  on  both  sides  until  dark,  when  the  enemy  ceased.  Ours  was 
continued  irregularly  and  apparently  without  effect  or  an  object  until 
stopped  by  my  order.  No  casualty  is  reported  on  our  side,  and  we  can  see 
no  damage  to  the  enemy.  A large  and  valuable  store  house,  with  con- 
siderable property,  in  the  navy-yard,  was  burned  by  the  enemy’s  shells 
32  R R — VOL  VI 


498  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

I regret  exceedingly  to  add  that  the  concurrent  testimony  of  many 
officers  of  rank  represent  Brigadier-General  Anderson  as  so  much  in- 
toxicated as  to  be  entirely  unfit  for  duty,  and  that  his  conduct  was  very 
reprehensible.  It  is  being  investigated,  and  I fear  that  an  arrest  and 
prosecution  will  be  necessary.  Holding  j uniors  to  a rigid  accountability, 
1 shall  not  overlook  a similar  offense  in  a commanding  general  under 
such  aggravating  circumstances. 

Not  the  least  cause  of  regret  was  the  large  and  criminal  waste  of 
means  so  necessary  for  our  defense,  and  which  we  cannot  replace. 

I must  again  urge  on  the  Department  my  request  for  a second  in 
command  here  who  could  be  intrusted  with  this  army  in  my  necessary 
absence.  Mobile  demands  much  of  my  time ; indeed,  the  state  of  affairs 
there  is  alarming,  but  I am  almost  powerless  for  want  of  the  proper  offi- 
cers for  command.  The  material  is  here,  but  it  cannot  be  used. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BKAXTON  BEAGG, 
Major- General j Commanding, 

Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army,  Richmond, 


JANUARY  20,  1862. — Contest  over  the  British  schooner  Andracita,  on  the 

coast  of  Alabama. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Col.  W.  L.  Powell,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

B^ort  of  Maj,  Gen,  Braxton  Bragg,  G,  S,  Army, 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Near  Pensacola,  Fla,,  February  1,  1862. 

Sir  : I inclose  a copy  of  a report  from  Colonel  Powell,  Provisional 
Army,  of  a recent  contest  by  a portion  of  his  command  with  the  enemy 
over  a British  schooner.  The  conduct  of  our  troops  was  highly  credit- 
able, though  they  were  unable  to  save  the  vessel  from  capture.  Every 
facility  has  been  extended  to  the  British  consul  in  prosecuting  the  case, 
and  I hope  he  has  succeeded,  as  he  desired,  in  complicating  affairs 
between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain.  A copy  of  an  article 
from  a Mobile  paper,  inclosed,*  gives  a very  correct  history  of  the  vessel 
and  her  movements. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BEAGG, 
Major-General,  Commanding, 

Adjutant- General,  Richmond,  Ya, 


% No.  2. 

Report  of  Col,  W,  L,  Powell,  C,  S,  Army, 

Camp  Bragg,  January  21, 1862. 

Captain  : I avail  myself  of  the  boat  from  this  point  to  day  to  report 
that  a sharp  contest  took  place  at  the  mouth  of  the  lagoon  yesterday 


Omitted. 


Chap.  XVI.]  RECONNAISSANCE  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA.  499 

between  two  of  the  enemy’s  steamers,  with  their  boats,  and  Captain  Cot- 
trill’s  command,  for  the  possession  of  the  schooner  Andracita,  formerly 
J.  W.  Wilder,  which  had  been  run  on  shore  at  that  place,  with  the  hope 
of  saving  her  cargo.  All  the  particulars  of  the  affair  cannot  be  given  at 
this  time,  as  I have  not  a report  as  to  the  part  taken  in  it  by  the  force, 
consisting  of  two  field  pieces  and  two  companies  ordered  up  from  Fort 
Morgan  and  Camp  Bragg,  and  which  were  on  the  west  side  of  the  lagoon, 
under  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General  Jones. 

Upon  my  getting  on  this  side  of  the  lagoon  to  put  Captain  Cottrill’s 
company  in  action,  that  officer  had  already  moved  his  available  force 
across  the  lagoon  to  within  a short  distance  of  the  schooner,  and  there 
he  kept  up  so  sharp  and  well-directed  a fire  upon  the  schooner  and  the 
boats  of  the  steamers  as  to  drive  those  of  the  enemy,  who  had  previously 
reached  her  below  and  prevented  the  boats  from  getting  to  their  assist- 
ance, while  he  sheltered  his  men  so  securely  behind  the  sand  hills  as  to 
maintain  his  position,  though  it  was  only  about  100  yards  from  the  beach 
and  not  more  than  600  or  800  yards  from  the  steamers,  without  losing  a 
life. 

Captain  Cottrill  and  his  command  deserve  great  credit  for  the  skillful 
and  daring  manner  in  which  they  performed  their  parts  in  a defense 
which,  judging  from  the  effect  of  their  fire  while  continued,  must  have 
been  successful,  if  it  had  not  been  the  case  that  the  schooner  was  run  on 
shore  at  low  tide,  and  that  the  enemy  succeeded  in  making  a hawser 
fast  to  her  before  he  got  his  men  into  position,  by  which  she  was  hauled 
out  of  range  after  the  tide,  in  rising,  had  caused  her  to  float. 

What  loss  the  enemy  met  with  I will  not  pretend  to  state,  as  I was  not 
fortunate  enough  to  reach  the  scene  of  action ; but  it  must  have  been 
considerable,  as  two  of  their  boats,  one  of  which  is  now  reported  as  on 
the  beach  and  in  the  possession  of  our  men,  were  sunk  or  turned  over, 
and  another  had  every  oarsman  shot  or  driven  off*  their  seats,  and  was 
towed  out  of  range  by  another  sent  to  her  assistance. 

As  I mentioned  above,  there  was  no  loss  of  life  from  this  command  so 
far  as  heard  from,  and  we  have  only  to  regret  that  of  the  schooner  and 
cargo,  which  I am  sorry  to  say  the  captain  neglected  to  fire  in  his  desire 
to  save  it.  Upon  returning  to  Fort  Morgan  I shall  be  able  to  furnish 
any  further  particulars  which  may  be  brought  to  my  notice. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  L.  POWELL, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Second  Brigade, 

Capt.  D.  E.  Huger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


MARCH  27-31,  1862.— Reconnaissance  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Capt.  Henry  W.  Closson,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig,  Gen,  Leicis  G,  Arnold,  If.  S,  Army. 

Headquarters  Departivient  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pickens,  April  4,  1862. 

I respectfully  forward  a report  of  Captain  Closson,  First  Artillery,  cf 
an  armed  reconnaissance  40  miles  up  the  island  of  Santa  Eosa,  made  in 


500  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

obedience  to  my  orders,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  character  of 
the  upper  end  of  the  island  and  to  punish  and  take  prisoners  any  rebels 
he  might  meet,  I having  received  information  that  about  200  armed  rebels 
were  encamped  near  the  Southeast  Pass,  where  they  had  a few  days 
previously  killed  2 sailors  and  wounded  2 others  belonging  to  the  block- 
ading schooner  stationed  there. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

L.  G.  ARTsOLD, 

Brigadier- General^  U.  S.  Volunteers^  Commanding. 


No.  2. 

Eeport  of  Capt  Henry  W.  Closson,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  Ajyril  2, 1802. 

Sir  : On  the  26th  of  last  month  I received  your  instructions  from  the 
general  commanding  to  make  an  armed  reconnaissance  of  Santa  Rosa 
Island,  my  command  to  consist  of  Company  L,  First  Artillery,  and  Com- 
pany K,  Sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers,  rationed  to  include  the 
31st,  and  a 10-pounder  Parrott  rifle. 

On  the  night  of  the  27th  I camped  12  miles  from  here,  and  at  midnight 
received  an  express,  directing  me  to  wait  until  3 p.  m.  the  next  day  for 
the  arrival  of  Lieutenant  Shipley  with  further  instructions.  He  not 
arriving  at  that  hour,  I went  into  camp  that  night  8 miles  beyond,  when 
I was  overtaken  bj^  Lieutenant  Jackson,  acting  assistant  adjutant - 
general  of  the  department,  with  Company  D,  Sixth  Regiment  New  York 
Volunteers,  and  a guide — Mr.  Woods,  a rebel  refugee.  Lieutenant  Jack- 
son  informed  me  that  I was  to  move  up  towards  the  east  end  of  the  island 
and  surprise  and  capture  a rebel  force  in  that  vicinity  on  the  main-land — 
boats  to  be  furnished  from  the  naval  volunteer  schooner  Maria  Wood, 
on  blockade  duty  at  the  East  Pass — one  part  of  my  command  with  the 
rifled  gun  to  shell  the  rebel  camp  from  the  island,  one  portion  to  cross 
the  sound  and  move  up  the  main-land,  and  one  portion  to  enter  the  pass 
and  move  down  the  sound.  The  latter  part  of  the  plan  I abandoned, 
on  account  of  the  distance  of  the  pass  from  the  point  of  attack,  some  10 
miles.  All  the  necessary  material  and  arrangements  had  been  provided 
and  made  with  the  schooner  at  Fort  Pickens  by  Acting  Assistant  Quar- 
termaster Shipley. 

At  noon  on  the  31st  I went  into  camp  about  36  miles  from  here  and 
4 from  the  supposed  location  of  the  rebel  force,  having  communicated 
with  the  schooner,  and  requested  that  at  dark  she  would  put  three  surf- 
boats  on  the  outside  beach,  where  I should  establish  a signal  fire.  Lieu- 
tenant Jackson  and  Lieutenant  Appleton  made  a thorough  and  close  re- 
connaissance of  the  island  and  main-land  at  this  point,  selected  where 
to  put  the  gun  and  to  cross  the  sound,  giving  600  yards  of  boating. 

At  sunset,  leaving  animals,  disabled  men,  and  stores  at  camp,  I moved 
with  170  men  2 miles  up  the  beach  to  the  crossing  and  lit  the  signal  fire. 
At  11  o’clock  two  surf-boats  arrived.  I had  them  hauled  about  800  yards 
over  the  sand  hills  to  the  inside  beach,  and  directed  Lieutenant  Jackson 
to  march  the  volunteer  battalion  there  and  wait  my  arrival  with  the 
regulars  and  the  third  surf-boat.  At  1 o’clock  in  the  morning  the  third 
surf-boat  made  its  appearance.  The  unaccountable  lateness  of  their 


Chap.  XVI.]  RECONNAISSANCE  ON  SANTA  ROSA  ISLAND,  FLA.  501 

arrival  had  now  precluded  all  possibility  of  the  surprise,  and  here  I 
received  a message  by  Lieutenant  Gibbs  from  Lieutenant  Jackson  that 
two  rebel  spies  had  been  in  the  vicinity  of  his  command  and  a party 
had  been  detached  for  their  capture — unsuccessfully.  I directed  the 
two  boats  to  be  returned  to  the  outside  beach.  Company  K,  Sixth  Regi- 
ment New  York  Yolunteers,  to  proceed  to  my  camp,  while  I took  Com- 
pany D,  Sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  the  regulars,  with  the  rifled 
gun,  2 miles  farther  up,  crossed  the  island,  and  put  the  gun  into 
position  on  the  inside  beach,  directly  opposite  the  rebel  camp,  and 
about  250  yards  from  it.  I remained  here  until  their  huts  could  be  seen 
in  the  dawn,  and  then  directed  Lieutenant  Jackson  to  open  fire.  The 
shells  burst  right  in  their  midst.  Loud  cries  and  yells  were  heard,  and 
the  rebels  could  be  barely  seen  through  the  brush  in  their  shirt-tails 
making  rapidly  into  the  back  country.  A scattering  volley  was  fired 
from  what  I supposed  to  be  their  guard,  who  then  disappeared  also. 

After  shelling  the  vicinity  thoroughly  I returned  to  my  camp.  My 
supply  of  rations  and  forage  was  nearly  exhausted,  the  mules  nearly 
broken  down  by  a very  severe  pull  of  40  miles  through  the  heavy  sand 
on  the  beach.  I therefore  sent  all  my  sick  men  (some  6)  and  all  the 
bedding  I could  spare  to  the  schooner,  and  started  on  my  return.  Late 
on  Monday  afternoon  Lieutenant  Appleton  reported  a schooner  making 
fts  way  up  the  sound.  The  rifled  gun  was  taken  over  to  the  inside  beach 
and  Lieutenant  Jackson  directed  to  open  fire.  The  range  ran  from  1 ,800 
to  3,000  yards,  but  the  firing  was  very  satisfactory ; the  schooner  was 
several  times  struck,  her  small  boat  hit,  but  after  firing  some  twcU'e 
shots  it  became  so  dusky  that  she  could  be  no  longer  distinguished. 

On  Tuesday  afternoon  I reached  Fort  Pickens. 

1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  W.  CLOSSON, 

Oftptam,  Mrst  Artillery. 

Lieut.  R.  H.  Jackson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  I>ept.  of  Florida. 

The  instructions  given  me  by  Lieutenant  Jackson  interfered  somewhat 
with  any  very  close  observation.  The  island  varied  in  width,  so  far  as 
I had  an  opportunity  to  notice,  from  half  a mile  to  500  yards ; is  cut  up 
by  sand  ridges,  so  as  to  make  the  passage  of  teams  across  very  difficult 
and  generally  impossible  j furnishes  good  water  in  pools  or  by  digging 
in  the  depressions;  but  very  little  grass  indeed,  and  that  very  coarse. 
The  only  practicable  road  for  teams,  in  the  direction  of  its  length,  is 
along  the  outside  beach,  and  that  generally  is  excessively  heavy  and 
quite  narrow,  and  in  many  places  at  full  tide  impassable  for  any  ordi- 
nary load.  The  condition  of  the  horses  and  mules  of  my  command  fur- 
nishes some  evidence  of  the  character  of  this  road.  In  many  places 
the  island  is  perfectly  open,  in  others  screened  from  the  main-land  by 
ridges  of  sand  hills  and  fringes  of  forest.  The  sound  is  in  width  from 
3 miles  to  300  yards,  I should  judge.  The  narrowest  point  is  about  40 
miles  from  the  fort.  Here  the  rebel  camp  was  located.  It  is  nowhere 
fordable ; navigable  for  its  whole  extent  for  vessels  of  7 feet  draught, 
the  channel  running  generally  close  along  the  main-land. 

These  remarks  are  the  result  of  my  own  observation  and  information 
of  the  guides,  and  a thorough  examination  might  not  substantiate  them. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

HENRY  W.  CLOSSON, 

Captain,  First  Artillery. 


502  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

APRIL  3-4,  1862. — Affairs  at  Biloxi  and  Pass  Christian,  Miss. 

Ee])ort  of  Maj.  Gen,  Mansfield  Lovell,  C,  8,  Army, 

Headquarters  Department  ]^o.  1, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  April  16,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  3d  instant  the  enemy 
landed  a force  of  500  men  at  Biloxi,  having  three  steamers  off  the  town. 
We  had  seven  companies  of  the  Third  Mississippi  Regiment  at  Hands- 
borough  and  three  at  Pass  Christian.  I arranged  with  Commodore 
Whittle  that  the  steamers  Carondelet,  Pamlico,  and  Oregon  should 
engage  these  vessels  while  we  attacked  their  troops  at  daylight  on  the 
4th,  but  their  fleet  was  re-enforced  by  two  vessels  at  night,  which  re-em- 
barked their  troops,  and,  having  engaged  our  ships  with  superior  forces, 
they  proceeded  to  Pass  Christian,  landed  1,200  men,  with  several  pieces 
of  artillery,  and  drove  away  our  three  companies,  burning  their  camj) 
and  destroying  a portion  of  their  clothing  and  stores. 

Our  men,  finding  themselves  greatly  overmatched  and  outflanked, 
retreated  without  loss  of  life  to  Gainesville.  Colonel  Deason  proceeded 
with  his  seven  companies  of  infantry,  one  of  cavalry,  and  a battery  of 
artillery  to  Biloxi,  which  he  found  abandoned  by  the  enemy.  I subse- 
quently ordered  the  troops  to  rendezvous  at  Pass  Christian,  where  they 
now  remain,  but  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  supplying  them  by  water 
I shall  probably  bring  them  to  this  city. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 

Major-  General,  CommayuUng, 

General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 


APRIL  7,  1862. — Affair  at  Sainf  Andrew’s  Bay,  Plorida.* 

Report  of  Capt,  E,  8,  8mith,  Marianna  Dragoons, 

Blue  Sprinu  Camp,  April  16,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Pinegan,  Commanding  Department: 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  a telegraphic  order  (a  copy  of  which  is  here- 
with inclosed)  from  Colonel  Dilworth,  then  commanding,  and  received  at 
my  camp,  6 miles  east  of  Marianna,  at  12  o’clock  m.  on  the  7th  instant, 
I started  at  3 p,  m.  of  the  same  day  with  my  command,  and  arrived  at 
3.02  p.  m.  the  next  day  at  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  having  been  in  the  sad- 
dle twenty-four  hours,  with  only  a rest  of  two  hours  to  feed  our  horses. 
I found  that  the  enemy  had  succeeded  in  getting  the  steamer  Florida 
from  her  anchorage  up  R'orth  Bay,  and  was  then  opposite  the  town  of 
Saint  Andrew’s.  When  about  3 miles  from  the  town  we  heard  a gun 
from  the  steamer,  and,  riding  then  at  half  speed,  I met  one  of  my  advance 
guard  just  before  reaching  the  town,  who  informed  me  that  the  enemy 
were  landing  from  a small  sloop  about  a mile  from  us.  I then  dismounted 
my  command  and  advanced  rapidly  through  the  woods,  hoping  to  cap- 
ture them.  But  the  enemy  saw  us  when  200  yards  off*,  and  took  to  their 
boats.  I then  caused  my  command  to  open  fire  upon  them.  They  were 
out  of  shot-gun  reach,  but  a portion  of  my  command,  who  were  armed 
with  Maynard  rifles,  killed  or  disabled  four*  or  five  of  the  seven.  Having 
only  five  cartridges  to  the  rifle,  our  ammunition  was  soon  exhausted. 
Had  I had  sufficient  cartridges  I am  sure  that  I could  have  taken  the 


Belongs  proi)erly  to  Chapter  XV,  but  report  found  too  late  for  insertion  there. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


503 


sloop,  and  probably  have  retaken  the  steamer,  or  at  least  burned  her. 
The  enemy  fired  on  us  with  a long-range  gun,  carrying  round  balls, 
which  passed  over  our  heads  at  a distance  of  half  a mile.  They  also 
sent  a few  shell  after  us,  but  no  one  was  hurt  on  t)ur  side.  The  steamer 
then  left  the  bay,  and,  after  remaining  some  days,  I returned  with  my 
command  to  camp. 

Yours,  obediently, 

E.  S.  SMITH, 

Ca])tain,  Commanding  Ilarianna  Dragoons, 

[Inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Dept.  E.  and  M.  Fla., 

Tallahassee,  Fla,,  April  7,  1862. 

Capt.  E.  S.  Smith,  Comdg,  Marianna  Dragoons,  Marianna,  Fla, : 

Captain:  You  will  immediately  proceed  in  the  direction  of  Saint 
Andrew^s  Bay  with  your  troops,  and,  if  possible,  recapture  the  steamer 
Florida,  prevent  all  unnecessary  communication  with  the  enemy,  and 
arrest  any  person  which  you  may  have  found  grounds  to  suspect  of 
treason. 

Eespectfully,  yours,  &c., 

W.  S.  DILWOETH, 
Colonel,  Commanding  District, 


APRIL  18-MAY  1,  1862. — Bembardment  and  capture  of  Forts  Jackson 
and  Saint  Philip,  and  occupation  of  New  Orleans,  La.,  by  the  Union 
forces.  ~ 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Army,  of  co-operation  with  the  naval 
forces,  and  occupation.  May  1,  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  John  W.  Phelps,  U.  S.  Army,  of  the  occupation  of  Forts  Jackson 
and  Saint  Philip. 

No.  3. — Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  K.  Duncan,  C.  S.  Army,  of  the  bombardment  and  cap- 
ture of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 

No.  5. — Lieut.  Col.  Edward  Higgins,  C.  S.  Army,  of  the  bombardment  and  capture 
of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 

No.  6. — Capt.  M.  T.  Squires,  Louisiana  Artillery,  of  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Saint 
Philip. 

No.  7. — Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  of  operations  on  the  ^‘Chalmette  and 
McGehee  Lines.” 

No.  8. — Proceedings  of  the  Confederate  Court  of  Inquiry  upon  the  fall  of  New  Orleans. 

No.  9 —Message  from  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States,  transmitting  corre- 
spondence with  the  Governor  of  Louisiana  and  General  Lovell. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj,  Gen,  Benjamin  F,  Butler,  U,  S.  Army,  of  co-operation 
tvith  the  naval  forces,  and  occupation,  May  1,  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans, 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  April  29,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  my  instructions 

I remained  on  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  with  the  troops  named  in  my  former 


504  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYL 

dispatch,  awaiting  the  action  of  the  fleet  engaged  in  the  bombardment 
of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip.  Failing  to  reduce  them  after  six 
days  of  incessant  fire,  Flag-Officer  Farragut  determined  to  attempt  their 
passage  with  his  whole  fleet,  except  that  part  thereof  under  the  imme- 
diate command  of  Captain  Porter,  known  as  the  Mortar  Fleet. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th  instant  the  fleet  got  under  way,  and  twelve 
vessels,  including  the  four  sloops  of  war,  ran  the  gauntlet  of  fire  of  the 
forts  and  were  safely  above.  Of  the  gallantry,  courage,  and  conduct  of 
this  heroic  action,  unprecedented  in  naval  warfare,  considering  the  char- 
acter of  the  works  and  the  river,  too  much  cannot  be  said.  Of  its  cas- 
ualties and  the  details  of  its  performance  the  flag-officer  will  give  an 
account  to  the  proper  Department.  I witnessed  this  daring  exploit  from 
a point  about  800  yards  from  Fort  Jackson  and  unwittingly  under  its 
fire,  and  the  sublimity  of  the  scene  can  never  be  exceeded.  The  fleet 
pressed  on  up  the  river  to  New  Orleans,  leaving  two  gunboats  to  pro- 
tect the  quarantine  station,  5 miles  above. 

In  case  the  forts  were  not  reduced,  and  a portion  of  the  fleet  got  by 
them,  it  had  been  arranged  between  the  flag-officer  and  myself  that  I 
should  make  a landing  from  the  Gulf  side  on  the  rear  of  the  forts  at  the 
quarantine,  and  from  thence  attempt  Fort  Saint  Philip  by  storm  and 
assault,  while  the  bombardment  was  continued  by  the  fleet.  I immedi- 
ately went  to  Sable  Island  with  my  transports,  12  miles  in  the  rear  of 
Saint  PhiHp,  the  nearest  point  at  which  a sufficient  depth  of  water  could 
be  found  for  them. 

Captain  Porter  put  at  my  disposal  the  Miami,  drawing  7}  feet,  being 
the  lightest-draught  vessel  in  the  fleet,  to  take  the  troops  from  the  ship, 
as  far  as  the  water  would  allow.  We  were  delayed  twenty-four  hours 
by  her  running  ashore  at  Pass  ^ POutre.  The  Twenty-sixth  Eegiment 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Colonel  Jones',  were  then  put  on  board  her 
and  carried  within  6 miles  of  the  fort,  where  she  again  grounded.  Cap- 
tain Everett,  of  the  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery,  having  very  fully  re- 
connoitered  the  waters  and  bayous  in  that  vicinity,  and  foreseeing  the 
necessity,  I had  collected  and  brought  with  me  some  30  boats,  into  which 
the  troops  were  again  transshipped  and  conveyed,  by  a most  fatiguing 
and  laborious  row,  some  miles  farther,  there  being  within  1 mile  of 
the  steamer  only  2J  feet  of  water.  A large  portion  of  this  passage  was 
against  a heavy  current,  through  a bayou.  At  the  entrance  of  ManuePs 
Canal,  a mile  and  a half  from  the  point  of  landing,  rowing  became  im- 
possible, as  well  from  the  narrowness  of  the  canal  as  the  strength  of  the 
current,  which  ran  like  a mill-race.  Through  this  the  boats  could  only 
be  impelled  by  dragging  them  singly,  with  the  men  up  to  their  waists 
in  water.  It  is  due  to  this  fine  regiment  and  to  a portion  of  the  Fourth 
Wisconsin  Volunteers  and  Twenty-first  Indiana,  who  landed  under  this 
hardship  without  a murmur,  that  their  labors  should  be  made  known  to 
the  Department,  as  well  as  to  account  for  the  slowness  of  our  operations. 
The  enemy  evidently  considered  this  mode  of  attack  impossible,  as  they 
had  taken  no  measures  to  oppose  it,  which  might  very  easily  have  been 
successfully  done.  We  occupied  at  once  both  sides  of  the  river,  thus 
effectually  cutting  them  off  from  all  supplies,  information,  or  succor 
while  we  made  our  dispositions  for  the  assault. 

Meantime  Captain  Porter  had  sent  into  the  bayou  in  the  rear  of  Fort 
Jackson  two  schooners  of  his  mortar  fleet  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the 
enemy  from  the  fort  in  that  direction.  In  the  hurry  and  darkness  of  the 
passage  of  the  forts  the  flag-officer  had  overlooked  three  of  the  enemy^s 
gunboats  and  the  iron-clad  battery  Louisiana,  which  were  at  anchor 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


505 


under  the  walls  of  the  fort.  Supposing  that  all  the  rebel  boats  had  been 
destroyed  (and  a dozen  or  more  had  been)  he  passed  on  to  the  city,  leav- 
ing these  in  his  rear.  The  iron  steam  battery  being  very  formidable, 
Captain  Porter  deemed  it  prudent  to  withdraw  his  mortar  fleet  some 
miles  below,  where  he  could  have  room  to  maneuver  it  if  attacked  by 
the  iron  monster,  and  the  bombardment  ceased. 

I had  got  Brigadier-General  Phelps  in  the  river  below  with  two  regi- 
ments to  make  demonstrations  in  that  direction  if  it  became  possible. 
In  the  night  of  the  27th,  learning  that  the  fleet  had  got  the  city  under, 
its  guns,  I left  Brigadier  General  Williams  in  charge  of  the  landing  of 
the  troops  and  went  up  the  river  to  the  flagship  to  procure  light-draught 
transportation.  That  night  the  larger  portion  (about  250)  of  the  garrison 
of  Port  Jackson  mutinied,  spiked  the  guns  bearing  up  the  river,  came 
up  and  surrendered  themselves  to  my  pickets,  declaring  that  as  we  had 
got  in  their  rear  resistance  was  useless,  and  they  would  not  be  sacrificed. 
Ko  bomb  had  been  thrown  at  them  for  three  days  nor  had  they  fired  a 
shot  at  us  from  either  fort.  They  a verred  that  they  had  been  impressed 
and  would  fight  no  longer.* 

On  the  28th  the  officers  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  surrendered 
to  Captain  Porter,  he  having  means  of  water  transportation  to  them. 
While  he  was  negotiating,  however,  with  the  officers  of  the  forts  under 
a white  flag  the  rebel  naval  officers  put  all  their  munitions  of  war  on  the 
Louisiana,  set  her  on  fire  and  adrift  upon  the  Harriet  Lane,  but  when 
opposite  Fort  Saint  Philip  she  blew  up,  killing  one  of  their  own  men  by 
the  fragments  which  fell  into  that  fort. 

I have  taken  possession  of  the  forts,  and  find  them  substantially  as 
•defensible  as  before  the  bombardment — Saint  Philip  precisely  so,  it  be- 
ing quite  uninjured.  They  are  fully  provisioned,  well  supplied  with 
ammunition,  and  the  ravages  of  the  shells  have  been  defensibly  repaired 
by  the  labors  of  the  rebels.  I will  cause  Lieutenant  Weitzel,  of  the 
Engineers,  to  make  a detailed  report  of  their  condition  to  the  Depart- 
ment. 1 have  left  the  Twenty-sixth  Eegiment  Massachusetts  V olunteers 
in  garrison,  and  am  now  going  up  the  river  to  occupy  the  city  with  my 
troops  and  make  further  demonstrations  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  now 
at  Corinth. 

The  rebels  have  abandoned  all  their  defensive  works  in  and  around 
Kew  Orleans,  including  Forts  Pike  and  Wood,  on  Lake  Pontchartrain, 
and  Fort  Livingston  from  Barataria  Bay.  They  have  retired  in  the 
direction  of  Corinth,  beyond  Manchac  Pass,  and  abandoned  everything 
up  the  river  as  far  as  Donaldsonville,  some  70  miles  beyond  New  Orleans. 

I propose  to  so  far  depart  from  the  letter  of  my  instructions  as  to  en- 
deavor to  persuade  the  flag-officer  to  pass  up  the  river  as  far  as  the 
mouth  of  Bed  Kiver,  if  possible,  so  as  to  cut  oft*  their  supplies,  and  make 
there  a landing  and  a demonstration  in  their  rear  as  a diversion  in  favor 
of  General  Buell  if  a decisive  battle  is  not  fought  before  such  movement 
is  possible. 

Mobile  is  ours  whenever  we  choose,  and  we  can  better  wait. 

I find  the  city  under  the  dominion  of  the  mob.  They  have  insulted 
our  flag — torn  it  down  with  indignity.  This  outrage  will  be  punished 
in  such  manner  as  in  my  judgment  will  caution  both  the  perpetrators 
and  abettors  of  the  act,  so  that  they  shall  fear  the  stripes  if  they  do  not 
reverence  the  stars  of  our  banner. 

I send  a marked  copy  of  a New  Orleans  paper,  containing  an  applaud- 
ing account  of  the  outrage.! 

’^See  Butler  to  Stanton,  June  1,  1862,  in  Chapter  XXVII. 

t Not  found. 


50G  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  LCuap.  XVL 


Trusting  my  action  may  meet  the  approbation  of  the  Department,  I 
am,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General,  Commandinn.  ' 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  G-ulf, 

Neiv  Orleans^  May  8,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  further  operations  since  my  dis- 
patch of  the  29th  ultimo. 

I commenced  the  disembarkation  of  my  men  on  May  1,  when  I took 
formal  possession  of  New  Orleans. 

The  Twenty-first  Indiana  was  landed  at  Algiers,  a small  town  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  river,  opposite  New  Orleans,  at  the  inner  terminus  of 
the  New  Orleans  and  Opelousas  Railroad.  All  the  rolling  stock  of  the 
road  has  been  seized,  and  the  road  is  now  running  under  my  direction, 
only  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  in  provisions  to  the  city.  That  regi- 
ment, under  Colonel  McMillan,  on  the  5th  of  May  was  sent  to  Brashear, 
80  miles  (the  whole  length  of  the  railway),  and  Berwick  Bay,  and  there 
captured  two  brass  6-pounder  field  guns,  with  ammunition  for  the  same, 
some  1,500  pounds  of  powder,  and  some  other  ordnance  stores,  and  dis- 
persed a military  organization  there  forming^  captured  and  brought  off 
two  citizens  who  persisted  in  insulting  our  troops. 

There  are  now  no  Confederate  forces  on  the  right  or  western  bank  of* 
the  Mississippi  within  possible  reaching  distance  of  which  I have  any 
intelligence. 

The  remainder  of  my  troops  which  I had  been  able  to  take  with  me  by 
means  of  any  transportation  which  I had,  to  wit.  Thirtieth  and  Thirty- 
first  Massachusetts,  Fourth  Wisconsin  and  Sixth  Michigan,  Ninth  and 
Twelfth  Connecticut,  with  Manning's  and  Everett^s  Fifth  and  Sixth  Mas- 
sachusetts Batteries,  and  Holcomb’s  Second  Vermont  Battery,  and  two 
companies  of  cavalry,  I landed  in  the  city  proper,  posting  and  quarter- 
ing them  at  the  custom-house,  city  hall,  mint,  and  Lafayette  Square. 

I thought  it  necessary  to  make  so  large  a display  of  force  in  the  city. 

I found  it  very  turbulent  and  unruly,  completely  under  the  control  of 
the  mob ; no  man  on  either  side  daring  to  act  independently  for  fear 
of  open  violence  and  assassination.  On  landing  we  were  saluted  with 
cheers  for  Jeff.  Davis”  and  Beauregard.”  This  has  been  checked,  and 
the  last  man  that  was  heard  to  call  for  cheers  for  the  rebel  chief  has 
been  sentenced  by  the  provost  judge  to  three  months’  hard  labor  at 
Fort  Jackson,  which  sentence  is  being  executed.  No  assassinations 
have  been  made  of  any  United  States  soldiers,  with  the  exception  of  a 
soldier  of  the  Ninth  Connecticut,  who  had  left  his  camp  without  orders 
in  the  night  and  was  found  dead  the  next  morning  in  an  obscure  street, 
having  probably  been  engaged  in  a drunken  brawl. 

My  officers  and  myself  now  walk  in  any  part  of  the  city  where  occa- 
sion calls  by  day  or  night,  without  guard,  obstruction,  or  annoyance. 
There  is,  however,  here  a violent,  strong,  and  unruly  mob,  that  can  only 
be  kept  under  by  fear. 

On  the  5th  instant  I sent  Brigadier- General  Phelps,  with  the  Ninth 
and  Twelfth  Connecticut  and  Manning’s  battery,  to  take  possession  of 
the  rebel  works  on  the  north  side  of  the  city,  which  run  from  the  river 
to  the  marshes  of  Lake  Pontchartrain,  about  7 miles  above  the  city.  I 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


507 


could  make  no  earliel*  movement,  because  all  the  steamers  captured  and 
in  repair  were  claimed  by  the  Navy,  and  were  used  either  in  towing- 
their  supply  ships  or  tugging  off  the  Ehode  Island,  which  had  gone  on 
‘shore  and  .detained  us  all  three  days.  This  point,  in  the  judgment  ot* 
the  engineers  on  both  sides,  is  a most  defensible  one  on  the  northerly 
side,  had  been  fortified  by  the  rebels  with  heavy  earthworks,  and  can  be 
maintained  with  a few  regiments  against  any  force,  however  large,  that 
may  be  brought  against  it. 

The  sloop-of-war  Portsmouth  and  the  gunboat  Iroquois  are  anchored 
so  as  to  enfilade  the  front  of  the  enbankments  which  were  abandoned 
by  the  rebels.  These  can  easily  be  put  in  defensible  condition,  although 
before  the  arrival  of  the  army  and  after  the  evacuation  by  the  enemy, 
who  spiked  the  guns,  a party  from  the  advanced  gunboats  landed  ami 
burned  the  gun-carriages,  which  we  must  supjjly  from  those  captured  at 
the  custom-house. 

All  the  rolling  stock  of  the  Jackson  Eailroad  was  carried  away  by 
the  retreating  General  Lovell,  and  he  has  cut  the  road  14  miles  above 
the  city.  I am  now  taking  measures  to  possess  ourselves  of  the  whole 
road  to  Manchac  Pass.  The  fleet  have  gone  up  the  river  as  far  as 
Baton  Eouge.  The  flag-officer  started  yesterday,  and  I have  sent  two 
regiments  to  accompany  him  and  make  any  landing  necessary. 

The  projected  expedition  from  Vicksburg  to  Jackson,  of  which  I spoke 
in  my  last  dispatch,  has  become  nugatory,  because  I am  reliably  informed 
from  different  sources  that  Beauregard  has  fallen  back  upon  Jackson 
with  his  whole  army,  and  is  there  concentrating  his  means  of  defense. 
My  spies  inform  me  that  he  is  suffering  greatly  for  want  of  food  j that 
his  army  is  daily  becoming  demoralized  and  leaving  him. 

As  soon  as  all  necessary  points  can  be  occupied  here  and  my  instruc- 
tions carried  out  as  regards  Mobile,  I will  endeavour  to  march  upon  his 
rear  with  all  the  force  I can  spare  consistently  with  reasonable  safety 
of  this  point. 

As  in  case  of  defeat  he  must  retreat  upon  us,  it  will  be  perceived  that 
I must  be  prepared  to  meet  the  debris  of  his  army,  or  indeed,  as  he  has 
ample  rolling  stock  (the  Telegraph  says  13  miles  of  cars),  he  may  pre- 
cipitate any  amount  of  force  upon  me  at  any  moment  j for  which  we  will 
try  to  be  ready.  I have  caused  Forts  Pike  and  Wood,  the  defenses  of 
Lake  Pontchartrain,  to  be  occupied  by  detachments  of  the  Seventh  Ver- 
mont and  Eighth  New  Hampshire  Eegiments.  I have  not  yet  occupied 
either  the  Ohalmette,  Tower  Dupre,  or  Battery  Bienvenue.  Our  boats 
hold  the  lake,  and  these  are  only  defenses  from  exterior  enemies ; are  in 
no  need  to  occupy  them  at  present.  The  same  observation  will  apply 
to  Fort  Livingston. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copies  of  a proclamation  and  the  several 
general  orders  necessary  in  the  administration  of  the  affairs  of  so  large 
a city.*  The  order  most  questionable  is  the  one  in  regard  to  cotton  and 
sugar.  No.  22  j but  it  has  had  a most  salutary  effect.  Both  cotton  and 
sugar  are  now  being  sent  for  to  be  brought  into  this  market,  and  the 
burning  through  the  adjacent  country  has  ceased. 

My  action  in  regard  to  provisions  was  made  absolutely  necessary  by 
the  starvation  which  was  falling  upon  the  ‘‘just  and  the  unjust,”  and  as 
the  class  of  workmen  and  mechanics  on  whom  it  is  pressing  most  heavily, 
I am  persuaded,  are  well  disi)osed  to  the  Union,  I may  have  to  take 
other  measures  to  feed  these. 

It  will  become  necessary  for  me  to  use  the  utmost  severity  in  rooting 


See  Correspoudence,  post. 


508  OPEKATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chat.  XYL 

out  the  various  rebel  secret  associations  here,  which  overawe  the  Union 
men,  and  give  expression  to  the  feelings  of  the  mob  by  assassination 
and  murder,  and  usurping  the  functions  of  government  when  a govern- 
ment was  here  pretended  to.  I propose  to  make  some  brilliant  examples*. 

I take  leave  to  suggest  whether  it  might  not  be  well  to  send  to  this 
point  or  Mobile  a large  force  by  which  to  operate  on  the  rebel  rear,  so  as 
to  cut  him  off  compJetely. 

1 send  this  dispatch  by  Colonel  Deming,  a gentleman  known  to  you, 
who  is  possessed  of  my  confidence,  and  will  present  to  you  some  matters 
of  interest  more  at  length  than  could  be  done  in  this  form  of  communi- 
cation. I desire,  however,  to  add  urgently  to  anything  he  may  say  that 
there  is  an  immediate  necessity  for  a paymaster  here.  As  well  for  the 
spirit,  health,  and  comfort  of  the  troops,  I have  established  the  strictest 
quarantine  at  the  proper  point  (the  quarantine  grounds),  and  hope  to  pre- 
serve the  present  good  health  of  my  command.  I hope  my  action  will 
meet  the  approval  of  the  President  and  the  Department  of  War.  Much 
of  it  has  been  done  in  the  emergencies  called  for  by  a new  and  untried 
state  of  things,  when  promptness  and  movement  were  more  desirable 
than  deliberation.  I await  with  anxiety  instructions  from  the  Depart- 
ment for  my  guidance  in  the  future. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major- General^  Commanding, 

The  Secretary  of  War. 


is^o.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  TT.  Phelps^  U.  S.  Army,  of  the  occupation 
of  Forts  Jachson  and  Saint  Philip. 

Transport  Ship  North  Aivierica, 

Mississippi  River,  April  30,  1862. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  General  Orders,  April  24,  1862,  from  your 
headquarters,  received  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  to  take  iiossession  of 
Forts  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson,  with  the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  and 
Twelfth  Connecticut,  I proceeded  up  to  the  Head  of  the  Passes  on  the 
25th  instant,  and  joined  those  two  regiments.  All  the  mortar  boats, 
steamboats,  and  sail  vessels  below  the  forts  had  already  gone  or  were 
going  down  towards  the  Southwest  Pass,  except  a few  gunboats,  which 
anchored  just  ahead  of  us. 

I informed  Commander  Porter  on  the  26th,  who  was  then  at  the  Head 
of  the  Passes,  of  my  readiness  to  occupy  the  forts,  and  directed  Lieu- 
tenant Hall,  my  aide,  to  offer  him  any  assistance  that  I could  render. 

The  commander  returned  to  the  forts  on  the  27th.  On  the  morning 
of  the  28th  he  sent  word  by  Captain  Baldwin,  of  the  gunboat  Clifton, 
that  the  forts  were  about  to  surrender.  As  the  wind  was  then  favor- 
able, I directed  the  North  America,  with  the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts, 
Read’s  cavalry,  and  Manning’s  battery,  under  Colonel  Dudley,  to  set 
sail.  Captain  Baldwin  assisting  to  tow  her,  and  sent  word  to  Colonel 
Deming,  with  the  Twelfth  Connecticut,  on  board  the  Farley,  to  follow  us. 
Our  progress  with  sail  vessels  against  the  current  of  the  Mississippi, 
swollen  to  its  fullest  height,  was,  as  may  readily  be  conceived,  not 
rapid.  On  our  way  we  observed  suddenly,  in  the  direction  of  the  forts, 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


509 


an  immense  column  of  smoke  rising  rapidly  to  the  clouds,  aud  after  an 
interval  heard  an  explosion.  Transshipping  three  companies  of  the 
Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  oue  company  cavalry,  aud  part  of  .Manning’s 
battery,  on  board  the  Clifton,  with  Colonel  Dudley,  Major  Whittemore, 
and  my  staff,  we  left  the  North  America  at  anchor  just  below  the  forts, 
and  joined  the  flotilla  at  about  3 o’clock  p.  m.  At  this  moment  the 
rebel  flags  of  the  forts  were  hauled  down  aud  the  national  colors  run 
up  5 a part  of  the  ceremony  which  was  greeted  b^'  our  men  with  nine 
hearty  cheers. 

Continuing  on  a short  distance  above  the  forts,  towards  some  steam- 
boats that  were  bows  ashore,  on  the  right  bank,  we  took  aboard  from 
them  about  200  prisoners  of  the  rebel  Navy  and  artillery,  who  had  treach- 
erously, and  with  that  peculiar  wantonness  which  characterizes  the  con- 
spiracy from  its  origin,  set  fire  to  and  blown  uid  the  iron -clad  gunboat 
Louisiana,  thus  killing  one  of  their  own  men  in  Fort  Saint  Philip  and 
endangering  the  lives  and  property  of  their  own  people,  as  well  as  of  the 
Government  forces  there  present. 

Landing  with  these  prisoners  at  Fort  Saint  Philip,  we  proceeded  to 
take  possession  of  the  forts  and  garrison  them  with  about  200  men  each, 
that  of  Fort  Saint  Philip,  under  Major  Whittemore,  of  the  Thirtieth 
Massachusetts,  and  that  of  Fort  Jackson,  under  Captain  Manning,  of 
the  Fourth  Massachusetts  Battery,  the  fornier  relieving  Lieutenant-Com- 
mander Nichols,  and  the  latter  Captain  Eenshaw,  of  the  Navy.  While 
thus  employed  the  United  States  steam-frigate  Mississippi,  Capt.  Me- 
lancton  Smith,  came  down  the  river  with  Colonel  Jones,  of  the  Twenty- 
sixth  Massachusetts,  who  reported  that  he  had  landed  with  his  regi- 
ment at  the  quarantine  from  the  outside,  and  had  captured  several 
hundred  prisoners  who  were  fleeing  from  the  forts. 

Commander  Porter  had  alone  accepted  of  the  surrender  of  the  forts, 
and  had  granted  terms  of  capitulation  to  their  defenders,  allowing  them 
to  go  at  large  on  their  parole,  excepting  those  implicated  in  blowing  ui) 
the  Louisiana. 

On  the  29th  I placed  Colonel  Deming  in  command  of  Fort  Jackson, 
designing  to  garrison  it  with  his  regiment,  and  to  occupy  Fort  Saint 
Philip  with  the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  under  Colonel  Dudley.  While 
thus  occupied  I received  orders  from  the  major-general  commanding 
the  department,  in  person,  to  withdraw  my  troops  and  proceed  up  the 
river,  leaving  the  forts  to  be  garrisoned  by  the  Twenty-sixth  Massa- 
chusetts. Accordingly  the  garrisons  were  withdrawn,  excepting  small 
guards  to  take  charge  of  the  prisoners  and  property,  and  we  got  under 
way  at  about  sunset,  the  Farley  preceding  us  by  about  half  an  hour. 

I transmit  herewith  copies  of  the  reports  rendered  by  officers  engaged 
in  occupying  the  forts.  * I may  state,  in  conclusion,  that  the  forts  ap- 
peared to  be  abundantly  provided  with  all  the  material,  including  com- 
missary stores,  necessary  for  a long  defense.  I had  not  time  to  effect 
a perfect  enumeration  of  it,  but  in  general  terms  I may  say  that  the 
artillery  and  small-arms  of  Fort  Saint  Philip  consisted  of  43  guns  en 
harhette,  1 13-inch  mortar,  4 lO-inch  sea-coast  mortars,  3 pieces  of  light 
artillery,  1 10-inch  and  1 8-inch  siege  mortars ; in  all,  53  cannon,  and 
about  45  stand  of  muskets,  with  equipments.  Some  of  these  latter  were 
from  Springfield,  of  the  date  of  1861. 

One  important  rifle  gun,  bearing  on  the  iiosition  of  the  mortar  fleet, 
had  been  broken  by  its  own  discharge.  Another  gun  had  been  broken 
short  off  a foot  or  two  back  from  the  muzzle  by  a shot  which  struck 


Not  fouud. 


510  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

squarely  against  it  j anotlier,  and  the  13-inch  mortar,  had  been  dis- 
mounted. In  other  respects  not  much  harm  was  done  either  to  the 
armament  or  Fort  Saint  Philip. 

The  armament  of  Fort  Jackson  consisted  of  45  heavy  guns  en  barbette^ 
20  in  casemate,  2 pieces  of  light  artillery,  and  G mortars;  in  all,  73 
cannon,  and  509  stand  of  small-arms,  with  equipments. 

Fort  Jackson  had  been  very  much  injured  by  the  bombardment.  Of 
the  some  7,000  13-inch  shells  which  had  been  thrown  at  it,  besides  other 
large  shots  from  our  gunboats,  many  had  either  struck  within  it  or 
burst  over  it.  It  was  in  a great  state  of  disorder,  the  brick  barracks 
inside  being  destroyed  by  fire,  the  parapets  and  terre-plein  much  pitted 
and  torn  by  the  shells,  and  the  work  partly  fiooded  with  water.  The 
country  generally  is  so  flooded  that  a ferry-boat  is  necessary  to  reach 
the  counterscarp  of  the  works.  Of  the  artillery  en  barbette  several 
pieces  had  been  dismounted.  Three  instances  are  reported  where 
casemate  arches  had  been  broken  through. 

Some  of  the  defenders  of  the  forts  whom  I particularly  noticed  had  • 
been  members  of  the  garrison  during  a period  of  fourteen  months,  the 
forts  having  been  seized  by  the  conspirators  as  early  as  the  21st  Feb- 
ruary, 1861 ; they  seemed  to  be  generally  foreigners,  heartily  tired  and 
disgusted  with  the  thralldom  under  which  they  have  so  long  labored, 
and  well  satisfied  with  their  recovered  liberty.  The  only  question  is 
whether  they  can  maintain  it  now  that  it  has  been  restored  to  them. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 

Brigadier- General^  First  Brigade^  Department  of  the  Gulf 

Maj.  Georde  0.  Strong, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General^  Department  of  the  Gulf 


Xo.  3. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell^  C.  S.  Army, 

Headquarters  Department  IS'o.  1, 

Camp  Moore,  La.,  April  26,  1862. 

Sir  : The  bombardment  of  Fort  Jackson,  which  commenced  Friday, 
the  18th  instant,  was  continued  day  and  night  until  about  3 a.  m.  on  the 
24th,  when  the  whole  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  came  up  abreast  the  forts,  and 
while  a portion  of  them  engaged  our  batteries  and  vessels  the  remainder 
passed  under  the  fire,  our  men  being  greatly  worn  and  exhausted  with 
an  incessant  fight  of  six  days.  General  Duncan  and  Colonel  Higgins 
were  in  command  of  the  troops. 

I had  just  arrived  in  a river  steamer  and  was  about  to  disembark  as 
the  engagement  commenced.  When  the  enemy’s  fleet  passed  1 was  sat- 
isfied that  JSTew  Orleans  could  not  be  held  for  more  than  twenty-four 
hours ; I therefore  started  at  once  for  the  city,  in  order  to  remove  as 
many  of  the  troops  and  as  large  a quantity  of  stores  as  possible.  I was 
weiraware  that  my  batteries  of  32-pounders  at  the  lower  levees,  manned 
by  inexperienced  troops,  could  not  detain  for  any  length  of  time  the 
heavy  ships  of  war  of  the  enemy  armed  with  9 and  11  inch  guns. 

I will  state  that  when  the  current  and  drift  had  earned  away  the 
obstructions  in  the  river  I became  convinced  that  a portion  at  least  of 
their  fleet  would  pass  whenever  the  attempt  was  made,  and  had  already 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


511 


given  orders  to  prepare  for  removal  a large  portion  of  the  Government 
stores,  directing  cars  and  steamers  to  be  held  in  readiness  for  that  pur- 
pose. On  my  arrival  at  Kew  Orleans  I gave  orders  to  the  few  regiments 
that  I was  organizing  there  to  be  ready  to  move,  and  had  the  larger  por- 
tion of  the  Government  property  placed  on  the  boats  and  cars  and 
started  north.  In  this  manner  a very  inconsiderable  portion  of  our  stores 
was  left  behind.  The  guns  on  the  levees  about  the  city  could  not  be 
removed  for  want  of  transportation.  Moreover,  as  soon  as  it  became 
known  that  the  enemy  had  passed  the  forts,  laborers  refused  to  work,  and 
the  larger  majority  of  persons  declined  to  take  any  more  Confederate 
notes  for  property  bought. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th  thirteen  of  the  enemy^s  ships  engaged 
our  batteries  5 miles  below  the  city,  and  after  two  hours’  firing,  dur- 
ing which  time  they  drove  the  men  from  one  battery  and  disabled  the 
other,  they  passed  up  and  anchored  abreast  the  city.  General  Smith 
had  a few  companies  of  his  brigade  at  these  works.  At  11  a.  m.  our 
last  batteries  were  passed. 

I immediately  ordered  the  troops  and  stores  to  be  sent  off  rapidly  by 
rail  towards  Jackson,  Miss. 

At  3 p.  m.  Captain  [Theodoras]  Bailey  and  another  officer  of  the  Fed- 
eral Navy  came  ashore  and  demanded  the  surrender  of  the  city,  and  that 
the  United  States  flag  be  put  up  on  the  principal  public  buildings. 

I declined  peremptorily  to  surrender,  saying  to  Captain  Bailey  that 
while  they  were  too  strong  for  us  on  the  water,  I felt  abundantly  able 
to  beat  them  on  the  land  ; but  that,  as  I did  not  feel  willing  to  subject 
to  bombardment  a city  filled  with  the  wives  and  children  of  absent 
soldiers,  I should  evacuate,  with  my  command,  and  turn  the  city  over  to 
the  mayor;  that,  if  they  were  willing  to  consent  to  this  proposition,  I 
would  quietly  withdraw ; if  not,  they  might  commence  the  bombardment 
at  once. 

He  said  he  would  report  to  his  commander  and  at  his  request  I sent 
two  of  my  staff  with  them  to  their  boat,  to  protect  them  from  the  people. 

1 then  continued  the  removal  of  troops  and  stores,  and  left  the  city  at 
5 p.  m.  in  the  last  train  of  cars.  I have  been  unable  to  receive  any 
report  from  Generals  Duncan  or  Smith,  so  am  unable  to  give  any  details 
further  than  above  stated,  but  will  communicate  with  the  Department  as 
soon  as  possible. 

I shall  probably  fall  back  to  Jackson,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  going 
up  to  Vicksburg  and  coming  in  rear  of  Beauregard. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding. 

Genera]  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

P.  S. — Sir  : I will  add,  as  a postscript  to  my  letter,  that,  as  far  as  I 
could  see,  the  river-defense  boats,  six  in  number,  made  a very  jioor 
show — want  of  discipline,  system,  and  training.  I had  but  a few  regi- 
ments, apart  from  the  miscellaneous  and  half-armed  militia  of  the  city, 
and  think  I shall  endeavor  to  collect  such  men  as  I can  from  the  vari- 
ous forts  in  the  department  and  fall  back  to  Jackson,  to  prevent  the 
enemy,  now  in  possession  of  the  river,  from  getting  in  rear  of  Beaure- 
gard, by  way  of  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Kailroad.  I write  this  in 
great  haste  and  without  any  facilities  or  conveniences. 

Eespectfully, 


M.  L. 


512  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  |Chap.  XVI. 

Headquarters  Department  Xo.  1, 

Jackson,  Miss.,  May  27,  1862. 

Sir  : Herewith  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  my  report  of  events  at- 
tendant upon  the  fall  of  New  Orleans ; also  the  reports  of  Generals  Smith 
and  Duncan.  Accompanying  the  latter  is  a diagram  of  Forts  Jackson 
and  Saint  Philip,  the  reports  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Higgins  and  Cap- 
tain Squires,  and  a report  of  the  killed  and  wounded  at  these  points. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Insj)ector  General,  Biclimond,  Va. 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1862. 

Sir  : Herewith  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  reports  of  Brigadier- 
Generals  Duncan  and  Smith,  with  the  accompanying  documents,  of  the 
operations  preceding  and  attendant  upon  the  fall  of  New  Orleans. 

The  Department  is  fully  aware,  from  my  ofQcial  correspondence  and 
telegraphic  dispatches,  of  the  exact  nature  of  the  defenses  erected  for 
the  protection  of  that  city,  consisting,  in  general  terms,  of  an  exterior 
line  of  forts  and  earthworks,  intended  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  the 
armed  vessels  of  the  enemy,  and  an  interior  Line  in  the  immediate  vicin- 
ity of  the  city,  which  was  constructed  almost  entirely  with  reference  to 
repelling  any  attack  made  by  land  with  infantry.  Where  this  line 
crossed  the  river  below  the  city  it  was  intended  to  have  a battery 
of  twelve  32  and  ten  42  pounders,  which  it  was  considered  would  enable 
us  to  drive  back  any  small  number  of  ships  that  might  succeed  in  pass- 
ing the  obstructions  at  the  forts  under  the  fire  of  their  guns  j but  whether 
sufficient  or  not,  no  more  were  to  be  had,  and  subsequently,  at  the 
earnest  request  of  the  naval  authorities,  I transferred  the  42-pounders 
to  the  steamers  Caron delet  and  Bienville  for  service  on  Lake  Pontchar- 
train  in  connection  with  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb. 

Immediately  after  I assumed  command  of  the  department,  finding 
that  there  were  no  guns  of  the  heaviest  caliber,  I applied  to  Eichmond, 
Pensacola,  and  other  points  for  some  10-inch  columbiads  and  sea-coast 
mortars,  which  I considered  necessary  to  the  defense  of  the  lower  river, 
but  none  could  be  spared,  the  general  impression  being  that  New 
Orleans  would  not  be  attacked  by  the  river,  and  I was  therefore  com- 
pelled to  make  the  best  possible  defense  with  the  guns  at  my  disposal. 
Twelve  42-pounders  were  sent  to  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip, 
together  with  a large  additional  quantity  of  powder,  and  being  con- 
vinced that  with  the  guns  of  inferior  caliber  mounted  there  we  could 
not  hinder  steamers  from  iiassing  unless  they  could  be  detained  for  some 
time  under  the  fire  of  the  works,  I pushed  forward  rapidly  the  construc- 
tion of  a raft  which  offered  a complete  obstruction  to  the  passage  of 
vessels  up  the  river,  except  through  a small  opening,  and  then  only  one 
at  a time.  The  forts  had  seventy-five  or  eighty  guns  that  could  be 
brought  successively  to  bear  upon  the  river  j were  manned  by  garrisons  of 
well-trained  artillerists,  affording  a double  relief  to  each  gun,  and  com- 
manded by  officers  who  had  no  superiors  in  any  service.  Under  these 
circumstances,  although  I feared  that  the  high  water  in  the  spring,  with 
the  accompanying  drift,  would  carry  away  the  raft,  yet  every  confidence 


Chap.  SVI.] 


CAPTUEE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


518 


was  felt  tliat  the  river  would  remain  closed  until  such  time  as  the  iron- 
clad steamers  Mississippi  and  Louisiana  could  be  linished,  whicli  I was 
confidently  informed  would  not  be  later  than  February  1. 

The  first  raft  constructed  was  not  carried  away  by  the  liigh  water 
and  drift  until  the  latter  part  of  February  j but  witli  funds  placed  at  my 
disposal  by  the  citizens  of  'New  Orleans  another  was  placed  in  position 
in  ilarch  by  the  energetic  labors  of  Colonel  Higgins  and  others,  and 
the  position  was  again  temporarily  secure.  F'o  heavy  guns  had  yet 
been  received,  although  strenuous  ai^plications  were  made  by  me  to  get 
some  from  Pensacola  when  that  place  was  abandoned.  The  general 
impression  of  all  those  to  whom  I applied  was  that  the  largest  guns 
should  be  placed  above  Kew  Orleans,  not  below  (although  1 had  iioti- 
fied  the  Department  on  March  22  that,  in  my  judgment,  the  fleet  only 
awaited  the  arrival  of  the  mortar  vessels  to  attempt-  to  pass  up  the  river 
from  below).  By  means,  hoAvever,  of  an  energetic  and  persevering  offi- 
cer, Maj.  W.  P.  Duncan,  commissary  of  subsistence,  three  lO-iiich 
columbiads  and  five  mortars  were  finally  procured  and  brought  over 
just  in  time  to  be  put  uj)  as  the  firing  commenced. 

Thinking  that  the  enemy’s  troops  at  Isle  Breton  were  intended  to  land 
at  quarantine  and  act  in  the  rear  of  Fort  Saint  Philip,  I ordered  Colonel 
Szymauski’s  regiment  of  ninety  days’  men,  armed  with  shot-guns,  to 
that  point  as  a protection.  I had  likewise  organized  two  comi)anies  of 
sharpshooters  and  swamp-hunters,  under  Captains  Mullen  and  Lartigue, 
whi(ffi  were  sent  down  for  operation  upon  the  enemy’s  vessels  from  the 
banks  of  the  river ; but  the  high  water,  keeping  the  men  day  and  night 
nearly  waist  deep  in  the  water,  soon  compelled  them  to  abandon  their 
positions. 

I will  here  state  that  every  Confederate  soldier  in  'New  Orleans,  with 
the  exception  of  one  company,  had  been  ordered  to  Corinth,  to  join  Gen- 
eral Beauregard  in  March,  and  the  city  was  only  garrisoned  by  about 
3,000  ninety-day  troops,  called  out  by  the  governor  at  my  request,  of 
whom  about  1,200  had  muskets  and  the  remainder  shot-guns  of  an  in- 
different description. 

The  river  rose  rapidly  in  April  and  soon  drove  out  Szymanski’s  regi- 
ment, which  was  removed  to  the  west  bank,  about  6-  miles  above  Fort 
Jackson.  The  whole  country  became  one  vast  sheet  of  water,  which 
rose  in  the  forts  and  covered  jhaces  heretofore  safe  from  its  encroach- 
ments. 

Tinder  the  tremendous  pressure  of  this  current  and  a storm  of  wind 
and  rain  the  second  raft  Avas  broken  away  on  the  night  of  Friday,  April 
11,  two  days  before  the  enemy  first  opened  fire.  The  fourteen  vessels 
of  Montgomery’s  Elver  Defense  Expedition  had  been  ordered  by  the 
Department,  when  completed,  to  be  sent  up  to  Memphis  and  Fort  Pil- 
low ; but,  believing  the  danger  of  attack  to  be  greater  from  below,  I 
detained  six  of  them  at  New  Orleans,  of  which  change  the  Department 
was  fully  advised. 

At  my  suggestion  GoAxrnor  Moore  had  also  fitted  up  two  steamers, 
which  Avere  sent  to  the  forts  below  the  city.  A large  number  of  fire 
rafts  Avere  also  constructed  and  towed  down,  and  two  small  steamers 
Avere  employed  for  the  special  purpose  of  towing  these  rafts  into  posi- 
tion where  they  could  be  most  effective,  so  as  to  leaA^e  the  armed  ves- 
sels free  to  operate  against  the  enemy. 

I telegraphed  General  Beauregard  to  send  down  the  iron-clad  ram 
iManassas,  and  when  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  ordered  the  steamer 
Louisiana  to  be  sent  also  up  the  rh^er  I protested  through  the  War 
Department,  being  satisfied  that  we  required  more  heavy  guns  below. 

33  R R VOL  VI 


514  OPERATIONS  IN  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Ciiap/xvi. 

She  was  eventually  permitted  to  go  down  the  river  on  Sunday,  April 
20,  but  not  in  a condition  to  use  her  motive  power  with  effect.  It  was 
lioped  that,  notwithstanding  this,  she  would  be  able  to  assume  a posi- 
tion below  Fort  Saint  Philip,  discovering  the  location  of  the  mortar 
boats,  and,  being  herself  proof  against  direct  lire,  dislodge  the  enemy 
with  her  guns,  which  were  of  very  heavy  caliber.  Knowing  also  that 
the  incessant  bombardment  kept  General  Duncan  closely  confined  to 
Fort  Jackson,  so  that  he  could  give  no  orders  to  the  river  defeuse 
steamers,  I placed  the  whole  under  the  control  of  Captain  Mitchell — 
the  armed  steamers  as  well  as  the  tugs  intended  to  tow  down  the  fire 
rafts. 

I will  here  state  that  the  river- defense  fleet  proved  a failure  for  the 
very  reasons  set  forth  in  my  letter  to  the  Department  of  April  15. 
Unable  to  govern  themselves,  and  unwilling  to  l3e  governed  by  others, 
their  almost  total  want  of  system,  vigilance,  and  discipline  rendered 
them  nearly  useless  and  helpless  when  the  enemy  finally  dashed  upon 
them  suddenly  on  a dark  night.  I regret  very  much  that  the  Depart- 
]aent  did  not  think  it  advisable  to  grant  my  request  to  place  some  com- 
petent head  in  charge  of  these  steamers. 

Learning  subsequent!}^  that  the  Louisiana  was  anchored  above  the 
forts  and  that  the  fire  rafts  were  not  sent  down,  I telegraphed  Captain 
Mitchell,  requesting  him  to  attend  to  it,  and  afterwards  called  ui)on 
Com  modore  Whittle  and  entreated  him  to  order  the  steamer  to  take  the 
desired  position  below  the  forts.  This  he  declined  to  do,  but  telegraphed 
Captain  Mitchell,  telling  him  to  strain  a point  to  place  the  vessel  there 
it  in  his  judgment  it  was  advisable.”  No  change,  however,  was  made, 
and  on  the  night  of  April  23  I went  down  m}  self  in  a steamboat,  to 
urge  Captain  Mitchell  to  have  the  Louisiana  anchored  in  the  position 
indicated,  and  also  to  ascertain  why  the  fire  rafts  were  not  sent  down. 
A few  moments  after  I arrived  the  attack  commenced,  and  the  enemy 
succeeded  in  i^assing  with  fourteen  ships,  as  described  in  General  Dun- 
caifs  report,  and  the  battle  of  New  Orleans,  as  against  ships  of  war, 
was  over. 

I returned  at  once  to  the  city,  narrowly  escaping  capture,  and’,  giving- 
orders  to  General  Smith,  in  command  of  the  interior  lines,  to  prepare 
to  make  all  possible  resistance  to  the  enemy’s  fleet  at  the  earthwork 
batteries  below  the  city,  instructed  Colonel  Lovell  to  have  several 
steamers  ready  to  remove,  as  far  as  possible,  the  commissary  and  ord- 
nance stores,  being  satisfied  that  the  low  developments  at  Chalmette 
could  offer  no  protracted  resistance  to  a powerful  fleet  whose  guns, 
owing  to  the  high  water,  looked  down  upon  the  surface  of  the  country 
and  could  sweep  away  any  number  of  infantry  by  an  enfilading  fire. 
These  lines,  as  before  remarked,  were  intended  mainly  to  repel  a land 
attack,  but  in  a high  stage  of  water  were  utterly  untenable  by  infantry 
5igainst  guns  afloat.  It  having  been  reported  to  me  that  a sufficient 
number  of  desperately  bold  men  could  easily  be  got  together  to  board 
the  enemy’s  vessels  and  carry  them  by  assault,  I authorized  Major  James 
to  seize  such  steamers  as  might  be  necessary  for  his  purpose  and  to 
attempt  it.  He  called  for  1,000  men,  by  public  advertisement,  but  being- 
able  to  find  but  about  100  who  would  undertake  it,  he  abandoned  the 
project. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th  the  enemy’s  fleet  advanced  upon  the  bat- 
teries and  opened  fire,  which  was  returned  with  spirit  by  the  troops  as 
long  as  their  powder  lasted,  but  with  little  apparent  effect  upon  the 
enemy.  The  powder  intended  for  this  battery  of  32-pounders  had  been 
transferred  by  me  to  the  steamer  Louisiana  a few  days  before,  under 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


515 


tlie  supposition  tliat  it  would  render  nmcb  better  service  from  her  lieavy 
rifles  and  shell  guns  than  with  a battery  of  light  32-pounders. 

■ For  the  operations  at  these  works  you  are  respectfully  referred  to 
General  Hmitlfls  report. 

The  greater  portion  of  the  ordnanee  stores,  provisions,  and  quarter- 
master’s property  were  sent  from  the  city  by  rail  or  steamer,  and  a iior- 
tion  of  the  volunteers  also  took  the  cars  for  Camp  Moore,  78  miles  dis- 
tant, on  the  Jackson  Railroad.  The  greater  part  of  the  ninety-day  trooi)s 
disbanded  and  returned  to  their  homes.  There  were  two  or  three  regi- 
ments and  smaller  bodies  of  men  raised  for  Confederate  service  in  the 
city  at  the  time,  but  being  entirely  without  arms  of  any  kind,  they  could 
be  of  no  service,  and  were  also  ordered  to  Camp  Aloore. 

1 adopted  this  course,  recognizing  the  perfect  absurdity  of  confronting 
more  than  100  guns  afloat  of  the  largest  caliber,  well  manned  and  served, 
and  looking  down  ut)on  the  city,  with  less  than  3,000  militia,  mostly 
armed  with  indifferent  shot-guns.  It  would,  in  my  judgment,  have  been 
a wanton  and  criminal  waste  of  the  blood  of  women  and  children,  with- 
out the  most  remote  possibility  of  any  good  result,  for  the  enemy  had 
only  to  anchor  one  of  his  ships  at  Kenner  to  command  the  Jackson  Rail- 
road, and  he  could  have  reduced  the  city  to  ashes  at  his  leisure,  without 
our  being  able  to  make  any  resistance  whatever  (or  without  firing  a shot 
he  could  have  starved  the  city  into  a surrender  in  less  than  three  weeks, 
as  there  was  not  more  than  eighteen  days’  food  on  hand  for  the  popula- 
tion, from  which  my  troops  were  almost  entirely  drawn*).  Why  he  did 
not  occupy  Kenner  and  cut  off*  all  exit  from  the  city  immediately  I do 
not  understand.  Presuming  that  he  would  do  so,  as  a matter  of  course, 
1 had  requested  Captains  Poindexter  and  Gwathmey,  of  the  Ravy,  to 
have  all  the  steamers  ready  in  Lake  Pontchartrain  to  carry  the  troops 
over  to  Madisonville,  whence  they  could  march  to  Camp  jMoore.  A por- 
tion of  them  were  taken  ov^er  by  this  route. 

Knowing  that  the  enemy  would  at  once  seize  the  Opelousas  Railroad, 
and  thus  cut  off  the  troops  occupying  the  works  on  the  coast  of  West 
Louisiana,  I sent  orders  to  the  different  commanding  officers  at  Forts 
Livingston,  Guion,  Quitman,  Berwick,  and  Chene  to  destroy  their  guns, 
and,  taking  their  small-arms,  provisions,  and  ammunition,  join  me  at 
Camj)  Moore. 

Major  Ivey  brought  away  the  troops  at  the  two  latter  forts  in  a very 
creditable  manner,  but  those  at  the  other  works  became  demoralized, 
disbanded,  and  returned  to  Kew  Orleans.  I gave  verbal  instructions 
to  Colonel  Fuller  to  have  the  garrisons  of  Forts  Pike  and  Alacomb, 
Batteries  Bieu venue  and  Tower  Dupre  ready  to  move  at  a moment’s 
notice,  as  their  posts  were  dependent  on  the  city  for  provisions  and  fre- 
quently for  water.  It  was  understood  that  the  naval  steamers,  in  con- 
nection with  other  vessels  in  the  lake,  should  bring  away  these  garrisons 
when  called  upon  to  do  so,  and  after  my  arrival  at  Camp  Moore  orders 
were  given,  on  the  26th,  to  go  for  them,  as  I had  been  informed  that 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  had  been  surrendered. 

Finding  that  this  report  was  untrue,  I immediately  countermanded 
the  orders,  giving  instructions  that  they  should  be  held  until  further 
notice ; but  before  either  order  could  reach  Madisonville  it  Avas  reported 
to  me  that  the  whole  command  was  already  at  Covington.  I advised 
Captain  Poindexter  to  make  his  way  to  Mobile,  with  his  armed  steamers; 
but  he  concluded  to  destroy  them.  We,  hoAvever,  procured  from  them 
some  of  (he  guns  and  ordnance  stores,  which  I ordered  immediately 
to  Vicksburg,  to  be  put  in  position  there. 

*Seo  General  Lovell’s  letter  of  June  18,  1863,  p.  518. 


516  OPERATIONS  IN  AY.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

On  the  25th  Captain  Bailey,  of  the  Federal  IS’avy,  demanded  the  sur- 
render of  the  city,  and  that  the  tlags  should  be  taken  down,  and  the 
United  States  flag  be  put  up  over  the  mint,  custom-house,  and  other 
l)ublic  buildings. 

To  this  demand  I returned  an  unqualified  refusal,  declaring  that  I 
would  not  surrender  the  city  or  any  portion  of  my  command,  but  added 
that,  feeling  unwilling  to  subject  the  city  to  bombardment,  and  recog- 
nizing the  utter  impossibility  of  removing  the  women  and  children,  I 
should  withdraw  my  troops  and  turn  it  over  to  the  civil  authorities. 

Tliis  I did  in  compliance  with  the  openly-expressed  opinion  of  all  the 
prominent  citizens  around  me,  that  it  would  be  a useless  waste  of  blood, 
without  being  productive  of  any  beneficial  results  to  the  cause  for  the 
troops  to  remain. 

Captain  Bailey  then  returned  to  his  ship,  under  escort  through  the 
city  (at  his  own  request)  of  two  officers  of  my  stafl‘.  Colonel  Lovell  and 
Major  James,  and  1 then  advised  the  mayor  not  to  surrender  the  city, 
nor  to  allow  the  flags  to  be  taken  down  by  any  of  our  iieople,  but  to  leave 
it  to  the  enemy  to  take  them  down  himself. 

This  advice  was  followed  by  the  city  authorities;  but  the  idea  being 
held  out,  in  their  subsequent  correspondence  with  the  Federal  officers, 
that  they  were  placed  in  a defenseless  condition  by  the  withdrawal  of 
the  troops,  but  for  which  a different  course  might  be  pursued,  I promptly 
telegraiihed  to  Major  James,  of  my  staff*,  then  in  the  city,  oferiug  to 
return  at  once,  with  my  command,  if  the  citizens  felt  disposed  to  resist 
to  the  last  extremity,  and  remain  with  them  to  the  end. 

I had  deliberately  made  up  my  mind  that,  although  such  a step  would 
be  entirely  indefensible  in  a military  i)oint  of  view,  yet,  if  the  people  of 
New  Orleans  were  desirous  ot  signalizing  their  patriotism  and  devotion 
to  the  cause  by  the  bombardment  and  burning  of  their  city,  I vrould 
return  with  my  troops  and  not  leave  as  long  as  one  brick  remained  upon 
another.  The  only  iialliation  for  such  an  act  would  be  that  it  would 
give  unmistakable  evidence  to  the  world  that  our  people  were  in  deadly 
earnest. 

This  determination,  plainly  expressed  in  my  dispatches  to  Major 
James  (herewith  transmitted,  marked  A),  was  read  by  him  to  the  mayor 
and  also  to  the  city  council  in  the  presence  of  one  or  more  prominent 
citizens.  The  opinion  was  generally  and  freely  expressed  by  the  mayor 
and  others  that  the  troops  ought  not  to  return.  (See  report  of  Major 
James,  hereunto  appended,  marked  B.) 

I went  to  the  city  myself,  however,  on  the  night  of  April  28,  and,  in 
order  that  there  might  be  no  mistake,  made  the  same  proposition  in  per- 
son to  the  mayor.  He  said  he  did  not  think  it  advisable  for  the  troops 
to  return  ; that  such  a step  w ould  only  be  followed  by  a useless  sacrifice 
of  life  without  any  corresponding  benefit,  and  urged  decidedly  that  it 
be  not  done. 

I,  howevw,  addressed  him  a letter  (herewith  appended,  marked  C), 
declaring  my  willingness  to  return  and  share  a bombardment  with  them, 
and  waited  until  the  night  of  the  29th  for  an  answer ; but,  receiving  none 
in  WTiting,  returned  to  Camp  Moore.  The  same  proposition  was  made 
by  me  in  the  course  of  the  day  to  several  prominent  citizens,  but  was 
invariably  discountenanced  by  them. 

For  a week  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  I had  a number  of  offi- 
cers in  the  city  and  kept  trains  running  regularly,  Avhich  brought  out  a 
large  amount  of  GoA^ernment  i)roperty  and  stores,  as  well  as  those  of  the 
State  of  Louisiana.  Nearly  eA^erything  Avas  brought  away  except  the 
heavy  guns  and  some  iiroi)erty  which  i)ersons  in  tlieir  flight  had  de- 


Ckap.  XVL] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


517 


stroyed,  and  everything  might  have  been  saved  had  not  persons  refused 
to  work  for  my  officers,  fearing  that  they  might  be  subjected  to  punish- 
ment by  the  enemy.  Many  also  refused  to  work  for  Confederate  money, 
which  occasioned  some  delay  and  difficulty  in  the  removal  of  stores. 

I feel  gratihed,  however,  in  being  able  to  state  that  we  brought  away 
all  the  troops  that  would  leave,  and,  including  the  property  of  the  State, 
a greater  amount  in  value  than  belonged  to  the  Government.  What 
we  failed  to  bring  was  from  inability  to  get  transportation. 

In  this  duty  I was  mainly  assisted  by  Colonel  Lovell,  Majors  James 
and  Bell,  Captain  Venable,  and  Lieutenant  McDonald,  to  whom  the 
Government  is  greatly  indebted  for  the  safety  of  much  valuable  jirop- 
erty. 

It  was  a source  of  great  distress  to  me  to  see  the  result  of  months  of 
toil  and  labor  swept  away  in  a few  hours  j but  it  was,  in  my  opinion, 
mainly  attributable  to  the  following  causes,  which  I could  not  by  any 
possibility  control : 

1st.  The  want  of  sufficient  number  of  guns  of  heavy  caliber,  which 
every  exertion  was  made  to  procure  without  success. 

2d.  The  unprecedented  high  water,  which  swept  away  the  obstruc- 
tions upon  which  I mainly  relied,  in  connection  with  the  forts,  to  i^revent 
the  passage  of  a steam  fleet  up  the  river  5 and 

3d.  The  failure,  through  inefficiency  and  want  of  energy  of  those  who 
had  charge  of  the  construction  of  the  iron-clad  steamers  Louisiana  and 
Mississippi  to  have  them  completed  in  the  time  specified  so  as  to  supijly 
the  place  of  obstructions  5 and,  finally,  the  declension  of  the  officers  in 
charge  of  the  Louisiana  to  allow  her,  though  not  entirely  ready,  to  be 
placed  as  a battery  in  the  position  indicated  by  General  Duncan  and 
myself.  On  these  last  points  I could  only  advise  and  suggest,  as  they 
appertained  to  a separate  and  independent  department,  over  which  I 
had  no  control  whatever.  (See  letter  of  Major  James,  hereunto  appended, 
marked  D.) 

Opened  fire  on  Ai)ril  13,  which  was  kept  up  at  intervals  for  five  days, 
when  the  mortars  opened,  and  from  that  time,  with  but  a single  inter- 
mission of  a few  hours,  a bombardment  was  kept  up  for  seven  days  and 
nights,  which  for  great  rapidity  and  wonderful  accuracy  of  range  has  no 
parallel.  More  than  25,000  shells  were  thrown,  of  which  not  less  than 
one-third  fell  within  the  limits  of  Fort  Jackson  ; yet  the  garrisons  held 
out,  although  wet,  without  change  of  clothing,  and  exhausted  for  want 
of  rest  and  regular  food,  with  a heroic  endurance  which  is  beyond  all 
praise.  That  the  enemy  succeeded  in  passing  a large  portion  of  his 
licet  by  the  flats  on  a dark  night,  under  a heavy  fire,  is  due  to  no  fault 
of  the  garrisons  of  the  forts.  They  did  their  whole  duty  nobly  and  he- 
roically, and  had  they  been  seconded  as  they  should  have  been  by  the 
defenses  afloat,  we  should  not  have  had  to  record  the  fall  of  New  Or- 
leans. 

To  the  officers  of  my  staff,  who  underwent  months  of  severe  and  ardu- 
ous labor  collecting  supplies,  creatiug  resources,  with  the  most  limited 
means,  and  preparing  all  sorts  of  materials  and  munitions  of  war  by 
ingenious  make-shifts,  I return  my  warmest  thanks.  Left  in  the  city 
with  a small  force  of  badly- armed  militia,  all  opportunity  for  distinction 
or  glory  was  cut  oft,  yet  they  never  flagged  in  their  zeal  and  devotion  to 
the  cause.  When  the  country  knows  all  that  was  done  and  in  what 
disadvantage  it  was  accomplished,  I feel  confident  that  its  verdict  will 
do  ample  justice  to  those  who  shared  equally  in  the  labors  of  prepara- 
tion, while  they  were  denied  the  glory  of  takiug  j)aft  in  the  defense. 


518  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  IChap.  XVr. 

The  battle  for  the  defense  of  Kew  Orleans  was  fought  and  lost,  at  Forts 
Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 

The  extraordinary  and  remarkable  conduct  of  the  garrisons  of  these 
forts,  in  breaking  out  in  open  mutiny  after  covering  themselves  with 
glory  by  their  heroic  defense,  is  one  of  those  strange  anomalies  for  which 
I do  not  pretend  to  account.  The  facts  are  recorded  and  speak  for  them- 
selves. The  causes  will  probably  never  be  known  in  full. 

For  the  detailed  accounts  of  the  bombardment  of  tlie  forts  and  the 
engagements  at  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the  fleets  by  them  and  the 
batteries  at  Ohalmette,  you  are  respectfully  referred  to  the  accompany- 
ing reports  of  Generals  Duncan  and  Smith.  There  were  no  batteries 
except  at  these  two  points,  for  the  reason  that  no  guns  could  be  pro- 
cured to  place  in  them. 

I had  frequent  occasion  to  regret  that  it  was  found  impossible  to  give 
me  control  of  the  defenses  afloat  as  well  as  ashore.  A single  controlling 
head  might  have  made  all  the  resources  more  available  and  efficient  in 
working  out  the  desired  results. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  8.  Army,  Eichmond,  Va, 


Eichmoxd,  Ya.,  June  18,  18G3. 

Sir  : Observing  several  errors  in  the  printed  copy  of  my  report  of  the 
evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  I compared  it  with  the  copy  on  tile  in  your 
office  and  the  latter  with  the  original  in  my  possession.  I find  an  omis- 
sion in  the  office  copy,  and  have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  projier 
alteration  may  be  made,  as  without  it  the  pertinency  of  the  succeeding 
sentence  is  not  apparent. 

The  following  words  were  omitted  after  the  word  whatever,”  on  page 
8,  line  20,  viz,  or  without  firing  a shot  he  could  have  starved  the  city 
into  a surrender  in  less  than  three  weeks,  as  there  was  not  more  than 
eighteen  days’  food  on  hand  for  the  population,  from  which  my  troops 
were  almost  entirely  drawn.”* 

By  giving  this  attention  you  will  much  oblige,  respectfully,  your  obe- 
dient servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 
Major- General,  Ac. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

[In closure  A.] 

Camp  Moore,  La.,  April  28,  18G2. 

If  the  people  are  willing  to  stand  the  result,  I will  bring  4,500  men 
down  as  soon  as  I can  give  them  arms  and  xiowder,  and  stay  as  long  as 
a brick  remains.  It  is  their  interest  I am  endeavoring  to  consult,  not 
the  safety  of  my  men.  I have  nothing  but  infantry  and  two  batteries  of 
field  artillery,  whicffi  would  be  of  no  use  against  ships.  I will  come  down 
myself  if  they  wish  it,  and  bring  the  men  along  as  fast  as  ready.  They 
are  newly-raised  regiments,  and  are  being  now  armed  and  equipped,  as 
you  know.  Can  'begin  to  bring  them  down  to-morrow  if  that  is  the 


Correction  made  in  the  text. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


510 


desire  of  the  citizens.  Shall  1 come  down  myself  to-niglit '?  Will  do  so 
if  I can  be  of  any  assistance,  and  leave  General  Smith  to  complete  the 
organization,  and  bring  down  the  five  regiments  when  ready.  The 
citizens  must  decide  as  to  the  consequences.  I will  come,  if  it  is  wished, 
cheerfully. 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  Generalj  Commanding. 

Major  James, 

Neio  Orleans.^  La. 

Camp  Moore,  La.,  April  28,  18G2. 

I shall  start  down  myself,  with  an  aide,  now,  and  am  joerfectly  ready, 
if  it  is  the  desire  of  the  city,  to  hold  it  to  the  end.  It  is  for  them  to  say, 
not  me.  M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General.  Commanding. 

Major  James, 

New  Orleans^  La. 

[Inclosuro  B.] 

Jackson,  Miss.,  May  24,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  while  1 was  in  the  city  of  Kew 
Orleans,  on  April  27,  executing  your  orders,  to  assist  in  removing  the 
Government  and  State  property,  and  while  the  negotiations  were  going 
on  between  the  city  authorities  and  the  Federal  officers  for  the  surrender, 
1 was  informed  that  the  nature  of  the  rejilies  to  the  naval  commander 
was  such  as  to  throw  some  censure  upon  yourself  for  leaving  them,  as 
the  mayor  styled  it,  without  military  i^rotection.  I deemed  it  my  duty 
to  advise  you  of  this  immediately,  the  result  of  which  w^as  the  inclosed 
dispatches  from  you,  offering  to  return  with  your  troops  and  afford  them 
all  the  protection  in  your  power,  but  that  theresponsibilty  of  any  results 
that  might  ensue  must  rest  upon  the  citizens  themselves. 

I read  your  disx)atches  to  the  city  council,  which  was  then  in  session, 
in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Pierre  Soule,  who  ha])pened  to  be  there  at  the 
time.  That  gentleman,  who  seemed  to  speak  for  the  mayor  and  council, 
most  emphatically  declared  that  you  ought  not  to  return  with  your  troops, 
as  did  also  the  mayor  and  members  of  the  council.  Several  of  them, 
however,  declared  that  they  would  be  glad  to  have  you  return  alone  and 
see  matters  for  yourself,  to  which  effect  I telegraphed  you. 

You  came  to  the  city  that  evening  with  a single  aide-de-camp  and  went 
with  me  to  the  mayor’s  house,  where  you,  in  my  presence,  told  him  that 
the  citizens  of  New  Orleans  should  have  no  cause  to  say  that  they  were 
obliged  to  submit  for  want  of  military  protection  ; that  you  were  ready 
and  Avilling  to  bring  your  whole  command  into  the  city  within  twenty- 
four  hours  and  undergo  a bombardment  with  them  it  that  was  their 
desire;  that  you  had  withdrawn  to  enable  the  citizens  to  decide  the 
matter  for  themselves,  as  it  was  they  and  not  you  who  had  their  families 
and  i^roiierty  at  stake.  In  reply,  the  mayor  earnestly  declined  your 
offer,  stating  that  you  had  done  all  in  your  power,  and  that  it  would  be 
a useless  waste  of  life  to  bring  the  troops  into  the  city.  lie  also  urged 
you  by  all  means  to  retire  from  the  city  for  your  own  safety,  and  subse- 
quently asked  me  to  persuade  you  to  h ave  ns  soon  as  possible,  as  he 
would  be  hung  if  the  United  States  authorities  found  you  were  at  his 
house. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  L.  JAMES, 
Volunteer  Aide-de-Camp. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell. 


520  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  PEA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [CiiAr..XVL 


[Tnclosure  C.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  April  29,  1862. 

Sir  : When  the  enemy,  having  succeeded  in  passing  our  defenses  on 
the  river  with  his  fleet,  anchored  abreast  the  city,  it  was  apparent  that 
the  infantry  troops  under  my  command  could  ofter  no  effectual  resistance, 
and  tlieir  presence  would  only  serve  as  a pretext  and  a justification  for 
them  to  open  their  guns  upon  a city  crowded  with  women  and  children, 
whom  it  was  impossible  to  remove. 

Under  these  circumstances  I determined  at  once  to  withdraw  my  troops 
and  leave  it  to  the  citizens  themselves  to  agree  upon  the  course  of  action 
to  be  pursued  in  relation  to  the  welfare  of  their  families  and  property. 

I now  beg  leave  to  say  that,  if  it  is  the  determination  of  the  people  of 
the  city  to  hold  it  at  any  and  all  hazards,  I will  return  with  my  troops 
and  share  the  danger  with  them.  That  my  return  will  be  followed  by 
bombardment,  is  in  my  opinion  certain,  but  if  that  is  the  conclusion 
come  to,  I will  afibrd  all  the  protection  in  my  power. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding. 

Hon.  John  T.  Munroe, 

Mayor  of  New  Orleans. 

[Inclosure  D.] 

Camp  Moore,  La.,  April  30,  1862. 

General:  At  your  request,  upon  my  return  from  Forts  Jachson  and 
Saint  Philip,  I accompanied  you  to  call  upon  Commodore  [ W.  C.]  Whittle, 
of  the  Navy,  at  his  headquarters  in  New  Orleans,  for  the  ])urpose  of 
getting  that  officer,  if  possible,  to  place  the  iron-clad  gunboat  Louisiana 
in  a position  below  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  from  which  she 
could  enfilade  the  position  of  the  enemy’s  mortar  fleet  and  drive  them 
from  it,  thereby  relieving  the  forts,  for  a time  at  least,  from  the  heavy 
bombardment  then  going  on,  which  would  allow  Brigadier-General  Dun- 
can to  make  such  repairs  as  were  necessary,  and,  what  was  equally 
necessary,  give  the  garrisons  some  rest. 

The  position  designated  for  the  vessel  to  be  placed  in  was  in  an  eddy 
upon  the  Fort  Saint  Philip  side  of  the  river,  and  under  the  i)rotection 
of  the  guns  of  both  forts,  and  entirely  out  of  the  line  of  the  bombard- 
ment, and  it  would  require  a change  of  position  of  the  mortar  fleet  to 
enable  them  to  strike  the  vessel  with  shell,  if  she  could  have  been  struck 
at  all. 

All  these  facts  were  fully  explained  by  yourself  to  Commodore  Whittle, 
and  he  was  requested  by  you  by  all  means  to  place  the  vessel  in  ques- 
tion in  said  position,  even  if  she  was  lost,  as  the  maintaining  the  position 
then  held  by  your  troops  in  the  forts,  without  this  assistance,  was  merely 
a question  of  time. 

To  this  earnest  appeal  upon  your  part  Commodore  Whittle  telegraphed 
to  Commander  [J.  K.]  Mitchell,  of  the  fleet  stationed  just  above  the 
forts,  to  strain  a point,  if,  in  his  judgment,  it  was  necessary,  to  comply 
with  your  request,  ami  place  the  Louisiana  inflhe  position  before  spoken 
of.  As  the  result  shows,  the  request  of  Commodore  Whittle  to  Com- 
mander Mitchell  was  not  complied  with. 

I make  this  statement  voluntarily,  in  order  that,  if  ever  the  question 
of  the  defenses  of  New  Orleans  should  arise,  you  can  have  every  evidence 


Chap.  XVI.]  CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  521 

to  show  that  it  was  not  certainly"  the  want  of  proper  exertions  on  the 
l)art  of  the  land  forces  which  caused  the  fall  of  New  Orleans. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  L.  JAMES, 
Yolunieer  ^Aide-de- Camp. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Commanding  Department  Vo.  1. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  K.  Duncan^  C.  8.  Army^  of  the  bombard- 
ment and  surrender  of  Forts  JacJcson  and  Saint  Philip. 

New  Orleans,  La.,  April  30,  18G2. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  bom- 
bardment of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  La.,  from  Ai)ril  10  to  24 : 

About  March  27  I was  informed  by  Lieut.  Col.  E.  Higgins,  command- 
ing Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  composing  a part  of  the  coast 
defenses  under  my  command,  that  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  crossing  the 
bars  and  entering  the  Mississippi  Eiver  in  force.  In  consequence  I 
repaired  at  once  to  that  post,  to  assume  the  general  command  of  the 
threatened  attack  upon  New  Orleans,  which  I had  always  anticipated 
would  be  made  from  that  quarter. 

Upon  my  arrival  I found  that  Fort  Jackson  was  suftering  severely 
from  transpiration  and  backwater,  occasioned  by  the  excessive  rise  in 
the  river  and  the  continued  prevalence  of  strong  easterly  winds.  Not- 
withstanding every  effort  which  could  be  made  the  water  kept  daily 
increasing  upon  us,  partly  owing  to  the  sinking  of  the  entire  site  and  to 
the  natural  lowness  of  the  countrj^  around  it,  until  the  iiarade  plain  and 
casemates  were  very  generally  submerged  to  a depth  of  from  3 to  18 
inches.  It  was  with  the  utmost  difiiculty,  and  only  then  by  isolating 
the  magazines  and  by  pumiflng  day  and  night,  that  the  water  could  be 
kept  out  of  them. 

As  the  officers  and  men  were  all  obliged  to  live  in  these  open  and  sub- 
merged casemates,  they  were  greatly  exposed  to  discomfort  and  sickness, 
as  their  clothing  and  feet  were  always  wet.  The  most  of  their  clothing 
and  blankets,  besides,  were  lost  by  the  fire  hereinafter  mentioned.  Fort 
Saint  Philip,  from  the  same  causes,  was  in  a similar  condition,  but  to  a 
lesser  extent. 

No  attention  having  been  previously  paid  to  the  repeated  requisitions 
for  guns  of  heavy  caliber  for  these  forts,  it  became  necessary,  in  their 
present  condition,  to  bring  in  and  mount  and  to  build  the  platforms  for 
the  three  10-inch  and  three  8-inch  columbiads,  the  rifled  42-pounder, 
and  the  five  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars  recently  obtained  from  Pensacola 
on  the  evacuation  of  that  place,  together  with  the  two  rifled  7-inch  guns 
temporarily  borrowed  from  the  naval  authorities  in  New  Orleans.  It 
was  also  tbund  necessary  to  prepare  the  old  water  battery  to  the  rear 
of  and  below  Fort  Jackson,  which  had  never  been  comifleted,  for  the 
reception  of  a portion  of  these  guns,  as  well  as  to  construct  mortar- 
Iiroof  magazines  an,d  shell  rooms  within  the  same. 

In  consequence  also  of  the  character  of  the  expected  attack  by  heavy 
mortars,  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  cover  all  the  main  magazines 
at  both  forts  with  sand  bags  to  a considerable  depth,  to  protect  them 
against  a vertical  fire. 


522  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

After  great  exertions,  cheerfully  made  by  both  officers  and  men,  and 
by  working  the  garrisons  by  reliefs  night  and  day,  this  work  was  all 
accomplished  by  April  13.  INo  sooner  had  the  two  rifled  7-iiich  navy 
guns  been  placed  in  position,  however,  than  orders  arrived  to  dismount 
one  of  them  immediately,  and  to  send  the  same  to  the  city  at  once,  to 
be  placed  on  board  of  the  iron-clad  steamer  Louisiana.  I strongly  remon- 
strated against  this  removal  by  telegraph,  but  was  informed,  in  reply, 
that  the  orders  were  imperative,  and  that  the  gun  must  be  sent  without 
fail.  It  was  accordingly  sent,  but  with  great  difficulty,  owing  to  the 
overflow  and  the  other  causes  stated. 

The  garrisons  of  boffi  forts  were  greatly  fatigued  and  worn-out  by 
these  labors,  performed  as  they  were  under  x^ressure  and  within  sight 
of  the  enemy  and  owing  to  the  many  discomforts  and  disadvantages 
we  were  laboring  under  in  consequence  of  high  water. 

In  the  mean  time  I had  called  upon  the  general  commanding  the  depart- 
ment for  two  regiments,  to  be  stationed  at  the  quarantine  buildings,  (y 
miles  above  the  forts,  to  act  as  a reserve  force  and  to  co-oiierate  with 
the  forts  in  case  of  a combined  land  and  water  attack.  I also  asked 
for  Capt.  W.  G.  Mullen’s  company  of  scouts  and  sharpshooters,  to  be 
stationed  in  the  woods  below  Fort  Jackson,  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
river,  for  the  purpose  of  i)icking  off  the  officers  and  men  from  the 
enemy’s  vessels  when  assuming  their  several  xmsitious  of  attack. 

Cax)tain  Mullen’s  comx)any,  of  about  125  men,  was  sent  down  as 
requested,  and  stationed  in  part  in  the  point  of  woods  below  Fort  Jack- 
son,  and  the  remainder  on  the  Fort  Saint  Philixi  side,  oxiposite  the  raft 
obstructing  the  river. 

The  Chalmette  Regiment,  consisting  of  about  500  men.  Colonel  Szy- 
manski  commanding,  was  sent  to  the  quarantine.  A part  of  it  was 
stationed  there,  and  comx)any  detachments  were  xilaced  at  the  heads  of 
the  several  canals  leading  from  the  river  into  the  bays  back  of  the  same, 
to  guard  against  a land  force  being  thrown  in  launches  above  us. 

Four  steamers  of  the  river  fleet  x^iotected,  and  to  a certain  extent 
made  shot-xiroof,  with  cotton  bulkheads,  and  xirepared  with  iron  prows, 
to  act  as  rams,  viz,  the  Warrior,  Stonewall  Jackson,  Defiance,  and  Reso- 
lute, commanded  by  Cax)tains  Stex^henson,  Philips,  McCoy,  and  Hooper, 
respectively,  were  sent  down  to  report  to  and  co  operate  with  me.  The 
steamers  Governor  Moore  and  General  Quitman,  as  those 

before  mentioned,  and  commanded  by  Capt.  B.  Kennon  and  A.  Grant, 
were  sent  down  in  a like  manner,  to  co-operate  with  the  forts  and  ram 
such  vessels  of  the  enemy  as  might  succeed  iu  xiassing. 

The  naval  authorities  also  sent  down  the  (vonfederate  States  steam 
ram  Manassas,  Cjftitain  [A.  F.J  Warley,  C.  S.  Kavy,  commanding.  She 
was  stationed  a short  distance  above  Fort  Jackson,  with  her  steam  up 
. constantly,  to  act  against  the  enemy  as  the  occasion  might  offer. 

Subsequently,  also,  Cax^t.  F.  B.  Renshaw,  C.  S.  Navy,  arrived,  in  com- 
mand of  the  Confederate  States  steamer  Jackson. 

The  raft  of  logs  and  chains  which  had  formerly  been  placed  across 
the  river  having  proven  a failure  upon  the  rise  iu  the  stream  and  con- 
sequent increase  of  the  velocity  of  the  drift-bearing  current,  a new  ob- 
struction had  been  x)laced  across  the  river,  ox)X>osite  Fort  Jackson,  by 
Lieut.  Col.  E.  Higgins  x>iior  to  his  assumption  of  the  command  of  the 
forts.  This  consisted  ot  a line  of  schooners  anchored  at  intervals,  with 
bows  ux^  stream,  and  thoroughly  chained  together  amidships,  as  well 
as  stem  and  stern.  The  rigging,  ratlins,  and  cables  were  left  to  trail 
astern  of  these  schooners,  as  an  additional  imx^ediment,  to  tangle  in  the 
X)ropeLer  wheels  of  the  enemy. 


CnAr.  XVI.  1 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


The  schooner  raft  was  seriously  damaged  by  the  wind-storin  on  April 
10  and  11,  which  parted  the  cliains,  scattered  the  schooners,  and  mate- 
rially affected  its  character  and  effectiveness  as  an  obstruction.  In  addi- 
tion to  the  wind,  the  raft  was  also  much  damaged  by  allowing  some  of 
the  fire  barges  to  get  loose  and  drift  against  it,  through  the  carelessness 
of  those  having  them  in  charge.  A large  number  of  these  tire  barges 
were  tied  to  the  banks  above  both  forts,  ready  at  all  times  to  be  towed 
into  the  current  and  against  the  enemy,  for  the  double  i)uri)ose  of  firing 
his  ships  and  to  light  up  the  river  by  night  to  insure  the  accuracy  of 
our  fire. 

My  instructions  to  the  river  fleet,  under  Captain  Stephenson  (see 
attached  document  A),  were  to  lie  in  stream  above  the  raft,  Avith  such 
boats  as  had  stern  guns,  in  order  to  assist  the  forts  with  their  fire  in 
case  the  enemy  should  attempt  the  passage,  as  well  as  to  turn  in  and 
ram  at  all  hazards  all  such  vessels  as  might  succeed  in  getting  above 
the  raft.  He  was  also  required  to  take  entire  control  of  the  fire  barges 
(see  attached  document  B),  to  reconnoiter  the  enemy  above  the  Head  of 
the  Passes,  and  to  keep  a watch  boat  below  every  night,  near  the  point 
of  woods,  to  signal  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  The  accompanying 
diagram  will  illustrate  all  the  points  referred  to  in  this  report. 

The  same  instructions  were  given  to  Captains  Kennon  aiul  Grant, 
and  upon  his  arriA^al  Captain  lienshaw  was  duly  informed  of  the  ar- 
rangements made,  in  whicli  he  promised  heartily  to  co-operate. 

While  the  enemy  remained  at  the  Head  of  the  Passes,  22  J miles  below 
the  forts,  and  subsequently,  when  he  came  ui)  to  the  Jump,  or  AVilder’s 
Bayou,  the  boats  of  the  river  fleet  took  turns  in  running  dowm  and 
watching  his  movements.  Por  a few  nights,  also,  at  this  time  one  of 
them  was  kept  below  as  a guard  boat.  We  had  telegraphic  communi- 
cation, besides,  down  to  within  half  a mile  of  the  Jump,  9 miles  below 
the  forts,  Avhich,  together  with  scouts  operating  in  the  bays  to  the  east 
and  west  of  the  riAW  in  skiffs  and  pirogues,  kept-  us  duly  posted 
meanwhile  of  the  enemy’s  movements  below  as  far  down  as  the  South- 
Avest  Pass. 

The  enemj"  was  not  idle  in  the  interim.  His  larger  vessels  were 
worked  OA^er  the  Southwest  Bar  after  failing  to  make  an  entrance  at 
Pass  a rOutre,  and  the  mortar  fleet  was  brought  up  as  far  as  the  South- 
west Pilot  Station,  where  the  mortars  Avere  scaled  and  after Avard  tested. 
Prom  seven  to  thirteen  steam  sloops  of  war  and  gunboats  Avere  con- 
stantly kept  at  the  Head  of  the  Passes  or  at  the  Jumt),  to  coAmr  his 
operations  below  and  to  prevent  our  observing  his  moA^ements  by  Avay 
OT  the  river.  By  gradual  and  regular  approaches  he  carefully  closed 
upon  the  forts  day  by  day,  and  opened  the  attack  as  hereinafter  de- 
tailed. 

April  9. — One  of  our  reconn  offering  steamers  was  chased  and  fol- 
loAved  up  by  two  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  as  far  as  the  point  of  woods 
below  Port  Jackson,  but  was  soon  forced  to  retire  by  a few  shots  from 
our  batteries.  This  was  his  first  reconnaissance,  and  our  fire  was  not 
returned. 

Aj)ril  13. — Several  of  the  hostile  gunboats  again  came  up  to  make 
observations.  They  would  occasionally  shoAV  themselves  singly  or  in 
pairs  above  the  point  of  woods  and  exchange  a few  shots  with  the  forts 
and  then  retire  again  behind  the  point.  Our  sharpshooters  obtained 
a few  shots  on  this  occasion,  but  with  very  partial  success,  owing  to 
the  lowness  of  the  country  and  the  extreme  rise  in  the  riA^er.  Many  of 
the  men  were  up  to  their  waists  in  water,  and  in  consequence  sickness 
pre Availed  among  them  and  unfitted  them  for  duty.  The  enemy  spent 


524  OPERATIOXS  m W.  FLA.,  S.  ala.,  S.  miss.,  and  la.  [Chap.  XVI. 

tlie  principal  part  of  the  day  in  firing  grape  and  canister  and  in  shelling 
the  woods  to  drive  them  out.  This  was  repeated  the  following  day,  the 
enemy  not  coming  within  range  or  sight  ©f  the  forts,  but  confining  him- 
self to  shelling  the  woods  below.  The  sharpshooters  were  all  driven 
out  by  this  second  day’s  firing.  Our  telegraphic  communication  below 
was  also  broken  up,  as  the  wires  were  removed  and  many  of  the  posts  ’ 
cut  and  torn  down  by  the  enemy. 

There  being  no  other  point  above  or  below  where  the  sharpshooters 
could  profitably  act  in  that  capacity,  and  as  many  of  them  were  unfit 
for  duty  from  exposure,  1 deemed  it  advisable  to  dispense  with  their 
services  and  send  them  to  the  city,  which  was  accordingly  done. 

It  being  of  the  highest  imx)ortance,  however,  to  keep  up  (he  tele- 
graphic connection  below,  Lieut.  T.  J.  Eoyster,  company  of  sappers 
and  miners  Twenty-second  Eegiment  Louisiana  Volunteers,  volunteered 
his  services,  with  lo  men  of  his  company,  to  act  as  sharpshooters  in 
liirogues,  and  cover  the  operator  in  repairing  the  line  and  re-establish- 
ing the  connection  with  the  forts  above  as  well  as  to  annoy  the  enemy. 

This  also  failed  from  the  great  difficulty  of  managing  the  pirogues 
effectively  in  the  dense  undergrowth  of  the  swampy  woods  below,  and 
the  telegraph  and  the  sharx)shooters  had  to  be  abandoned  in  conse- 
quence. 

April  15. — The  enemy  brought  up  his  whole  fleet,  extending  the  same 
from  the  Head  of  the  Passes  to  the  i)Oint  of  woods  below  the  forts. 

Orders  were  repeatedly  given  to  Captain  Stephenson,  of  the  river 
fleet,  to  cause  the  fire  barges  to  be  sent  down  nightly  upon  the  enemy* 
but  every  attempt  seemed  to  prove  a perfect  abortion,  the  barges  being 
cut  adrift  too  soon,  so  that  they  drifted  against  the  banks  directly  under 
the  forts,  firing  our  wharves  and  lighting  us  up,  but  obscuring  the  posi- 
tion of  the  enemy.  In  consequence,  I turned  the  control  of  them,  as 
well  as  the  boats  employed  to  tow  them  into  the  stream,  over  to  Cap- 
tain Eenshaw,  the  senior  naval  officer  present.  I also  directed  Captains 
Kennon  and  Grant  to  report  to  him  tor  orders,  as  I found  great  diffi- 
culty in  communicating  with  or  controlling  the  vessels  afloat,  and 
directed  Captain  Stephenson,  with  his  four  boats,  t(F  co-operate  with 
Captain  Eenshaw  in  every  possible  way.  These  boats  of  the  river  fleet, 
it  seemed,  could  not  be  turned  over  directly  to  the  immediate  command 
of  naval  officers,  owing  to  certain  conditions  imijosed  by  the  Eavy 
Department. 

April  10. — From  7.30  a.  m.  the  enemy’s  gunboats  came  around  the 
lioint  repeatedly  for  observation,  but  were  invariably  forced  to  retire 
by  our  fire.  In  the  mean  time  he  was  locating  the  position  of  the  mor- 
tar flotilla,  composed  of  twenty-one  schooners,  each  mounting  one  13- 
inch  mortar  and  other  guns,  close  against  the  bank  on  the  Fort  Jackson 
side  and  behind  the  point  of  woods. 

At  1.15  II.  m.  the  enemy  ran  out  a gunboat  and  fired  upon  the  fort, 
under  the  cover  of  which  two  of  the  mortar-boats  were  brought  out  into, 
the  stream. 

These  boats  opened  fire  upon  Fort  Jackson  at  5 p.  m.,  which  was 
continued  for  an  hour  and  a half,  the  enemy  under  our  fire  retiring 
behind  the  point  of  woods. 

April  17. — One  fire  barge  sent  down  successfully  against  the  enemy 
at  4 a.  m.,  which  drifted  in  among  his  vessels  and  was  fired  upon  by 
them,  creating  considerable  movement  and  perturbation. 

During  the  day  Captains  Eenshaw,  Beverly  Kennon,  Grant,  Ste- 
phenson, and  Hooper  iiassed  in  turns  with  their  boats  below  the  raft, 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


525 


now  very  inucb  disconnected  and  scattered^  and  exchanged  a few  shots 
with  the  hostile  gunboats  aud  mortar  boats. 

Two  more  abortive  attempts  were  made  to  send  down  fire  barges 
against  the  enemy  during  the  night. 

A][)ril  18. — At  9 a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  upon  Fort  Jackson  with  Ids 
entire  mortar  fleet  of  twenty-one  vessels  and  with  rifled  guns  from 
Ids  gunboats.  Fifteen  of  them  were  concealed  behind  the  point  of 
woods  and  the  other  six  hauled  out  in  the  stream  at  an  angle  with  them 
(see  diagram),  just  at  the  extreme  range  of  our  heaviest  guns.  Our 
fire  disabled  one  gunboat  and  one  mortar  boat,  causing  those  in  the 
stream  to  retire  behind  the  cover  of  the  woods.  Generally  our  shots 
fell  short  for  lack  of  elevation  and  in  consequence  of  the  inferiority  of 
our  powder  compared  to  that  of  the  enemy.  Even  our  nearest  gun,  a 
10-inch  sea-coast  mortar,  would  not  reach  his  boats  with  the  heaviest 
charges. 

The  enemy  ceased  firing  at  7 p.  m.,  having  fired  this  day  2,997  mortar 
shells. 

The  quarters  in  the  bastions  were  fired  and  burned  down  early  in  the 
day,  as  well  as  all  the  quarters  immediately  without  the  fort.  TTie  cit- 
adel was  set  on  fire  and  extinguished  several  times  during  the  first  part 
of  the  day,  but  later  it  became  impossible  to  put  out  the  flames,  so  that 
when  the  enemy  ceased  firing  it  was  one  burning  mas's,  greatly  endan- 
gering the  magazines,  w^hich  at  one  time  were  reported  to  be  on  fire. 
Many  of  the  men  and  most  of  the  officers  lost  their  bedding  and  cloth- 
ing by  these  fires,  which  greatly  added  to  the  discomforts  of  the  over- 
flow. The  mortar  fire  was  accurate  and  terrible,  many  of  the  shells  fall- 
ing everywhere  within  the  fort  and  disabling  some  of  our  best  guns. 

I endeavored  to  get  the  naval  forces  to  carry  down  fire  barges  against 
the  enemy  so  as  to  disperse  them,  but  they  were  all  let  go  above  the  raft, 
and  with  such  a lack  of  judgment  that  they  only  lodged  under  the  forts 
and  did  not  reach  the  enemy.  (See  attached  document  C.) 

None  of  the  boats  acted  as  a guard  boat  below  the  raft  at  night,  so 
that,  in  consequence,  the  enemy  sent  up  two  launches  to  examine  the 
character  of  the  raft  obstructing  the  river. 

April  19. — The  mortar  fleet  again  opened  at  G a.  m.  and  the  fire  was 
constantly  kept  up  throughout  the  day.  Gunboats  constantly  came 
above  the  point  during  the  day  to  engage  the  forts,  but  were  as  con- 
stantly driven  back  by  our  fire.  One  of  them  we  crippled,  which  was 
towed  behind  the  point  of  woods.  The  enemy’s  fire  was  excellent,  a 
large  proportion  of  his  shells  falling  within  Fort  Jackson.  The  terre- 
plein,  parade  plain,  parapets,  and  iflatforras  were  very  much  cut  u]),  as 
well  as  much  damage  done  to  the  casemates.  The  magazines  were  con- 
siderably threatened,  and  one  shell  passed  through  into  the  casemate 
containing  fixed  ammunition.  One  10-inch  and  one  8-inch  colurabiad, 
one  82  and  one  24  i)ounder,  and  one  10-inch  siege-mortar  were  disabled 
in  the  main  work,  also  two  rifled  32-pounders  in  the  water  battery. 
Bombardment  continued  very  regularly  and  accurately  all  night.  Fail- 
ures again  were  made  in  sending  down  fire  barges. 

April  20 — Some  rain  in  the  morning.  Bombardment  constant 
throughout  the  day,  with  occasional  shots  from  the  gunboats  around 
the  point.  Wind  very  high.  No  fire  barges  sent  down  to  light  up  the 
river  or  distract  the  attention  of  the  enemy  at  night.  In  consequence, 
between  11  and  12  p.  m.,  under  cover  of  "the  heaviest  shelling  during 
the  bombardment  thus  far,  one  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  came  up  in  the 
darkness  aud  attempted  to  cut  the  chains  of  the  raft  and  drag  ofl*  the 
schooners.  A heavy  fire  was  opened  ujion  her,  which  caused  her  to 


526  OPERATIONS  IN  ^y.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVT. 

retire,  but  not  until  sbe  bad  partially  accomplisbed  ber  purpose.  The 
raft  after  this  could  not  be  regarded  as  an  obstruction.  Tbe  tire  con- 
tinued uninterruptedly  all  nigbt. 

April  21. — Firing  continued  all  day  and  nigbt  without  interruption. 
Several  guns  were  disabled.  Disabled  guns  were  repaired  as  far  as 
practicable  as  often  as  accidents  happened  to  them  or  tbeir  platforms. 
Fort  Jackson  by  this  time  was  in  need  of  extensive  repairs  almost  every- 
where, and  it  was  with  extreme  pleasure  that  we  learned  of  the  arrivml 
during  the  night  of  the  iron-clad  steamer  Louisiana,  under  the  cover  of 
whose  heavy  guns  we  expected  to  make  the  necessary  repairs. 

April  22. — By  the  direction  of  the  major-general  commanding  the  de- 
partment everything  afloat,  including  the  tow-boats  and  the  entire  con- 
trol of  the  fire  barges,  was  turned  over  to  Capt.  John  K.  Mitchell,  0.  S. 
Navy,  commanding  the  Confederate  States  naval  forces  Lower  Missis- 
sippi River.  I also  gave  Captain  Mitchell  150  of  our  best  men  from 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  under  Lieutenants  Dixon  and  Gandy 
and  Captain  Ryan,  to  serve  a portion  of  the  guns  of  the  Louisiana  and 
to  act  as  sharpshooters  on  the  same  vessel. 

In  an  interview  with  Captain  Mitchell,  on  the  morning  of  this  date,  I 
learned  that  the  motive  power  of  the  Louisiana  was  not  likely  to  be  com- 
pleted within  any  reasonable  time,  and  that  in  consequence  it  was  not 
within  the  range  of  probabilities  that  she  could  be  regarded  as  an 
aggressiv^e  steamer  or  that  sbe  could  be  brought  into  the  pending  action 
in  that  character.  As  an  iron-clad  invulnerable  floating  battery,  with 
sixteen  guns  of  the  heaviest  caliber,  however,  she  was  then  as  complete 
as  she  would  ever  be. 

Fort  Jackson  had  already  undergone  and  was  still  subjected  to  a ter- 
rible fire  of  13-iuch  mortar  shells,  which  it  was  necessary  to  relieve  at 
once  to  prevent  the  disabling  of  all  the  best  guns  at  that  fort,  and, 
although  Fort  Saint  Philip  partially  opened  out  the  point  of  woods  con- 
cealing tbe  enemy  and  gallantly  attempted  to  dislodge  bim  or  draw  his 
fire,  be  nevertheless  doggedly  persisted  in  his  one  main  object  of  bat- 
tering Fort  Jackson.  Under  these  circumstances  I considered  that  the 
Louisiana  could  only  be  regarded  as  a battery,  and  that  her  best  possi- 
ble i)osition  would  be  below  the  raft,  close  in  on  the  Fort  Saint  Phili]) 
shore,  where  ber  fire  could  dislodge  the  mortar  boats  from  behind  tbe 
point  of  woods  and  give  sufficient  respite  to  Fort  Jackson  to  repair  i)i 
exienso.  This  position  (X  on  the  accompanying  diagram)  would  give  us 
three  direct  cross-fires  upon  the  enemy’s  approaches  and  at  the  same 
time  insure  the  Louisiana  from  a direct  assault,  as  she  would  be  imme- 
diately under  the  guns  of  both  forts.  Accordingly,  I earnestly  and 
strongly  urged  these  views  upon  Captain  Mitchell  in  a letter  of  this 
date  (copy  lost),  but  without  avail,  as  will  be  seen  by  bis  reply,  attached 
as  document  D. 

Being  so  deeply  impressed  myself  with  tbe  importance  of  this  position 
for  tbe  Louisiana  and  of  tbe  necessity  of  prompt  action  in  order  to  in- 
sure the  success  of  tbe  impending  struggle,  I again  urged  this  subject 
upon  Captain  Mitchell,  during  tbe  latter  part  of  tbe  same  day,  as  abso- 
lutely indispensable  and  imperative  to  tbe  safety  of  New  Orleans  and  to 
tbe  control  of  tbe  Lower  Alississippi.  iMy  efforts  were  inefiectual  to  get 
bim  to  move  tbe  boat  from  ber  original  position  above  the  forts.  His 
reply  is  attached  as  document  E,  in  which  he  is  sustained  by  all  tbe 
naval  officers  present  having  tbe  command  of  vessels. 

I also  addressed  him  two  other  notes  through  the  day — one  in  regard 
to  sending  fire  barges  against  the  enemy  and  the  other  relative  to  keep- 
ing a A'igiiaut  lookout  from  all  bis  vessels,  and  asking  for  co-operation 


Chap.  XYI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


sboiilfl  the  enemy  attempt  to  pass  during  the  night.  (See  attached  doc- 
ument F.) 

Bombardment  continued  tlironghout  theday  and  night,  being  at  times 
very  heavy.  Baring  the  day  our  tire  was  principally  contined  to  shell- 
ing the  point  of  woods  from  both  forts,  and  apparently  with  good  results, 
as  the  mortar  tire  was  slackened  towards  evening.  The  casemates  were 
very  much  cut  up  by  the  enemy’s  tire,  which  was  increased  at  night. 

There  was  little  or  no  success  in  sending  down  tire  barges  as  usual, 
owing  in  part  to  the  condition  of  the  tow-boats  Mosher,  Music,  and  Belle 
Algerine,  in  charge  of  the  same,  exi)lained  by  attached  document  G. 
This  does  not  excuse  the  neglect,  however,  as  there  were  six  boats  of  the 
river  fleet  available  for  this  service,  independent  of  those  alluded  to,  and 
tire  barges  were  i)lentiful. 

April  23  — The  day  broke  warm,  clear,  and  cloudless,  hlo  immediate 
relief  being  looked  for  from  our  fleet,  the  entire  command  was  turned  out 
to  repair  damages  under  a very  heavy  tire  of  the  enemy. 

The  bombardmentcoutinued  without  intermission  throughout  the  day, 
but  slackened  oft*  about  12  m.,  at  which  hour  there  was  every  indication 
of  an  exhaustion  on  the  part  of  the  moriar  flotilla  5 hence  it  became 
evident  that  the  tactics  of  the  enemy  would  necessarily  be  changed  into 
an  attack  with  broadsides  by  his  larger  vessels.  In  consequence,  these 
views  were  laid  before  Captain  Mitchell,  and  he  was  again  urged  to 
])lace  the  Louisiana  at  the  point  before  mentioned,  below  the  raft  and 
]iear  the  Fort  ^Saiut  Philip  bank  of  the  river,  to  meet  the  emergency. 
(See  attached  document  H.)  Captain  Mitchell’s  reply  is  attached,  in 
documents  E,  I,  J,  andK,  wherein  he  positively  declines  again  to  assume 
the  only  position  which  oft‘ered  ns  every  possible  chance  of  success,  and 
Captains  [Chas.  F.]  McIntosh,  [Thomas  B.]  Huger,  and  Warley  sustain 
Captain  Mitchell  in  his  views  of  the  case. 

Just  before  sundown,  under  a very  heavy  mortar  fire,  the  enemy  sent 
up  a small  boat,  and  a series  of  white  flags  were  planted  on  the  Fort 
Saint  Philip  bank  of  the  river,  commencing  about  350  yards  above  the 
lone  tree  ui)on  that  shore.  (See  diagram.) 

This  confirmed  my  previous  views  of  an  early  and  different  attack 
from  the  usual  mortar  bombardment,  especially  as  I presumed  that  these 
flags  indicated  the  positions  to  be  taken  up  by  the  several  vessels  in  their 
new  line  of  operations. 

As  nothing  was  to  be  expected  from  the  Louisiana  after  the  correspond- 
ence during  the  day,  I could  only  inform  Captain  Mitchell  of  this  new 
movement  of  the  enemy  (see  attached  document  L),  and  i)articularly 
impress  upon  him  the  necessity  of  keeping  the  river  well  lit  up  with 
tire  barges,  to  act  as  an  impediment  to  the  enemy  and  assist  the  accu- 
racy of  our  fire  in  a night  attack. 

Lieutenant  [Geo.  S.]  Shryock,  C.  S.  Havy  (Captain  Mitchell’s  aide), 
c^me  on  shore  about  h p.  m.  to  inform  me  that  the  Louisiana  would  be 
ready  for  service  by  the  next  evening — the  evening  of  the  24th.  I in- 
formed him  that  time  was  everything  to  us  and  that  to-morrow  would 
in  all  probability  prove  too  late.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Higgins  warmly 
seconded  my  opinion,  and  warned  Lieutenant  Shryock  that  the  final 
battle  was  imminent  within  a few  hours. 

In  regard  to  lighting  the  river.  Lieutenant  Shryock  stated  that  fire 
barges  would  be  regularly  sent  down  throughout  the  night  every  two 
hours,  and  as  none  had  been  sent  nj)  to  that  hour  (9.30  p.  m.),  he  left, 
informing  me  that  this  matter  would  be  attended  to  as  soon  as  he 
arrived  on  board.  To  my  utter  surprise  not  one  siugle  fire  barge  was 
sent  down  the  river,  notwithstanding,  at  any  hour  of  this  night.  It  was 


528  OPEKATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Cii.u>.  XVI. 

imi)ossible  for  us  to  seud  them  down,  as  everything  afloat  liad  been 
turned  over  to  Captain  Mitchell,  by  order  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding, and  the  fire  barges  and  the  boats  to  tow  them  into  the  stream 
were  exclusively  under  his  control.  In  consequence  of  this  criminal 
neglect  the  river  remained  in  complete  darkness  throughout  the  entire 
night.  The  bombardment  continued  all  night  and  grew  furious  towards 
morning. 

April  21. — At  3.30  a.  m.  the  larger  vessels  of  the  enemy  were  observed 
in  motion,  and,  as  we  presumed,  to  take  up  the  positions  indicated  by 
the  small  flags  planted  by  them  on  the  previous  evening.  I then  made 
my  last  and  final  appeal  to  Captain  Mitchell,  a copy  of  which  is  attached 
as  document  M. 

The  J Louisiana  was  still  in  her  old  position  above  Fort  Saint  Philip, 
surrounded  by  her  tenders,  on  board  of  which  was  the  majority  of  her 
cannoneers  and  crew,  and  the  other  boats  of  the  fleet  were  generally  at 
anchor  above  her,  excepting  the  Jackson,  Captain  Eenshaw,  C.  S.  i^avy, 
commanding,  which  had  been  sent  the  day  before  at  my  suggestion  to 
l)revent  the  landing  of  forces  through  the  canals  above. 

Tlie  McRae  lay  near  and  above  the  Louisiana,  and  the  steam  ram 
Maimssas,  Avith  her  tender,  remained  in  her  constant  position  above  Port 
Jackson,  both  with  steam  up  and  ready  for  immediate  action. 

The  enemy  evidently  anticipated  a strong  demonstration  to  be  made 
against  him  with  fire  barges.  Finding,  upon  his  approach,  however,  that 
no  such  demonstration  was  made,  and  that  the  only  resistance  otfered 
to  his  passage  was  the  expected  fire  of  the  forts  (the  broken  and  scat- 
tered raft  being  then  no  obstacle),  I am  satisfied  that  he  was  suddenly 
inspired  for  the  first  time  to  run  the  gauntlet  at  all  hazards,  although 
not  a part  of  his  original  design.  Be  this  as  it  may,  a rapid  rush  was 
made  by  him  in  column  of  twos  en  echelon^  so  as  not  to  interfere  with 
each  other’s  broadsides. 

The  mortar  fire  upon  Fort  Jackson  was  furiously  increased,  and  in 
dashing  by  each  vessel  delivered  broadside  after  broadside  of  shot,  shell, 
grape,  canister,  and  spherical  case  to  driA  e the  men  from  our  guns. 

Both  the  officers  and  men  stood  up  manfully  under  this  galling  and 
fearful  hail,  and  the  batteries  of  both  forts  were  promptly  opened  at 
their  longest  range  with  shot,  shell,  hot  shot,  and  a little  grape,  and 
most  gallantly  and  rapidly  fought  until  the  enemy  succeeded  in  getting 
aboA^e  and  beyond  our  range. 

The  absence  of  light  on  the  river,  together  with  the  smoke  of  the  guns, 
made  the  obscurity  so  intense,  that  scarcely  a vessel  was  Ausible,  and  in 
consequence  the  gunners  were  obliged  to  goA^ern  their  firing  entirely  by 
the  flashes  of  the  enemy’s  guns. 

I am  fully  satisfied  that  the  enemy’s  dash  was  successful  mainly  owing 
to  the  cover  of  darkness,  as  a frigate  and  several  gunboats  were  forced 
to  retire  as  day  was  breaking.  Similar  results  had  attended  every  pre- 
vious attemi)t  made  by  the  enemy  to  pass  or  to  reconnoiter  when  we  had 
sufficient  light  to  fire  Avith  accuracy  and  efiect. 

The  passage  by  was  of  short  duration,  having  been  accomplished 
between  3.30  a.  m.  and  daylight,  under  a A^ery  rapid  and  heavy  pressure 
of  steam. 

Of  the  ])art  taken  in  this  action  by  the  Louisiana,  Manassas,  and  other 
A^essels  comprising  the  co-operative  naval  forces,  I cannnot  speak  with 
any  degree  of  certainty,  excepting  that  the  Louisiana  is  reported  to  have 
fired  but  tweh^e  shots  during  the  engagement  j but  to  the  heroic  and 
gallant  manner  in  which  Captain  Huger  handled  and  fought  the  McRae 
Ave  can  all  bear  evidence. 


Chap.  X7I.1  CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  529 

Tbe  Defiance,  Captain  McCoy  commanding,  was  the  only  vessel  saved 
out  of  the  river  fleet. 

Shortly  after  daylight  the  Manassas  was  observed  drifting  down  by 
the  forts.  She  had  been  abandoned  and  fired,  and  was  evidently  in  a 
sinking  condition. 

The  McEae  was  considerably  cut  up  in  this  action  by  shot  and  grape. 

The  Eesolute  was  run  on  shore  about  a mile  above  the  forts,  where 
she  hoisted  aVhite  flag,  but  by  the  i)rompt  action  of  the  McEae  she  was 
prevented  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enem3\  She  was  subse- 
quently wrecked  and  burned. 

The  W arrior  was  run  ashore  and  fired  on  the  point  just  above  Fort 
Saint  Philip. 

^^^otuing  was  known  by  us  of  the  movements  of  the  Stonewall  Jack- 
sou,  the  Governor  Moore,  or  the  General  Quitman. 

The  steamers  Mosher,  Music,  and  Belle  Algerine,  in  charge  of  the  fire 
barges,  were  all  destroyed.  So  also  was  the  Star. 

The  heroic  courage  displayed  by  the  officers  and  men  at  both  forts 
was  deserving  of  a better  success,  especially  after  the  fortitude  which 
they  constantly  exhibited  through  the  long  tedium  of  a protracted  bom- 
* bardment,  unsuri^assed  for  its  terrible  accuracy,  constancy,  and  fury. 

Thirteen  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  out  of  twenty-three  succeeded  in  get- 
ting by,  viz ; The  Hartford,  Pensacola,  Eichmond,  Brooklyn,  Mississippi, 
Oneida,  Iroquois,  Cayuga,  Wissahickon,  Sciota,  Kiueo,  Katahdin,  and 
Pinola. 

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  and  to  the  Yaruna  and  such  other  ves- 
sels as  were  sunk,  there  were  6 gunboats  and  1 frigate  engaged  in  this 
action  besides  the  mortar  flotilla.  Heavy  chains  were  flaked  along  the 
sides  of  the  most  of  these  vessels  as  an  iron-proof  protection. 

The  extent  of  the  damage  which  was  done  to  the  enemy  we  had  no 
means  of  ascertaining. 

The  vessels  which  passed  all  came  to  an  anchor  at  or  below  the  quar- 
antine, 6 miles  above  the  forts,  where  they  remained  until  about  10  a.  m., 
when  they  all  passed  slowly  up  the  river,  with  the  exception  of  two  gun- 
boats, left  at  the  quarantine  as  a guard. 

Shortly  alter  the  fleet  above  got  under  way  a gunboat  from  below 
made  her  appearance  with  a flag  of  truce,  and  verbally  demanded  the 
surrender  of  the  forts  in  the  name  of  Commander  D.  D.  Porter,  U.  S. 
Eavy,  commanding  the  mortar  flotilla,  under  the  penalty  of  reo])ening 
the  bombardment  (which  had  ceased  shortly  after  the  passage)  in  case 
of  refusal. 

The  demand  was  rejected,  and  the  bombardment  was  reopened  about 
12  m.  It  continued  until  near  sundown,  when  it  ceased  altogether. 
The  entire  mortar  fleet  and  all  the  other  vessels  except  six  gunboats 
then  got  under  way,  and  passed  down  the  river  and  out  of  sight  under 
full  steam  and  sail.  A vigilant  lookout  was  kept  up  above  and  below 
during  the  night,  but  aU  remained  quiet.  So  long  as  the  mortar  fleet 
remained  below,  the  position  wherein  the  Louisiana  could  render  the 
greatest  assistance  to  the  forts  was  the  one  below  Fort  Saint  Philip, 
hereinbefore  mentioned,  where  the  fire  of  her  batteries  could  dislodge 
the  enemy  from  behind  the  point  of  woods. 

After  the  mortar  fleet  had  left,  however,  and  when  the  enemy  had  got 
in  force  above  the  forts,  the  question  was  materially  changed,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  fact  that  all  of  our  heavy  guns  at  both  forts  had  been 
mounted  to  beai  upon  the  lower  approaches  and  not  on  those  above. 
The  most  effective  position  which  the  Louisiana  could  then  take  as  a 
battery  was  in  the  fight  above  Fort  Jackson,  where  her  guns  could  pro- 
34  R R VOL  VI 


530  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

tect  our  rear  and  sweep  the  long  reach  of  river  above  towards  the  quar- 
antine. This  would  still  insure  her  safety,  as  she  would  be  under  the 
guns  of  both  forts.  This  is  evident  by  a reference  to  the  point  (XX) 
on  the  diagram.* 

In  several  personal  interviews  and  by  correspondence  with  Captain 
Mitchell,  on  this  date  (see  attached  documents  X,  O,  P,  Q,  and  E),  I 
requested  him  daring  the  morning  of  the  24th,  while  th^  mortar  fleet 
was  below,  to  place  the  Louisiana  below  the  raft  and  dislodge  it 5 and 
later  in  the  day,  when  the  mortar  fire  was  nearly  exhausted,  to  place  her 
in  the  position  (XX)  above  Port  Jackson,  to  assist  in  repelling  an  attack 
from  the  vessels  above. 

Daring  the  day  she  was  in  an  unfit  condition  to  assume  either  posi- 
tion, for  the  reasons  given  by  Captain  Mitchell  in  his  letters  to  me. 

The  intoxicated  volunteers  referred  to  were  none  of  my  men,  nor  did 
they  get  their  liquor  at  the  forts,  as  there  was  none  on  hand  there  dur- 
ing the  bombardment  excepting  the  small  supplies  of  hospital  stores  in 
the  medical  department. 

April  25. — Xo  attack  attempted  daring  the  day  by  the  enemy  either 
from  above  or  below.  The  gunboats  from  the  quarantine  above  and. 
from  the  point  of  woods  below  occasionally  showed  themselves  for  ob- 
servation,  but  without  firing. 

During  the  day  all  the  principal  guns  that  would  admit  of  it  at  both 
forts  were  prepared  at  once  so  as  to  traverse  in  a fall  circle^  and  bear 
above  or  below,  as  necessity  might  require.  Some  of  the  24-pounder 
barbette  guns  at  Fort  Jackson  were  also  replaced  by  guns  of  heavier 
caliber  to  bear  on  the  river  above. 

Permission  was  granted  by  the  enemy  to  the  Confederate  States 
steamer  McEae  to  proceed  to  Xew  Orleans  under  a flag  of  truce  with 
the  wounded.  Availing  ourselves  of  the  offer  of  Captain  Mitchell,  the 
seriously  wounded  of  both  forts  were  sent  on  board  01  her.  As  it  was 
late  when  the  wounded  were  all  gotten  onboard,  the  McEae  did  not  get 
ofi*  until  the  next  morning. 

Still  failed  during  the  day  in  getting  Captain  Mitchell  to  place  the 
Louisiana  in  the  bight  above  Fort  Jackson,  where  she  could  act  against 
the  enemy  from  above. 

One  of  the  raft  schooners  was  burned  during  the  night  to  light  the 
river,  and  all  remained  quiet. 

April  26. — A gunboat,  with  a white  flag,  dropped  down  from  the 
quarantine  to  escort  the  McEae  on  her  mission.  The  McEae  did  not 
return  again  to  the  forts. 

F5ur  of  the  enemy^s  steamers  were  in  sight  at  the  quarantine  at  dawn. 
A gunboat  occasionall.y  showed  herself  below  to  reconnoiter. 

In  the  direction  of  Bird  Island,  and  back  of  the  salt-works,  a large 
steam  frigate  and  an  ordinary  river  steamer  appeared  in  sight,  the  lat- 
ter working  her  way  up  the  bay  behind  Fort  Saint  Philip,  apparently 
towards  the  quarantine. 

During  the  day  Captain  Mitchell  communicated  with  the  enemy  above 
under  a flag  of  truce,  and  learned  that  the  city  had  surrendered,  and 
that  the  Confederate  States  steam  ram  Mississippi  had  been  barned  by 
our  authorities.  The  wreck  of  the  floating  dock  or  battery  drifted  by 
the  forts  about  4 p.  m. 

The  Louisiana  was  not  placed  in  the  position  required  of  her  during 
the  day.  Captain  Mitchell  promising  to  put  her  there  the  next  day,  the 
27th.  Another  raft  schooner  burned  for  light,  and  all  quiet  during  the 
night.  Xo  shots  exchanged  during  the. day. 

April  27. — At  daylight  the  steamer  which  had  been  observed  the  day 


See  p.  546. 


CiJ.vr.  XVI.j 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


531 


before  working  her  way  up  in  the  back  bays  was  in  view,  iininediately 
in  the  rear  of  Fort  Saint  Philip,  and  near  the  mouth  of  Fort  Bayou. 
A frigate  and  five  other  vessels  were  also  in  sight  towards  Bird  Island, 
one  of  which  was  seen  working  her  way  up  the  bay.  From  ten  to  thirteen 
launches  were  visible  near  the  boat  back  of  Fort  Saint  Philip,  by  means 
of  which  troops  were  being  landed  at  the  quarantine  above  us. 

About  12  m.  one  of  the  enemy^s  gunboats  from  below  made  her  appear- 
ance under  a flag  of  truce,  bearing  a written  demand  for  the  surrender 
of  the  forts,  signed  by  Commander  David  D.  Porter,  U.  S.  Navy,  com- 
manding mortar  flotilla.  (See  attached  document  S.)  The  forts  refused 
to  surrender.  (See  attached  document  T.) 

About  4 p.  m.  the  French  man-of-war  Milan,  Captain  Clouet,  command- 
ing, passed  up  to  the  city,  after  asking  and  obtaining  permission  of  the 
forts  to  do  so.  The  position  of  the  Louisiana  still  remained  unchanged. 

So  far,  throughout  t he  entire  bombardment  and  final  action,  the  spirit 
of  the  troops  was  cheerful,  confident,  and  courageous.  They  were  mostly 
foreign  enlistments,  without  any  great  interests  at  stake  in  the  ultimate 
success  of  the  revolution.  A reaction  set  in  among  them  during  the  lull 
of  the  25th,  26th,  and  27 th,  when  there  was  no  other  excitement  to  arouse 
them  than  the  fatigue  duty  of  repairing  our  damages  and  when  the  rumor 
was  current  that  the  city  had  surrendered  and  was  then  in  the  hands  of 
the  enemy. 

No  reply  had  been  received  from  the  city  to  my  dispatches  sent  by 
couriers  on  the  24th  and  25th,  by  means  of  which  I could  reassure  them. 
They  were  still  obedient,  but  not  buoyant  and  cheerful.  In  consequence, 
1 endeavored  to  revive  their  courage  and  patriotism  by  publishing  an 
order  to  both  garrisons,  attached  hereto  as  document  U. 

I regret  to  state  that  it  did  not  produce  the  desired  effect.  Every- 
thing remained  quiet,  however,  until  midnight,  when  the  garrison  of  Fort 
J ackson  revolted  in  mass  ; seized  upon  the  guard  and  posterns  j reversed 
the  field  pieces  commanding  the  gates,  and  commenced  to  spike  the  guns, 
while  many  of  the  men  were  leaving  the  fort  in  the  mean  time  under  arms. 
All  this  occurred  as  suddenly  as  it  was  unexpected.  The  men  were 
mostly  drawn  up  under  arms  and  positively  refused  to  fight  any  longer, 
besides  endeavoring  by  force  to  bring  over  the  Saint  Mary^s  Cannoneers 
and  such  other  few  men  as  remained  true  to  their  cause  and  country. 

The  mutineers  stated  that  the  officers  intended  to  hold  out  as  long  as 
possible,  or  while  the  provisions  lasted,  and  then  blow  uj)  the  forts  and 
everything  in  them ; that  the  city  had  surrendered,  and  that  there  was 
no  further  use  in  fighting  j that  the  enemy  were  about  to  attack  by  land 
and  water  on  three  sides  at  once,  and  that  a longer  defense  would  only 
prove  a butchery.  Every  endeavor  was  made  by  the  officers  to  repress 
the  revolt  and  to  bring  the  men  to  reason  and  order,  but  without  avail. 
Officers  upon  the  ramparts  were  fired  upon  by  the  mutineers  in  attempt- 
iug  to  put  a stop  to  the  spiking  of  the  guns. 

1 am  greatly  indebted  to  the  Eev.  Father  Nachon  for  his  efforts  to 
quell  the  mutineers,  through  some  of  whom  he  learned  that  the  revolt 
had  been  discussed  among  them  for  two  days,  and  yet  there  was  no  one 
man  among  them  true  enough  to  communicate  the  fact  to  his  officers. 
Signals  also  were  said  to  have  been  passed  between  the  forts  during  the 
night  and  while  the  mutiny  was  at  its  height.  Being  so  general  among 
the  men,  the  officers  were  helpless  and  powerless  to  act.  Under  these 
circumstances  there  was  but  one  course  left,  viz,  to  let  those  men  go 
who  wished  to  leave  the  fort,  in  order  to  see  the  number  left  and  to 
ascertain  what  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  them.  About  one-half  of 
the  garrison  left  immediately,  including  men  from  every  company  excex)t- 


532  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVl 

iDg  the  Saint  Mary’s  Cannoneers,  volunteers  and  regulars,  non  com- 
missioned officers  and  privates,  and  among  them  many  of  the  very  men 
who  had  stood  last  and  best  to  their  guns  throughout  the  protracted 
bombardment  and  the  final  action  when  the  enemy  passed.  It  was  soon 
evident  that  there  was  no  further  fight  in  the  men  remaining  behind; 
that  they  were  completely  demoralized,  and  that  no  faith  or  reliance 
could  be  placed  in  the  broken  detachments  of  companies  left  in  the  forts. 

In  the  mean  time  we  were  totally  ignorant  of  the  condition  of  afiairs  at 
Fort  Saint  Philip,  and  as  all  our  small  boats  had  been  carried  away  by 
the  mutineers,  we  could  not  communicate  with  that  fort  until  the  next 
morning.  As  the  next  attack  upon  the  forts  was  likely  to  be  a combined 
operation  by  land  and  water,  and  as  Fort  Saint  Philip  was  the  point 
most  threatened,  from  the  nature  of  the  country  around  it  and  from  the 
character  of  the  work  itself,  with  narrow  and  shallow  ditches,  and  but 
little  relief  to  the  main  work,  it  was  self-evident  that  no  reduction  could 
be  made  in  its  garrison  to  strengthen  that  of  Fort  Jackson,  even  if  all 
the  men  there  remained  true.  In  fact,  two  additional  regiments  had 
been  asked  for  at  the  quarantine  in  anticipation  of  such  an  attack,  to  act 
as  a reserve  to  strengthen  the  garrisons  of  both  forts. 

With  the  enemy  above  and  below  us,  it  will  be  apparent  at  once  to 
any  one  at  all  familiar  with  the  surrounding  country  that  there  was  no 
chance  of  destroying  the  public  property,  blowing  np  the  forts,  and 
escaping  with  the  remaining  troops.  Under  all  these  humiliating  cir- 
cumstances there  seemed  to  be  but  one  course  open  to  us,  viz,  to  await 
the  approach  of  daylight,  communicate  then  with  the  gunboats  of  the 
mortar  flotilla  below  under  a flag  of  truce,  and  negotiate  for  a surrender 
under  the  terms  offered  us  by  Commander  Porter  on  the  26th  instant, 
and  which  had  previously  been  declined. 

April  28. — A small  boat  was  procured  and  Lieutenant  Morse,  post 
adjutant,  sent  over  to  convey  the  condition  of  affairs  at  Fort  Saint 
Philip,  as  well  as  to  Captain  Mitchell,  on  the  Louisiana.  Captain 
Mitchell  and  Lieutenant  Sbryock,  C.  S.  Navy,  came  on  shore  and  dis- 
cussed the  whole  question,  after  which  they  left,  remarking  that  they 
would  go  on  board  and  endeavor  to  attack  the  enemy  above,  at  the 
quarantine,  notwithstanding  that  reasons  had  been  given  from  time  to 
time  for  not  moving  this  vessel  into  her  proper  position,  only  a few 
hundred  yards  distant. 

Captains  Squires  and  Bond,  Louisiana  Artillery,  and  Lieutenant  Dixon, 
commanding  the  company  of  Confederate  States  regular  recruits,  came 
on  share  shortly  afterwards  from  Fort  Saint  Philip,  and  concurred  with 
us  that,  under  the  circumstances,  we  could  do  nothing  else  than  sur- 
render, as  they  were  not  at  all  confident  of  the  garrison  there  after  the 
unlooked-for  revolt  at  Fort  Jackson,  although  none  of  their  men  had 
left*  or  openly  revolted.  For  these  reasons  a flag  of  truce  was  sent 
down  to  communicate  with  the  enemy  below  and  to  carry  a written 
offer  of  surrender  under  the  terms  offered  on  the  26th  instant.  (See 
attached  document  V.) 

This  communication  brought  up  the  Harriet  Lane  and  three  other 
gunboats  opposite  the  forts,  with  white  flags  at  the  fore,  white  flags 
being  displayed  from  the  yards  of  the  flag  masts  at  both  forts,  while 
tiie  Confederate  flags  waved  at  the  mast-heads. 

While  negotiations  were  pending  on  the  Harriet  Lane,  it  was  reported 
that  the  steamer  Louisiana,  with  her  guns  protruding,  and  on  fire,  was 
drifting  down  the  river  towards  the  fleet.  As  the  wreck  in  descending 
kept  close  into  the  Fort  Saint  Philip  shore,  the  chances  were  taken  by 
the  enemy  without  changing  the  position  of  his  boats.  The  guns  of  the 


C’HAl*.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


533 


Louisiana  were  discharged  at  random  as  she  floated  down,  and  the  boat 
Anally  blew  up  near  Fort  Saint  Philip,  scattering  its  fragments  every- 
where within  and  around  the  fort,  killing  1 of  our  men  and  wounding 
3 or  4 others. 

Oaptain  McIntosh,  G.  S.  Navy,  who  had  been  severely  wounded  in 
the  discharge  of  his  duty  on  the  night  of  the  enemy^s  passage,  and  Avho 
was  then  lying  in  a tent  at  that  fort,  was  nearly  killed  also. 

As  far  as  I could  learn,  however,  the  Louisiana  was  fired  prior  to  the 
time  that  the  enemy’s  boats  with  white  flags  came  to  an  anchor  abreast 
of  the  forts  to  negotiate.  She  was  fired  in  her  first  and  original  position 
without  a change  of  any  kind  since  her  arrival  at  the  forts. 

The  terms  of  the  capitulation  are  attached  hereto  as  document  W j in 
addition  to  which  Commander  Porter  verbally  agreed  not  to  haul  down 
the  Confederate  flag  or  hoist  the  Federal  until  the  officers  should  get 
away  from  the  forts. 

The  officers  of  Fort  Jackson  and  the  Saint  Mary’s  Cannoneers  left 
about  4 p.  m.  for  the  city,  on  board  of  the  United  States  gunboat  Ken- 
nebec, and  arrived  on  the  morning  of  the  29th  in  New  Orleans.  The 
officers  of  Fort  Saint  Philip,  were  sent  up  the  next  day’,  and  all  the  men 
subsequently  within  a few  days,  as  transportation  could  be  furnished, 
excepting  the  men  who  revolted  on  the  night  of  the  27th,  many  of  whom 
enlisted  with  the  enemy. 

Upon  my  arrival  in  the  city  I found  that  the  enemy’s  vessels  were 
lying  oft*  the  town,  and  that  no  flag,  excepting  that  of  the  State  of  Lou- 
isiana, on  the  city  hall,  was  visilJe  upon  the  shore.  I also  learned  that 
Flag-Officer  Farragut  had  directed  it  to  be  hauled  down  and  the  United 
States  flag  hoisted  in  its  stead,  upon  the  penalty  of  shelling  the  city 
within  forty-eight  hours  if  the  demand  was  not  complied  with,  and  that 
he  had  warned  the  city  authorities  to  remove  the  women  and  children 
within  the  time  specified.  I therefore  deemed  it  my  duty’  to  call  at  once 
upon  the  mayor  at  the  city  hall  and  inform  him  of  the  fate  of  the  forts 
below,  which  1 did  accordingly’. 

Learning  there  from  one  of  his  aides  that  the  major-general  command- 
ing the  department  was  still  in  the  city,  I called  upon  him  in  person  and 
verbally  reported  the  main  incidents  of  the  bombardment,  the  passage 
of  the  enemy,  and  the  capitulation  of  the  forts. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  the  report  of  Lieut.  Col.  E.  Hig- 
gins, Twenty-second  Regiment  Louisiana  Volunteers,  commanding  Forts 
Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  as  well  as  the  several  reports  of  Capt.  M.  T. 
Squires,  Louisiana  Artillery,  senior  officer  in  charge  of  Fort  Saint  Philip, 
and  those  of  the  different  company  and  battery  commanders,  together 
with  the  surgeons’  reports  of  the  killed  and  wounded. 

The  report  of  Colonel  Szymanski,  commanding  the  Chalmette  Regi- 
ment at  the  quarantine,  has  not  been  received  by  me,  so  that  I am  un- 
able to  report  upon  his  operations. 

I fully  indorse  the  just  praise  bestowed  in  the  inclosed  reports  upon 
all  the  officers  at  both  forts,  and  warmly  return  them  my  thanks.  They 
all  distinguished  themselves  by  cool  courage,  skill,  and  patriotism 
throughout  the  entire  bombardment,  and  by  the  patient  fortitude  with 
which  they^  bore  the  several  trying  ordeals  of  water,  fire,  and  the  ener- 
getic fury  of  the  enemy  ’s  protracted  and  continuous  fire. 

I must  also  bear  testimony  to  the  cheerful  courage  and  prompt  and 
willing  obedience  with  which  the  men  performed  their  duties  through- 
out the  bombardment  and  up  to  the  sad  night  when  they  took  the  rash 
and  disgraceful  step  of  rising  against  their  officers,  breaking  through 
all  discipline,  and  leading  to  such  disastrous  and  fatal  consequences.  I 


534  OPERATIONS  IN  .W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

can  charitably  account  for  it  only  on  the  grounds  of  great  reaction  after 
the  intense  physical  strain  of  many  weary  days  and  nights  of  terrible 
fire,  through  which  they  were  necessaril}^  subjected  to  every  privation 
from  circumstances  beyond  our  control,  but  which  they  had  not  the 
moral  courage  to  share  and  sustain  with  their  officers,  all  of  whom  were 
subjected  to  the  same  hardships  in  every  particular. 

To  Lieut.  Col.  E.  Higgins,  commanding  the  forts,  my  thanks  are 
esi)ecially  due  for  his  indefatigable  labors  in  preparing  his  heavy  bat- 
teries preparatory  to  the  attack,  almost  in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  and 
for  the  quiet,  skillful,  and  judicious  manner  in  which  he  caused  them  to 
be  I'ought.  He  was  present  everywhere,  and  did  his  whole  duty  well 
and  thoroughly. 

Copt.  M.  T.  Squires,  Louisiana  Eegiment  of  Artillery,  as  senior  officer 
in  charge  of  Fort  Saint  Philip,  under  the  orders  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Higgins,  commanding,  fully  sustained  every  anticipation  entertained  of 
his  gallantry,  skill,  and  efficiency. 

During  the  first  day’s  bombardment,  when  Captain  Anderson  was 
wounded,  my  aide-de-camp  (Lieut.  William  M.  Bridges,  Louisiana  Artil- 
lery) volunteered  to  command  the  two  10  inch  columbiads  on  the  main 
work,  and  I return  him  my  thanks  for  the  gallant  and  efficient  manner 
in  which  he  fought  them  during  the  rest  of  the  action. 

I take  great  jdeasure  in  making  personal  mention  of  my  volunteer 
aides,  Capts.  William  J.  Seymour  and  J.  R.  Smith,  for  the  valuable  assist- 
ance which  they  rendered  me  at  all  times. 

My  thanks  are  also  due  to  Drs.  Bradbury  and  Foster,  who  volunteered 
their  services  to  assist  Assist.  Surgs.  p.  Burke  and  C.  D.  Lewis  at  Forts 
Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  respectively,  and  most  efiSciently  did  they  aid 
in  this  departlment.  Dr.  Bradbury  remained  at  Fort  Jackson  until  its 
fall,  and  was  paroled.  Dr.  Foster,  at  my  request,  accompanied  the 
wounded  soldiers  to  the  city  on  the  Confederate  States  steamer  McRae. 

Messrs.  Fulda  and  Stickney  and  Sergt.  J.  R.  Poindexter,  Fourth  Mis- 
sissippi Volunteers,  telegraph  operators,  rendered  the  most  valuable 
services  in  keeping  open  our  communication  above  and  below  under  the 
most  dangerous  and  difficult  circumstances. 

Although  we  have  failed  in  our  mission  of  keeping  the  enemy’s  fleet 
from  passing  the  forts,  and  have  been  subjected  to  the  deep  humiliation 
of  surrendering  the  charge  intrusted  to  our  keeping  to  the  enemies  of 
our  country,  I must  nevertheless  state,  in  common  justice  to  myself  and 
those  under  my  command,  that  to  the  very  best  of  our  ability,  with  the 
means  at  our  disposal,  our  whole  duty  was  performed  faithfully,  honestly, 
and  fearlessly.  If  all  had  to  be  gone  through  with  again,  under  similar 
events  ,and  circumstances,  I know  that  we  should  be  forced  to  the  same 
results  and  consequences. 

Great  as  the  disaster  is,  it  is  but  the  sheer  result  of  that  lack  of  cheer- 
ful and  hearty  co  operation  from  the  defenses  afloat  which  we  had  every 
right  to  expect  and  to  the  criminal  negligence  of  not  lighting  up  the 
river  at  night  when  the  danger  was  imminent  and  the  movements  of  the 
enemy  absolutely  known  almost  to  the  hour  of  the  final  attack.  Except 
for  the  cover  afforded  by  the  obscurity  of  the  darkness  I shall  always 
remain  satisfied  that  the  enemy  would  never  have  succeeded  in  passing 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 

I am,  very  resiiectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUNCAN, 

Brigadier- General^  late  Commanding  Coast  Defenses, 

Mqj.  J.  G.  Pickett, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen..,  Department  No.  1,  Camp  Moore,  La. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


535 


New  Orleans,  La.,  May  13,  18C2. 

Major:  In  addition  to  the  foregoii).i?  report,  I wisli  to  add  that  upon 
the  arrival  of  the  paroled  enlisted  men  from  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint 
Philip  in  the  city  1 endeavored,  to  tlie  best  of  my  ability,  to  see  that 
they  were  properly  cared  for  until  such  time  as  they  could  be  sent  out 
of  town. 

As  far  as  it  could  be  done,  they  were  paid  in  part  for  the^time  due,  and 
arrangements  were  also  made  through  the  city  authorities  and  tlie  city 
safety  committee  to  have  them  boarded  and  lodged  temporarily,  all  with 
the  view  of  preventing  them  from  going  over  to  the  enemy  through  dis- 
tress and  starvation.  In  this  I was  veiy  much  assisted  by  Oapt.  INI.  T. 
Squires  and  First  Lieut.  L.  B.  Taylor,  Louisiana  Eegiment  of  Artillery. 
Notwithstanding  that  they  were  thus  ami)ly  i)rovided  for,  scores  of  them 
have  been  daily  going  over  to  the  enemy  and  enlisting  since,  until  now 
there  are  but  a very  few  left  from  either  fort  not  in  the  ranks  of  the 
enemy.  Although  I really  did  think  at  the  time  of  the  surrender  that 
some  few  of  the  men  were  loyal,  the  facts  which  have  since  come  to  light 
have  perfectly  satisfied  me  that  nearly  every  man  in  both  forts  was  thor- 
oughly implicated  and  concerned  in  the  revolt  on  the  night  of  April  27, 
with  the  exception  of  the  company  of  Saint  Mary’s  Cannoneers,  composed 
mostly  of  planters. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUNCAN, 

Brigadier  General^  late  Commanding  Coast  Defenses, 

Maj.  J.  G.  Pickett, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.j  Department  No.  1,  Camj)  Moore^  La, 

[Inclosure  A.] 


Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  La., 

April  G,  1862. 

Captain:  Keep  your  boats  in  constant  readiness  at  all  times  for  the 
enemy’s  approach.  Should  he  attack,  all  of  your  fleet  must  be  kept  above 
the  raft,  and  such  of  your  boats  as  have  stern  guns  should  lie  in  the  mid- 
dle of  the  stream,  above  the  raft  and  without  the  field  of  our  fire,  and  use 
these  guns  against  the  enemy.  Should  any  boat  of  the  enemy  by  any 
means  get  above  the  raft,  you  must  instantly  ram  it  with  determination 
and  vigor  at  aU  risks  and  every  sacrifice.  All  signal  mast-head  lights 
should  be  kept  extinguished  at  night  or  never  hoisted. 

Trusting  to  your  known  energy  and  to  the  great  expectations  antici- 
pated of  the  river  fleet  by  your  friends,  I have  every  confidence  that 
your  whole  duty  will  be  thoroughly  performed. 


Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant 


Capt.  John  A.  Stephenson, 

Commanding  Direr  Fleei^  present. 


1 K.  DUNCAN, 
Brigadier-  General, 


[Inclosure  B.] 


Hdqrs.  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  La., 

April  9,  1862. 

Captain:  Keep  one  of  your  boats  constantly  below  night  and  day 
opposite  the  wooded  point,  where  you  can  watch  the  movements  of  the 
enemy.  Signal  us  his  approach  and  the  number  of  vessels  seen  coming 
ui),  and  give  me  a copy  of  the  signals  for  our  government  at  the  forts. 


536  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

1 wish  you  to  take  the  entire  control  of  the  fire  rafts,  and  you  will  be 
assisted  therein  by  the  steamers  Star,  Algerine,  and  such  other  boats 
as  I can  procure  from  the  city  tor  the  purpose.  Your  own  knowledge 
of  the  river  and  the  currents  will  enable  you  to  set  them  adrift  at  such 
time  as  your  judgment  warrants. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUKCAN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 

Capt.  John  A.  Stephenson, 

Commanding  River  Fleets  present. 


f Inclosure  C.] 


Gunboat  Jackson,  April  18,  1862. 

Dear  Sir:  Yours  just  received.  The  fire  barge  was  sent  down,  as  I 
supposed,  by  your  order.  Captain  Grant  accompanied  me  to  select  a 
proper  place  to  let  her  go.  She  was  fired  by  my  order,  but  was  not 
aware  that  she  was  too  close  to  the  fort  j but  the  eddy  current,  after 
firing,  probably  brought  her  into  close  proximity  to  the  fort.  I regret 
the  affair  was  an  abortion. 

Eespectfully,  F.  B.  EENSHAW, 

C.  S.  Navy. 

Colonel  Higgins. 

[Inclosure  D.J 


Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Off  Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  22,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  yours  of 
this  date,  asking  me  to  place  the  Louisiana  in  position  below  the  raft 
this  evening,  if  possible.  This  vessel  was  hurried  away  from  New 
Orleans  before  the  steam  power  and  batteries  were  ready  for  service, 
without  a crew,  and  in  many  other  respects  very  incomplete,  and  this 
condition  of  things  is  but  partially  remedied  now.  She  is  not  yet  pre- 
pared to  offer  battle  to  the  enemy,  but  should  he  attempt  to  pass  the 
forts  we  wiU  do  all  we  can  to  prevent  it,  and  it  was  for  this  purpose 
only  that  she  was  placed  in  position  where  necessity  might  force  her 
into  action,  inadequately  prepared  as  she  is  at  this  moment. 

We  have  now  at  work  on  board  about  50  mechanics  as  well  as  her 
own  crew  and  those  from  other  vessels,  doing  work  essential  to  the 
preparation  of  the  vessel  for  battle.  Under  these  circumstances  it 
would,  in  my  estimation,  be  hazarding  too  much  to  place  her  under  the 
fire  of  the  enemy.  Every  effort  is  being  made  to  prepare  her  for  the 
relief  of  Fort  Jackson,  the  condition  of  which  is  fully  felt  by  me,  and 
the  very  moment  I can  venture  to  face  our  enemy  with  any  reasonable 
chance  of  success,  be  assured,  general,  I will  do  it,  and  trust  that  the 
result  will  show  you  that  I am  now  pursuing  the  right  course. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  K.  MITCHELL, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Naval  Forces  Lower  Mississippi. 

General  Johnson  K.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Coast  Defenses,  Fort  Jackson,  La. 

p.  s. — The  Jackson,  with  launch  No.  3,  will  go  up  to  the  quarantine 
this'  afternoon  to  watch  the  enemy,  as  suggested  in  your  note  this 
morning. 

Eespectfully,  &c.,  J.  K.  M. 


Chat.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


537 


[Inclosuro  E ] 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Near  Fort  JacJcson,  La..,  April  23,  18G2. 

General  : On  tlie  receipt  last  niglit  of  your  second  communication 
of  yesterday’s  date,  asking  me  to  place  this  vessel  under  the  fire  of  the 
enemy,  I consulted  the  commanding  officers  of  the  Confederate  States 
naval  vessels  present  on  the  subject,  and  hereAvith  annex  a copy  of 
their  opinion,  sustaining  my  own  views  on  the  subject. 

I feel  the  importance  of  affording  relief  to  your  command  as  soon  as 
possible  j but,  general,  at  the  same  time  I feel,  and  I believe  that  I 
know,  the  importance  to  the  safety  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip 
and  the  city  of  New  Orleans  of  having  this  vessel  in  iiroper  condition 
before  seeking  an  encounter  with  the  enemy.  If  he  seeks  one  or 
attempts  the  passage  of  the  forts  before  this  vessel  is  ready  I shall 
meet  him,  however  unjirepared  I may  be. 

We  have  an  additional  force  of  mechanics  from  the  city  this  morn- 
ing, and  I hope  that  by  to-morrow  night  the  motive  power  of  the  Lou- 
isiana will  be  ready,  and  that  in  the  mean  time  her  battery  will  be  in 
place  and  other  pre]iarations  will  be  completed  so  as  to  enable  her  to 
act  against  the  enemy.  When  ready  you  will  be  immediately  advised. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  K.  MITCHELL, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Naval  Forces  Lower  Mississippi. 

General  Johnson  K.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Coast  Defenses,  Fort  JacJcson,  La. 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Near  Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  22,  18G2. 

Two  communications  having  this  day  been  received  from  Brigadier- 
General  Duncan  (herewith  attached,  marked  Nos.  1 and  3,  and  also  the 
answer  of  Commander  J.  K.  Mitchell,  No.  1,  marked  No.  2),  requesting 
that  the  Louisiana  be  placed  in  position  below  the  raft  in  the  river,  near 
Fort  Jackson,  a consultation  was  held  by  Commander  J.  K.  Mitchell 
with  Commander  McIntosh  and  Lieutenants  Commanding  Huger  and 
Warley,  who  fully  sustained  the  views  of  Commander  Mitchell,  as  ex- 
pressed in  his  reply  (marked  No.  2),  declining  to  comply  with  the  request 
of  Brigadier-General  Duncan. 

C.  F.  MCINTOSH, 

Commander,  C.  S.  Navy. 

T.  B.  HUGEB, 

Lieutenant  Commanding, 

A.  F.  WARLEY, 

Lieutenant  Commanding, 

Lieut.  Georue  S.  Shryock,  C.  S.  Navy, 

Aide  to  Commanding  Officer, 

[Inclosure  F.] 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  22,  18G2. 

General  : Your  two  notes  of  this  date  have  been  received.  A fire 
has  been  ordered  to  be  built  below  Saint  Philip,  as  you  requested,  except 
that  it  will  be  on  the  beach,  and  a raft  will  be  kept  ready  to  fire  and 
turned  adrift,  as  you  requested,  near  Fort  Jackson,  in  the  event  of  the 
apprehended  attack  being  made  by  the  enemy  to-night.  I shall  also 


538  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chav.  XVI. 

direct  a vigilant  lookout  to  be  kept  by  all  the  vessels,  and  co-operate 
with  you  to  prevent  his  passage  of  the  forts  at  every  hazard. 

Your  request  respecting  the  report  of  the  bad  condition  of  the  engines 
of  the  Mosher  will  claim  my  attention  as  soon  as  possible. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  K.  MITCHELL, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Naval  Forces  Lower  Mississippi. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  K.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Coast  Defenses  at  Fort  Jaclxson,  La. 

[Inclosure  G.] 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Off  Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  22,  1862. 

Gentlemen  : The  steamers  Mosher  and  Belle  Algerine  having  been 
represented  as  being  unfit  for  service,  you  will  please  to  examine  them 
carefully  without  delay,  and  report  to  me  in  duplicate  their  condition. 
In  the  performance  of  this  duty  please  state  the  cause  of  any  damage 
you  may  discover,  with  such  recommendations  as  in  your  judgment 
you  may  deem  proper. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  K.  MITCHELL, 

Commanding  C.  8.  Naval  Forces  Lower  Mississippi. 

Lieutenant  Huger, 

Asst.  Engr.,  Comdg.  C.  8.  8teamer  McRae,  off  Fort  Jackson^  La. 

P.  S. — Lieutenant  Huger  will  fill  up  the  blanks  with  the  names  of 
the  two  engineers  he  thinks  most  suitable  for  the  service  belonging  to 
the  McEae. 

J.  K.  M. 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

April  22,  1862. 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  your  order  we  have  held  a survey  upon  the 
steamer  Belle  Algerine  and  the  tug  Mosher.  The  latter  has,  we  t hink, 
loosened  the  after-bearing  of  her  shaft.  This  we  can,  I think,  obviate 
in  a few  hours.  The  Belle  Algerine  leaks  badlj-  in  the  bows,  from  two 
holes  knocked  in  her,  the  captain  reports,  while  working  at  the  raft  and 
also  while  landing  guns  at  Fort  Saint  Philip.  This  we  can  also  remedy, 
and  are  now  doing  so.  I trust  by  to-night  both  vessels  will  be  service- 
able. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  B.  HUGER, 
Commanding  the  McRae. 

SAMUEL  BROCK, 
8enior  Engineer  McRae. 

General  : Above  you  will  see  the-  report  on  the  vessels  reported  to 
you  as  unfit  for  service.  I send  it  for  your  information. 

Respectfullj^,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  K.  MITCHELL, 
Commanding  C.  8.  Naval  Forces. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  K.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


539 


flnclosuro  IT.] 

Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  23,  18G2. 

Captain  : I am  of  tbe  oiiinion  tliat  the  mortar  practice  of  the  enemy 

gainst  Fort  Jackson  must  be  nearly  exhausted,  and  that  there  is  every 
indication  that  the  enemy,  as  the  next  plan  of  attack,  is  about  to  move 
his  large  vessels  to  the  point  of  woods  and  open  upon  us  with  his  broad- 
sides. One  of  the  large  vessels  has  already  been  brought  up  and  iilaced 
in  ])Osition.  Should  the  above  prove  to  be  the  case,  it  is  imperatively 
and  absolutely  necessary  that  the  batteries  of  the  Louisiana  should  be 
brought  into  action  at  all  hazards,  as  well  as  those  of  Forts  Jackson  and 
Saint  Philip. 

A proper  position  for  the  Louisiana  would  be  on  the  Fort  Saint  Philip 
side,  a short  distance  below  the  raft  and  close  to  the  shore,  which  will 
give  us  three  direct  and  cross  fires  upon  the  point  of  attack. 

Earnestly  calling  your  attention  to  this  subject,  as  you  can  see  from 
your  position  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  can  consequently  know 
when  to  act,  I remain,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUNCAN, 

Brigadier-General^  Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 

Capt.  J.  K.  Mitchell, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces  Lower  Mississippi  River. 

[Inclosure  I.J 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Near  Fort  Jaclcson^  La.,  April  23,  18G2. 

General:  I am  in  receipt  of  your  letter  of  this  date,  in  which  you 
express  your  belief  that  the  enemy  is  about  to  change  his  place  of  attack 
and  open  the  broadside  of  his  larger  ships  on  the  forts,  and  in  which 
you  make  certain  suggestious  as  to  the  position  to  be  taken  by  this 
ship. 

By  reference  to  a letter  of  mine  to  you  of  yesterday’s  date,  and  of 
No.  1 of  this  date,  you  will  be  apprised  of  the  condition  of  this  shij). 
Should  an  attack  be  made,  as  anticipated,  I shall  be  governed  by  cir- 
cumstances and  do  all  I can  against  the  enemy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  K.  MITCHELL, 

Commanding  C.  8.  Naval  Forces  Lower  Mississippi. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  K.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Coast  Defenses.,  Fort  JacJi'son,  La. 

[Inclosuro  J.] 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Off  Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  23,  18G2. 

Sir  : I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a communication  received  on  the 
21st  instant  from  Captain  Stephenson,  from  which  you  will  perceive 
that,  notwithstanding  General  Lovell’s  order  to  him,  this  letter  so  quali- 
fies my  authority  as  to  relieve  me  from  all  responsibility  as  to  the  laove- 
ments  of  the  vessels  of  the  river  fleet  under  his  command. 

I have  the  honor  to  be.  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

JNO.  K.  MITCHELL,  ' 
Commanding  C.  S.  Forces  Lower  Mississippi. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  K.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Coast  Defenses,  Fort  JacJcso7i,  La. 


540  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [CuAr.  XVI. 

[Inclosuro  E.] 

Eiver  Defenses,  0.  S.  Gunboat  Warrior, 

Fort  Jaclcson,  La.^  April  21,  1862. 

Sir  : I am  iu  receipt  of  an  order  from  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell,  dated  20tli 
instant,  in  which  I am  directed  to  place  myself  and  my  whole  command 
at  this  point  under  your  orders. 

Every  officer  and  man  on  the  river  defense  expedition  joined  it  ivith 
the  condition  that  it  was  to  be  independent  of  the  Nav^y  and  that  it 
would  not  be  governed  by  the  regulations  of  the  Navy  or  be  commanded 
by  naval  officers.  In  the  face  of  the  enemy  I will  not  say  more. 

I will  co-operate  with  you  and  do  nothing  without  your  approbation, 
and  will  emleavor  to  carry  out  your  wishes  to  the  best  of  my  ability, 
but  in  my  own  way  as  to  details  and  the  handling  of  my  boats ; but  I 
expect  the  vessels  under  my  charge  to  remain  as  a separate  command. 
All  orders  for  their  movements  addressed  to  me  will  be  promptly  exe- 
cuted if  practicable,  and  I undertake  to  be  responsible  for  their  efficiency 
when  required. 

I suppose  this  is  all  that  is  intended  by  the  order  of  Major-General 
Lovell  or  that  will  be  expected  I'rom  me  by  you. 

Kespectfully,  yours,  &c., 

JEO.  A.  STEPHENSON, 

Senior  Captain^  Comdg.  River  Fleet  at  Fort  JacJcson,  La. 

Commander  J.  K.  Mitchell, 

C.  S.  Navy. 


p.  s. — Our  signals  should  be  made 'to  assimilate  at  once.  Captain 
Eenshaw  and  myself  could  arrange  this  if  you  wish,  as  no  doubt  you 
are  greatly  fatigued  and  still  have  much  to  do  and  arrange.  Anything 
I can  do,  rely  on  its  being  done  promptly  and  cheerfully. 

Yours,  &c., 

J.  A.  S. 


[Inclosure  L.] 


Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  23,  1862. 

Captain  : The  euemy  has  just  sent  up  a small  boat  and  planted  a 
series  of  white  flags  o'u  the  Fort  Saint  Philip  side,  commencing  about 
350  yards  above  the  lone  tree.  It  is  the  probable  position  of  his 
ships  in  the  new  line  of  attack,  which  in  my  opinion  he  contemplates  for 
attacking  Fort  Jackson  with  his  large  vessels.  As  you  may  not  have 
seen  this  operation,  I furnish  you  with  the  information. 

Please  keep  the  river  well  lit  up  with  fire  rafts  to-night,  as  the  attack 
may  be  made  at  any  time. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUNCAN, 

Brigadier- General  J Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 

Capt.  J.  K.  Mitchell, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces  Loiver  Mississippi  River. 


f Inclosure  M.] 

Fort  Jackson,  La.,  Ax^rll  24,  1862 — 3.30  a.  m. 
Captain  : As  I anticipated  and  informed  you  yesterday,  the  enemy 
are  taking  up  their  position  at  the  present  moment  with  their  large 


Chap.  XVLJ 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


541 


ships  on  the  Fort  Saint  Philip  shore,  to  operate  against  Fort  Jackson. 
They  are  placing  themselves  boldly,  with  their  lights  at  their  mast-heads. 
You  are  assuming  a fearful  responsibility  if  you  do  not  come  at  once  to 
our  assistance  with  the  Louisiana  and  the  fleet.  I can  say  no  more. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUNCAN, 

Brigadier- General j Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 
Capt.  J.  K.  Mitchell, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces  Lower  Mississippi  River. 


[Inclosuro  N.] 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Near  Fort  Saint  Philip^  La.,  April  24,  1862. 

General:  On  returning  to  the  Louisiana  I find  that  we  have  no 
tender  on  whose  steam  power  we  can  rely,  and  many  of  the  volunteer 
troops  on  board  of  the  W.  Burton  are  intoxicated.  These  circumstances, 
as  well  as  the  exhausted  condition  of  our  own  crew  and  excessive  diffi- 
culty in  handling  the  vessel,  will  prevent  our  taking  the  position,  at 
least  to-day,  that  I proposed  and  was  arranged  between  us  this  forenoon. 
I will,  however,  as  you  suggested  in  your  communication,  take  up  a 
position  above  to  protect  the  approaches  in  that  direction.  Having  no 
adequate  motive  power  of  our  own,  it  will  be  an  easy  matter  for  the 
enemy’s  vessels  that  have  it  to  take  up  such  a position  that  our  guns 
cannot  reach  him  for  want  of  elevation  or  be  brought  to  bear  upon  him. 
I will,  however,  do  all  I can  to  keep  him  back  from  above.  The  McEae 
has  lost  her  9-inch  gunsj  of  course  we  cannot  expect  much  assistance 
from  her. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  K.  MITCHELL, 

Commanding  C.  8.  Naval  Forces^  Lower  Mississippi. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  K.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Coast  Defenses^  Fort  Jaclcson^  La. 


[Inclosure  O.] 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Louisiana, 

Fort  Saint  Philip^  La.,  April  21,  1862. 

General  : Your  second  and  third  notes  of  this  date  are  at  hand. 
We  are  in  a helpless  condition  for  the  want  of  tug-boats.  The  W.  Bur- 
ton is  crippled  and  the  Landis  also,  and  the  gunboat  Defiance  will  not 
do  anything  for  us.  If  she  comes  within  my  reach  I will  deprive  her 
caiitain  of  his  command  by  force,  if  necessary.  The  anchor  we  have 
down  cannot  purchase,  and  we  are  afraid  to  ship  it  to  move  about  300 
yards  higher  up,  where  we  can  be  better  secured.  We  shall  probably 
remain  where  we  are,  and  do  all  we  can  to  defeat  the  enemy  should  he 
attack  us  again.  It  will  be  out  of  our  power,  I am  afraid,  to  light  uji 
the  bank  below  Saint  Philip  to-night  or  to  set  adrift  fire  boats,  as  none 
are  at  hand  and  they  have  all  disappeared,  apparently. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

• JNO.  K.  MITCHELL, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Naval  ForceSj  Lower  Mississippi. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  K.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Coast  Defenses^  Fort  Jaclcson^  La. 


542  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Ciiap.  XVL 

[Inclosuro  P.] 

Fort  Jackson,  La.,  Aj^ril  24,  1862. 

Captain  : From  all  we  can  see  and  learn,  the  enemy,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  one  or  two  gunboats,  has  passed  up  the  river,  so  that  there  will 
be  no  use  in  changing  your  }>resent  position  to  one  farther  above.  I 
regret  to  learn  the  condition  of  the  volunteer  troops  on  board  the  W. 
Burton;  this,  together  with  the  exhausted  condition  of  your  crew,  will 
prevent  your  taking  up  the  position  below  which  was  agreed  upon  this 
morning  for  the  present.  You  may  be  able  to  take  it  up,  however,  when 
your  crew  recover  from  their  fatigue  and  when  you  are  able  to  control 
the  irregularities  of  the  volunteers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUNCAN, 

Brigadier-General^  Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 

Capt.  J.  K.  Mitchell, 

Commanding  G.  iS.  Naval  Forces^  Lower  Mississijgpi  River. 


[Inclosuro  Q.] 

Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  24,  1862. 

Captain  : As  I have  no  boats  of  any  kind,  I must  ask  of  you  to  light 
up  the  river  with  fire  barges  to  night  if  it  possibly  lies  in  your  power. 
The  absence  of  light  greatly  impairs  the  accuracy  and  effectiveness  of 
our  fire  upon  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUNCAN, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 

Capt.  J.  K.  Mitchell, 

Commanding  G.  S.  Naval  Forces^  Lower  Mississippi  River. 

[Inclosure  K.] 

Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  24,  1862. 

Captain  : The  lower  schooner  will  be  lighted  by  firing  her  from  a 
row-boat  from  Fort  Saint  Philip  at  early  dusk.  As  this  light  dies  away 
the  next  one  above  will  be  fired,  and  so  on  all  night. 

Unless  you  can  better  yourself  materially,  I would  not  advise  any 
movement  on  your  part  from  your  present  position,  owing  to  all  the  ad- 
verse circumstances  mentioned  in  your  letter. 

In  regard  to  the  Defiance,  the  authority  over  her  which  I formerly  had 
has  been  transferred  to  you,  but  we  will  freely  lend  you  any  assistance 
which  you  may  require  in  deposing  her  commander  or  in  exercising  your 
authority  over  her. 

Keep  a vigilant  lookout  for  another  attack  to-night,  when  we  will 
mutually  support  each  other  and  do  all  that  we  possibly  can. 

Captain  Squires  has  been  directed  by  Colonel  Higgins  to  furnish  you 
such  assistance  as  you  may  require. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  DUN43AN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Coast  Defenses, 

Capt.  J.  K.  Mitchell, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Naval  Forees,  Loiver  3Iississippi  River, 


CiLU*  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


543 


[Inclosurc  S.j 


U.  S.  Steamer  IIarriet  Lane, 

Mississippi  River ^ April  20,  1802. 

Sir:  When  I last  demanded  the  suiTender  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint 
Philip  I had  no  positive  assurance  of  the  success  of  our  vessels  in  pass- 
ing safely  the  batteries  on  the  river.  Since  then  I have  received  com- 
munications from  Flag-Officer  Farragiit,  who  is  now  in  possession  of 
Kew  Orleans.  Our  troops  are  or  will  be  in  possession  of  the  prominent 
points  on  the  river,  and  a sufficient  force  has  been  x)osted  outside  of  the 
bayous  to  cut  off  all  communication  and  prevent  sui)i)lies. 

No  man  could  consider  it  dishonorable  to  surrender  under  these  cir- 
cumstances, especially  when  no  advantage  can  arise  by  longer  holding 
out,  and  by  yielding  gracefully  he  can  save  the  further  effusion  of  blood. 
You  have  defehded  the  forts  gallantly,  and  no  more  can  be  asked  of  you. 

I feel  authorized  to  offer  you  terms  sufficiently  honorable  to  relieve 
you  from  any  feeling  of  humiliation.  1 he  officers  will  be  permitted  to 
retire  on  parole,  with  their  side-arms,  not  to  serve  again  until  regularly 
exchanged.  All  private  property  will  be  respected ; only  the  arms  and 
munitions  and  the  vessels  lying  near  the  foi  ts  will  be  surrendered  to  the 
United  States  Government.  No  damage  must  be  done  to  the  defenses. 
The  soldiers  also  will  be  paroled  and  be  permitted  to  return  to  their 
homes,  giving  up  their  arms. 

I am  aware  that  you  can  hold  out  some  little  time  longer,  and  am  also 
aware  of  the  exact  condition,  as  reported  to  us  by  a deserter,  which  con- 
vinces me  that  you  will  only  be  inflicting  on  yourself  and  those  under 
you  unnecessary  discomforts  without  any  good  results  arising  from  so 
doing. 

Your  i)ort  has  long  been  closed  to  the  world,  by  which  serious  injury 
has  been  experienced  by  many  loyal  citizens.  I trust  that  you  will  not 
lend  yourself  to  the  further  injury  of  their  interests,  where  it  can  only 
entail  calamity  and  bloodshed  without  any  possible  hope  of  success  or 
relief  to  your  Ibrts. 

Your  surrender  is  a mere  question  of  time,  which  you  know  is  not  of 
any  extent  j and  I therefore  urge  you  to  meet  my  present  proposition. 
By  doing  so  you  can  put  an  end  to  a state  of  affkirs  which  will  only  in- 
flict injury  upon  all  those  under  you,  who  have  strong  claims  upon  your 
consideration. 

1 remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  D.  POETEE, 
Commanding  Mortar  Fleet. 

Col.  Edward  Higgins, 

Comdg.  Confederate  Forces  in  Forts  Jaclcson  and  Saint  Philip. 


V [Inclosure  T.] 


Headquarters  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip, 

April  27,  1862. 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  26th  instant,  demanding  the  surrender  of  these 
forts,  has  been  received.  In  reply  thereto  I have  to  state  that  no  official 
information  has  been  received  by  me  from  our  own  authorities  that  the 
city  of  New  Orleans  has  been  surrendered  to  the  forces  of  Flag-Officer 


544  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Farragut,  and  until  such  information  is  received  no  proposition  for  a 
surrender  can  be  for  a moment  entertained  hefe. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HIGGINS, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding. 

Commander  David  D.  Porter,  U.  S.  Navy, 

Commanding  Mortar  Fleet. 

linclosuro  U.] 

Fort  Jackson,  La.,  April  27,  1862. 

To  the  Soldiers  of  Forts  Jaelcson  and  Saint  Philip: 

You  have  nobly,  gallantly,  and  heroically  sustained  with  courage  and 
fortitude  the  terrible  ordeals  of  fire,  water,  and  a hail  of  shot  and  shell 
wholly  unsurpassed  during  the  present  war.  But  more  remains  to  be 
done.  The  safety  of  New  Orleans  and  the  cause  of  the  Southern  Con- 
federacy, our  homes,  tamilies,  and  everything  dear  to  man  yet  depend 
upon  our  exertions.  We  are  just  as  capable  of  repelling  the  enemy 
to-day  as  we  were  before  the  bombardment.  Twice  has  the  enemy  de- 
manded your  surrender  and  twice  has  he  been  refused.  Your  officers 
have  every  confidence  in  your  courage  and  patriotism,  and  feel  every 
assurance  that  you  will  cheerfully  and  with  alacrity  obey  all  orders  and 
do  your  whole  duty  as  men  and  as  becomes  the  well-tried  garrisons  of 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip.  Be  vigilant,  therefore,  and  stand  by 
your  guns,  and  all  will  yet  be  well. 

J.  K.  DUNCAN, 

Brigadier-General.,  Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 


[Inclosure  V.] 

Headquarters  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip, 

April  28,  1862. 

Sir  : Upon  mature  deliberation  it  has  been  decided  to  accept  the  terms 
of  surrender  of  these  forts  under  the  conditions  offered  by  you  in  your 
letter  of  the  26th  instant,  viz,  that  the  officers  and  men  shall  be  paroled, 
officers  retiring  with  their  side-arms.  We  have  no  control  over  the  ves- 
sels afloat. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HIGGINS, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Coynm anding. 

Commander  David  D.  Porter,  U.  S.  Navy, 

Commanding  Mortar  Fleet. 


finclosuro  W.] 

U.  S.  Steamer  Harriet  Lane,  * 
Forts  Jaelcson  and  Saint  Philip,  Mississippi  River,  April  28,  1862. 

By  articles  of  capitulation  entered  into  April  28,  1 862,  between  Com- 
mander David  D.  Porter,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  the  United  States 
mortar  flotilla,  of  the  one  part,  and  Brig.  Gen.  J.  K.  Duncan,  command- 
ing the  coast  defenses,  and  Lieut.  Col.  Edward  Higgins,  commanding 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  of  the  other  part,  it  is  mutually  agreed: 

First.  That  Brigadier-General  Duncan  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hig- 
gins shall  surrender  to  the  mortar  flotilla  Forts  J acksou  and  Saint  Philip, 


Chap.  XVI.J 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


545 


the  arms,  munitions  of  war,  and  all  the  appurtenances  thereunto  helonj?- 
ing,  together  with  all  public  property  that  may  be  under  their  charge. 

Second.  It  is  agreed  by  Commander  David  D.  Porter,  commanding 
the  mortar  flotilla,  that  Brigadier-General  Duncan  and  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Higgins,  together  with  the  ofificeys  under  their  command,  shall  be 
permitted  to  retain  their  side-arms,  and  that  all  private  x>roperty  shall 
be  respected.  Furthermore,  that  they  shall  give  their  parole  of  honor 
not  to  serve  in  arms  against  the  Government  of  the  United  States  until 
they  are  regularly  exchanged. 

Third.  It  is  further  agreed  by  Commander  David  D.  Porter,  command- 
ing the  mortar  flotilla,  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  Government, 
that  the  non-commissioned  officers,  privates,  and  musicians  shall  be  per- 
mitted to  retire  on  parole,  their  commanding  and  other  officers  becoming 
responsible  for  them,  and  that  they  shall  deliver  up  their  arms  and 
accouterments  in  their  present  condition,  provided  that  no  expenses 
accruing  from  the  transportation  of  the  men  shall  be  defrayed  by  the 
Government  of  the  United  States. 

Fourth.  On  the  signing  of  these  articles  by  the  contracting  parties  the 
forts  shall  be  formally  taken  possession  of  by  the  United  States  naval 
forces  composing  the  mortar  flotilla,  the  Confederate  flag  shall  be  low- 
ered, and  the  flag  of  the  United  States  hoisted  on  the  flag-staffs  of  Forts 
Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 

In  agreement  of  the  above  we,  the  undersigned,  do  hereunto  set  our 
hands  and  seals. 

DAVID  D.  POETER, 
Commanding  Mortar  Flotilla. 

W.  B.  EEKSHAW, 

Commander.,  U.  tS.  Navy. 

J.  M.  WAINWEIGHT, 

Lieutenant- Commander.,  U.  Steamer  Harriet  Lane. 

J.  K.  BJJNCAN, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  Coast  Defenses. 

EDWARD  HIGGINS, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  C.  8.  Army, 
Commanding  Forts  Jaclcson  and  Saint  Philip,  La. 

Witnessed  by — 

Ed.  T.  Nichols, 

Lieutenant-Commander,  TJ.  S.  Gunhoat  Winona. 

J.  H.  Russell, 

Lieutenant- Commander,  TJ.  S.  Gunboat  Kennebec. 

35  R R YOL  YI 


546  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


Diagram'  ofi2L&  ^ am^cirdmeiit  ^ 

FORTS  FAC ON  AND  ST.  PH/L/P,  LA. 
ponvAprvL'  d6^i.o  ApriZ  J868. 


Chap.  XVI  ] CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  547 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Edward  Higgim^  C.  aS'.  Anng,  of  the  bombard- 
ment and  eapture  of  Forts  Jaclcson  and  iSaint  riiilip. 

Hdqrs.  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  La., 

April  27,  18G2. 

Sir  : 1 liave  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Friday,  the  18th  instant,  the 
naval  force  of  the  United  States,  which  has  been  for  some  weeks  in  the 
river  making  preparations  for  an  attack  on  these  forts,  commenced  the 
bombardment  of  Fort  Jackson.  Fire  from  their  mortar  fleet  ^as  opened 
at  9 a.  m. 

The  force  employed  by  the  enemy  against  us  consisted  of  twenty-one 
mortar  vessels  and  a fleet  of  about  twenty-one  steam  vessels  of  war,  car- 
rying more  than  200  guns  of  the  heaviest  caliber. 

The  mortar  vessels,  when  they  opened  fire,  were  all  concealed  from 
our  view  save  six,  which  took  position  in  sight  of  the  forts  and  within 
our  longest  range.  These  we  soon  forced  to  retire.  They  joined  the 
rest  of  their  fleet  behind  the  point  of  woods,  and,  concealed  from  sight, 
renewed  their  fire. 

Orders  had  been  issued  to  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  to 
retire  to  the  casemates  of  the  fort  the  moment  the  bombardment  com- 
menced. The  order  being  obeyed,  nothing  was  left  for  us  to  do  but 
receive  the  furious  storm  of  shell  which  was  hailed  upon  us.  Our  cita- 
del was  soon  destroyed  by  fire.  All  buildings  around  and  in  connection 
with  the  fort  shared  the  same  fate. 

From  Friday  morning  until  the  following  Thursday  we  sustained  this 
terrible  battering.  Several  times  during  the  bombardment  the  enemy^s 
gunboats  attempted  to  pass  up  the  river  under  cover  of  their  mortar 
tire,  and  on  each  occasion  our  batteries  were  promptly  manned  and  the 
enemy’s  advance  gallantly  repelled. 

At  3.30  a.  m.  on  Thursday  it  was  observed  that  the  mortar  fire  was 
increased  to  an  intensity  of  fury  which  had  not  been  previously  reached. 
At  the  same  moment  a movement  was  observed  in  the  steam  fleet  below. 
Our  batteries  were  instantly  in  readiness  and  were  at  once  engaged  in 
a most  terrific  conflict  with  the  enemy’s  fleet  of  fourteen  steamships, 
which,  dashing  by  the  fort  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  pouring  in  their 
broadsides  of  shot,  shell,  grape,  canister,  and  shrapnel,  succeeded  in 
getting  beyond  our  range  and  in  our  rear. 

During  the  forenoon  a demand  was  made  by  Commander  Porter,  com- 
manding the  mortar  fleet,  for  a surrender  of  the  forts.  This  proposition 
was  promptly  refused,  and  the  bombardment  was  again  commenced  and 
continued  until  4 p.  m.,  when  all  firing  ceased. 

I inclose  you  the  reports  of  company  and  battery  commanders,*  also 
the  surgeon’s  report  of  killed  and  wounded.f 

I fully  indorse  the  encomiums  of  the  company  commanders  uiion  the 
officers  under  their  command,  and  feel  myself  in  duty  bound  to  record 
my  high  admiration  of  the  coolness,  courage,  skill,  and  fortitude  of  all 
the  officers  of  both  forts. 

Capt.  J.  B.  Anderson,  Company  E,  Louisiana  Artillery,  was  wounded 
early  in  the  conflict,  while  most  heroically  fighting  his  guns.  I7otwith- 
standing  his  severe  wound,  he  rendered  the  most  gallant  and  efficient 
service  to  the  last. 

Capt.  W.  B.  Eobertson,  who  commanded  a detached  work  called  the 


'‘Not  found. 


t Tabulated  on  p.  550. 


548  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI 

water  battery,  remained  with  his  command  during  the  whole  of  thi& 
protracted  ordeal  without  cover  of  any  kind,  although  suffering  from 
severe  physical  disease  and  scarcely  able  at  times  to  walk  around  his^ 
battery.  He  was  most  ably  and  gallantly  assisted  by  Oapt.  E.  J.  Bruce, 
of  the  Louisiana  Artillery. 

First  Lieut.  Eugene  W.  Baylor,  Louisiana  Artillery,  who  was  in  com- 
mand of  the  42-i)ounder  barbelte  battery,  and  First  Lieut.  Eichard  Agar, 
of  the  same  battery,  did  all  that  gallant  officers  and  men  could. 

The  officers  stationed  at  the  heaviest  batteries  on  the  river  front  were 
the  greater  part  of  the  time,  fatigued  as  they  were,  obliged  to  be  con- 
stantly with.their  detachments  at  their  guns  to  prevent  surprise.  Lieuts. 
A.  N.  Ogden,  Becerly  C.  Kennedy,  and  William  T.  Mumford,  of  the  Lou- 
isiana Artillery,  jiarticularly  distinguished  themselves  in  this  service. 

Although  not  under  my  immediate  command,  I cannot  omit  to 
mention  the  devoted  conduct  of  your  aide-de-camp,  Lieut.  William  M. 
Bridges,  who  upon  the  disability  of  Captain  Anderson  immediately 
volunteered  his  services,  and  took  charge  of  the  two  10-inch  columbiads, 
and  fought  them  night  and  day  with  ceaseless  energy. 

Lieut.  J.  W.  Gaines,  in  command  of  the  32-pounder  battery  on  the 
river  front,  assisted  by  Lieut.  E.  L).  Woodlief ; Capt.  S.  Jones,  Company 
I,  Twenty-third  Eegiment  Louisiana  Volunteers ; Capt.  F.  Peter,  Com- 
pany I,  Tweuty-second  Eegiment  Louisiana  Volunteers,  fought  their 
batteries  gallantly  and  well. 

Lieut.  Thomas  K.  Pierson,  Twenty-third  Eegiment  Louisiana  Volun- 
teers, was  killed  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  while  gallantly  fighting  his 
guns. 

The  Saint  Mary’s  Cannoueers,  Capt.  F.  O.  Cornay,  have  my  warmest 
gratitude  and  admiration  for  their  whole  conduct,  both  in  face  of  the 
enemy  and  in  the  severe  and  arduous  fatigue  duties,  which  they  dis- 
charged always  and  at  all  times,  day  and  night,  with  alacrity  and  energy. 
They  are  an  honor  to  the  country,  and  well  may  their  friends  and  rela- 
tives be  proud  of  them. 

The  report  of  Capt.  M.  T.  Squires,  who  was  the  senior  officer  at  Fort 
Saint  Philip,  is  inclosed,  with  the  reports  of  the  other  officers.  Captain 
Squires  fought  the  batteries  of  Fort  Saint  Philip  most  gallantly.  He 
was  in  charge  of  that  fort  during  the  whole  bombardment,  the  severe 
work  at  Fort  Jackson  requiring  my  constant  presence  there.  I had 
every  confidence  in  the  coolness,  courage,  and  skill  of  Captain  Squires 
and  his  officers,  and  most  satisfactorily  did  they  discharge  their  duties. 
I refer  you  to  his  rei)ort  for  the  mention  of  the  individual  conduct  of 
his  officers. 

The  fioating  battery  Louisiana,  the  steam  ram  Manassas,  and  the 
Confederate  steamer  McEae,  together  with  a number  of  vessels  which 
had  been  fitted  up  by  the  Confederate  and  State  Governments,  were  in 
the  river  above  the  forts  at  the  time  the  enemy  dashed  by.  I am  unable 
to  state  what  assistance,  if  any,  was  rendered  by  the  greater  portion  of 
these  vessels. 

At  daylight  I observed  the  McEae  gallantly  fighting  at  terrible 
odds — contending  at  close  quarters  with  two  of  the  enemy’s  powerful 
ships.  Her  gallant  commander,  Lieut.  Thomas  B.  Huger,  fell  during 
the  conflict  severely  but,  I trust,  not  mortally  wounded. 

The  Manassas  I observed  under  way,  apparently  in  pursuit  of  one  of 
the  vessels  of  the  enemy,  but  I soon  lost  sight  of  her. 

I would  here  observe  that  I think  an  investigation  should  be  demanded 
into  the  conduct  of  the  authorities  afloat,  whose  neglect  of  our  urgent 
entreaties  to  light  up  the  river  during  this  sad  niglit  contributed  so 
much  to  the  success  of  our  enemies. 


€hap.  XVI.) 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


549 


My  adjutant,  Lieut.  C.  N.  JMorse,  was  indefatigable  in  the  discharge 
of  his  important  duties,  which  required  his  constant  i)resence  near  my 
person,  and  has  my  sincere  thanks. 

Surg.  Somerville  Burke,  C.  S.  Army,  and  Dr.  Bradbury,  who  kindly 
volunteered  his  services  when  he  became  aware  of  the  attack  on  the 
forts,  were  unremitting  in  their  attention  to  the  wounded,  fearlessly 
exposing  themselves  at  all  times  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties. 

Lieut.  Charles  Wermes,  ordnance  officer,  distinguished  himself  by 
the  most  self-sacrificing  attention  to  arduous  and  important  duties. 
Day  and  night  he  was  at  his  post,  and  by  his  great  exertions  our  mag- 
azine was  saved  from  being  flooded,  the  water  having  risen  considerably 
above  the  floor. 

Lieutenants  Mann  and  Ro^'ster,  of  Captain  Ryan’s  comi)any,  rendered 
fearless  and  efficient  service.  Captain  Ryan  was,  with  a detachment  of 
his  company,  on  board  the  Louisiana  during  a portion  of  the  bombard- 
ment and  in  the  fight  of  Thursday  morning.  At  all  times  his  services 
were  most  promptly  rendered. 

Mr.  James  Ward  rendered  me  the  most  important  ser\ices  during  the 
bombardment.  In  charge  of  the  firemen,  he  made  almost  superhuman 
exertions  during  the  burning  of  the  citadel.  He  has  my  warmest  grati- 
tude. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HIGGIis^S, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  G,  8.  Army, 
Commandifig  Forts  JacJcsoji  and  Saint  Philip,  La, 

Lieut.  William  M.  Bridges, 

A.  A,  A,  G.,  Second  Brig.,  Dept.  No.  1,  New  Orleans,  La. 


Hew  Orleans,  La.,  April  30,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  April  27  a 
formal  demand  for  a surrender  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  was 
made  by  Commander  David  D.  Porter,  commanding  United  States 
mortar  fleet. 

The  terms  which  were  ofiered  were  of  the  most  liberal  nature)  but  so 
strong  was  I in  the  belief  that  we  could  resist  successfully  any  attack 
which  could  be  made  upon  us,  either  by  land  or  water,  that  the  terms 
were  at  once  refused. 

Our  fort  was  still  strong ; our  damage  had  been  to  some  extent  re- 
paired ; our  men  had  behaved  well,  and  all  was  hope  and  confidence 
with  the  officers,  when  suddenly  at  midnight  I was  aroused  by  the  report 
that  the  garrison  had  revolted,  had  seized  the  guard,  and  were  spiking 
the  guns.  Word  was  sent  us  through  the  sergeants  of  companies  that 
the  men  would  fight  no  longer.  The  company  officers  were  immediately 
dispatched  to  their  commands,  but  were  driven  back.  Officers  were 
fired  upon  when  they  appeared  in  sight  upon  the  parapet.  Signals  were 
exchanged  by  the  mutineers  with  Fort  Saint  Philip.  The  mutiny  was 
complete,  and  a general  massacre  of  the  officers  and  a disgraceful  sur- 
render of  the  fort  appeared  inevitable. 

By  great  exertions  we  succeeded^  with  your  influence,  in  preventing 
this  dis^aceful  blot  upon  our  country,  and  were  fortunate  in  keeping 
the  passions  of  the  men  in  check  until  we  could  effect  an  honorable  sur- 
render of  the  forts,  which  was  done  by  us  jointly  on  the  morning  of  the 
28th  instant. 

As  the  facts  and  documents  relating  to  this  matter  are  in  your  pos- 


550  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

session,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  dwell  longer  on  tins  humiliating  and 
unhappy  affair. 

I wish  to  place  on  record  here  the  noble  conduct  of  Capt.  S.  O.  Cor- 
nay’s  company,  the  Saint  Mary’s  Cannoneers,  which  alone  stood  true  as 
steel  when  every  other  company  in  Fort  Jackson  basely  dishonored  its 
country. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  vefy  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

EDWAED  HIGGIXS, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  C.  S.  Army, 

Late  Commander  Forts  Jadcson  and  Saint  Philip^ 
Lieut.  William  M.  Bridges, 

Aide-de-Camp  and  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brigade. 


Beturn  of  casualties  in  the  Confederate  garrisons  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  April 

• 18-25,  1862. 


Command. 

KiUed. 

Wounded 

Fort  Jackson 

9 

3& 

Fort  Saint  Philip 

2 

4 

Total 

11 

No.  6. 

Report  of  Capt.  M.  T.  Squires,  Louisiana  Artillery,  of  the  homhardment 

of  Fort  Saint  Philip. 

Fort  Saint  Philip,  La.,  April  27,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  submit  the  following  report : 
Early  on  the  morning  of  Friday,  the  18th  instant,  perceiving  by  the 
movements  of  the  enemy  that  they  were  about  taking  up  their  positiouy 
the  heavy  guns  were  ordered  to  open  upon  them,  to  annoy  them  in  the 
execution  of  their  purpose  as  much  as  possible,  but,  the  distance  being 
great  and  the  range  extreme,  with  but  very  little  success,  the  enemy 
taking  little  or  no  notice  of  our  fire,  only  answering  by  a few  rifle  shells 
at  long  intervals.  The  13-inch  mortar,  alter  the  thirteenth  round,  became 
useless,  the  bed  giving  way  under  it,  breaking  in  two,  and  the  mortar 
coming  upon  the  ground.  The  enemy  retired  from  our  sight  at  8 p.  m. 
and  nothing  more  was  heard  of  him  that  night. 

At  an  early  hour  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  instant  the  enemy  again 
took  up  a position  identical  with  that  of  the  day  previous,  excepting 
that  no  mortar  boats  were  on  this  shore,  all  keeping  close  behind  the 
point  of  woods,  and  opened  fire  upon  Fort  Jackson,  which  was  allowed 
to  continue  without  interruption  from  this  side  until  11  a.  m.,  when, 
finding  the  tire  concentrated  upon  the  other  side,  fearing  the  effect,  and 
having  ascertained  the  exact  range  and  distances,  I determined  to  open 
upon  them  and  draw  off  some  of  the  fire  to  this  side  if  possible.  It  was 
immediately  done  and  with  partial  success,  three  of  the  mortar  boats 
opening  upon  us  with  but  little  effect.  * 

Oil  the  20th,  21st,  and  22d  the  fire  of  the  enemy  still  continued  from 
their  mortar  boats,  with  an  occasional  shot  from  the  gunboats.  The 
only  damage  done  during  these  days  was  the  damaging  of  the  platform 
of  the  24-pounder  gun  in  the  salient  near  the  main  magazine,  the  shell 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


551 


passing  under  and  throwing  it  up,  but  not  rendering  it  useless.  Our 
fire  was  slow  and  deliberate,  with  no  visible  results  more  than  the  driv- 
ing back  of  two  of  the  mortar  boats,  which  were  partially  exposed, 
around  the  wooded  point.  The  fire  of  the  enemy,  although  warm,  well 
directed,  and  sustained,  was  for  the  most  part  either  short  or  very  much 
over. 

Up  to  this  time  the  only  guns  used  were  the  columbiad  battery,  in  the 
main  work,  and  the  13-inch  mortar,  disabled  on  the  first  day.  In  the 
lower  water  battery  one  8-inch  columbiad  and  one  7-inch  rifled  gun, 
worked  by  Capt.  K.  0.  Bond’s  company,  and  four  10-inch  sea-coast 
mortars,  by  Capt.  J.  H.  Lamon’s  company. 

On  the  23d  the  enemy  still  kept  up  a regular  fire,  to  which  we  did  not 
reply  all  day. 

At  3.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  24th  the  men  were  ready  and 
standing  at  their  guns,  having  received  information  that  there  was  a 
movement  by  the  enemy.  No  vessels  were  to  be  seen,  and  the  first 
notice  of  an  enemy  nearing  us  was  the  reply  to  the  shots  from  Fort 
Jackson,  and  the  gunners  were  ordered  to  fire  by  the  flashes  of  the 
enemy’s  guns,  which  was  done;  but  the  fire  was  entirely  too  high  and 
passed  over  them. 

Immediately  after  this  a vessebcame  in  sight,  and  they  followed  each 
other  in  rapid  succession,  seemingly  in  pairs,  one  of  the  two  keeping 
back  far  enough  to  enable  her  to  deliver  her  fire  from  her  broadsides. 
The  fire  from  our  guns  was  rapid,  and  from  the  little  that  could  be  seen 
and  heard  was  accurate ; but  after  the  first  discharge  the  smoke  almost 
hid  them  from  sight,  and  we  were  again  compelled  to  judge  by  the 
flashes  of  their  guns.  As  to  the  effect  of  the  fire,  it  is  impossible  to 
state  what  it  was,  as  the  darkness,  aided  by  the  smoke,  rendered  seeing 
out  of  the  question. 

A three-masted  propeller  ran  ashore  during  the  engagement  above 
the  upper  water  battery,  and,  remaining  there  several  minutes,  with  a 
fire  barge  alongside,  her  rigging  had  caught  fire,  but  was  immediately 
extinguished.  We  were  not  able  to  open  upon  her,  as  one  of  the  colum- 
biads  had  been  previously  dismounted  and  the  other  could  not  be  brought 
to  bear;  besides,  their  hands  were  full  with  other  vessels  coming  up,  and 
the  24-i)onnder  in  the  salient  of  the  upper  water  battery,  bearing  directly 
upon  her,  had  been  broken  in  two  near  the  trunnions.  The  vessels 
passed  close  under  our  guns,  taking  advantage  of  the  eddy  which  runs 
up  with  considerable  force,  and  it  was  found  impossible  to  get  more 
than  one  or  two  shots  at  any  one  vessel,  they  passed  with  such  rapidity. 

All  our  guns  were  worked  with  courage,  energy,  and  skill,  excepting 
the  upper  water  battery,  where  some  confusion  arose,  caused  by  the 
men  not  being  so  thoroughly  drilled  as  they  should  have  been.  Com- 
pany G of  the  Confederate  recruits,  Lieut,  j.  K.  Dixon,  was  fully  pre- 
pared to  work  the  guns  of  this  battery,  and  would  have  done  so  with 
effect,  but  was  two  days  before  ordered  on  board  the  floating  battery 
Louisiana,  and  its  place  was  supplied  bj^  Captain  Assenheimer’s  com- 
pany (B),  Twentieth  Begiment  Louisiana  Volunteers,  which  had  only 
been  drilled  a few  times,  and  Captain  Massicott’s  company  (D),  Chal- 
mette  Begiment,  which  was  raw,  undrilled,  perfectly  ignorant  even  of 
the  use  of  the  shot-guns  with  which  it  was  armed,  ami  had  never  been 
drilled  as  artillery. 

• As  soon  as  it  was  seen  that  the  guns  did  not  open,  Lieut.  A.  J.  Quigley, 
with  such  men  as  could  be  gathered,  was  sent  to  attend  to  them.  Which 
was  done,  so  far  as  they  were  concerned,  to  the  satisfaction  of  that 
officer. 


552  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

The  compauy  of  Confederate  recruits,  under  Lieutenants  Dixon  and 
Blow,  were  detailed  to  report  to  Captain  Mitchell,  C.  S.  Navy,  for  duty 
on  board  the  Louisiana,  as  per  instructions  dated  Headquarters  Forts 
Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  April  21, 1862,  where  they  remained  until  the 
evening  of  the  24th  instant. 

Captain  Lartigue’s  comi)any  did  good  service  as  scoots  and  sharp- 
shooters, many  of  them  being  out  both  night  and  day,  and  some  of 
them  being  out  at  all  times.  On  the  night  of  the  23d  seven  of  them 
were  sent  to  ascertain  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  all  returned 
without  accomplishing  anything.  Two  other  scouts,  oue  from  Company 
K and  the  other  from  Company  F,  were  out  on  the  same  mission,  and 
had  it  not  been  for  the  failure  of  the  rocket,  which  by  an  accident 
became  wet,  would  have  signaled  their  a])proach  much  sooner.  As  it 
was,  the  only  intimation  1 received -was  the  firing  of  one  of  their 
muskets. 

The  following  is  the  number  of  projectiles  used,  &c. : 


S-inch  solid  sliot 675 

8-inch  shells 171 

13-inch  shells  from  columbiad  battery,  &c.,  in  main  work 13 

10-inch  mortar  shells  from  lower  mortar  battery 142 

Shot,  shell,  and  grape  from  lower  water  battery 470 

Shot,  grape,  and  canister  from  upper  water  ^battery 120 


Capt.  E.  C.  Bond,  assisted  by  First  Lieuts.  Carleton  Hunt  and  Will- 
iam C.  Ellis,  and  his  company  (K) ; Capt.  J.  H.  Lamon,  with  the  assist- 
ance of  First  Lieut.  H.  W.  Fowler,  with  his  company  (C),  in  the  lower 
battery,  manning  the  42  and  32  flounders  respectively;  Lieuts.  Lewis 
B.  Taylor  and  W.  B.  Jones,  with  Company  F,  at  the  columbiad  battery, 
and  Lieut.  A.  J.  Quigley,  with  supernumeraries  of  Company  F,  taken 
from  the  main  work  to  man  the  guns  of  the  upper  battery,  behaved 
with  gallantry,  energy,  coolness,  and  bravery  worthy  of  imitation ; . and 
all,  both  officers  and  men,  deserve  the  highest  praise  that  could  be 
given  to  any  one  for  the  honorable  part  they  performed  during  the 
whole  time  since  the  commencement  of  this  trying  conflict. 

Capt.  Charles  Assenheimer’s  company  (B)  did  their  best,  both  his 
officers  and  men. 

Individual  acts  of  heroism  are  numerous,  but  where  all  did  so  well  it 
would  appear  invidious  to  mention  names.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  were 
everything  to  be  done  again,  or  anything  else  required  to  be  performed, 
one  could  ask  no  other  privilege  than  to  have  the  same  men  to  do  it, 
feeling  satisfied  it  would  be  as  well  carried  out  as  possible. 

The  injury  to  the  fort  was  slight.  Of  the  guns,  one  banded  7-inch 
rifle  was  burst  by  the  explosion  of  a shell  in  its  bore  near  the  muzzle, 
and  one  24-pounder  gun  was  broken  in  two,  about  14  inches  in  front  of 
the  trunnions,  by  being  struck  by  a solid  shot.  An  8-inch  columbiad 
was  dismounted,  but  only  temporarily  useless,  the  gun  being  uninjured 
and  soon  remounted.  The  platform  of  one  24-pounder  gun  was  under- 
mined by  a shell,  but  was  not  rendered  entirely  useless.  One  of  the 
uprights  of  a 42-pounder  gun-carriage  was  i)artially  shot  away,  but  can 
still  be  of  service. 

With  many  thanks  to  all  officers  and  men  for  their  assistance  and 
efficient  aid,  and  humbly  bowing  before  the  will  of  Almighty  G'od,  I 
am,  very  respectfullv,  vour  obedient  servant, 

M.  T.  SQUIRES, 
Captain,  Louisiana  Artillery. 

Lieut.  Charles  N.  Morse, 

Lost  Adjutant,  Fort  Jackson,  La. 


Chap.  XVI. ) 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


553 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Bri(j.  Gen,  M.  L.  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  of  operations  on  the  “ ChaG 
mette  and  McGehee  Lines.^^ 

Camp  Moore,  Tangipahoa,  La.,  May  0,  18G2. 

Major:  I herewith  submit  a report  of  the  operations  of  the  troops 
under  my  command  at  the  Chalmette  and  McGehee  lines  on  the  approach 
of  the  enemy’s  vessels  from  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  to  the  city 
of  New  Orleans.  These  interior  lines  of  defense  are  constructed  with 
special  reference-  to  an  attack  by  land,  but  terminating  them  at  the  river 
banks  were  two  batteries,  calculated  for  twelve  and  twenty  guns,  respect- 
ively, and  at  the  time  of  the  action  containing  live  and  nine.  Ten  42- 
pounders,  intended  for  this  battery,  were  turned  over  to  the  Navy  for 
the  defense  of  the  city  by  water. 

As  you  are  aware,  the  defense  of  New  Orleans  by  water  has  been  con- 
sidered as  depending  upon  the  forts  mentioned,  which  are  well  con- 
structed permanent  w orks,  rather  well  armed,  and  far  stronger  than  any 
others  that  could  be  hastily  erected.  With  this  view  all  the  available 
material,  both  of  guns  and  ammunition,  had  been  concentrated  there 
prior  to  the  bombardment,  and  during  its  continuance  wms  being  added 
to  in  such  quantities  daily  as  the  means  of  the  department  admitted  of, 
it  being  evident  that  the  decisive  struggle  was  there  to  be  made. 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  it  became  certain  that  the  large  vessels  of  the 
enemy  had  succeded  in  passing,  there  no  longer  existed  a chance  of 
preventing  them  from  reaching  New  Orleans,' and  the  short  resistance 
made  by  the  few  guns  mounted  on  the  two  batteries  of  the  interior 
lines  was  made  through  a sense  of  duty,  but  without  any  expectation 
of  success,  the  enemy  numbering  as  many  vessels,  less  one,  as  w'e  had 
guns. 

On  the  side  of  the  river  where  I w^as  in  person  during  the  action  w ere 
stationed  three  companies  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pinkney’s  battalion,  to 
man  the  nine  guns,  and  one  company  of  sharpshooters.  With  the  live 
guns  on  the  other  side  were  Captain  Patton’s  company  of  the  Twenty- 
second  Louisiana  Volunteers  ; one  company  from  Fort  Pike,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Butler,  and  one  company  of  the  Beauregard  Battery,  besides  two 
battalions  of  infantry  collected  in  camp  for  instruction,  as'w^ell  as  to 
guard  the  line  in  case  of  the  enemy’s  landing  and  attacking  by  land,  all 
under  the  immediate  command  of  General  Buisson. 

The  enemy’s  vessels  had  approached  to  within  about  the  fourth  of  a 
mile  before  we  opened  on  them,  the  first  gun  being  from  Colonel  Pink- 
ney’s battery,  and  immediately  followed  by  several  from  the  battery  on 
the  opposite  side,  and  as  promptly  replied  to  from  the  enemy’s  vessels. 
The  engagement  lasted  until  every  round  of  ammunition  on  hand  w'as 
fired,  both  officers  and  men  displaying  a coolness  and  intrepidity  that 
was  gratifying,  especially  as  regards  the  men,  who  then  for  the  first  time 
in  their  lives  discharged  a heavy  gun.  The  firing  on  our  side  was  spir- 
ited, perhajis  a little  uncertain ; on  the  enemy’s,  heavy  and  rather  well 
directed.  During  the  engagement  their  vessels  gradually  lessened  the 
distance  until  near  enough  to  open  with  grape  and  canister.  The  ammu- 
nition being  expended  and  every  sense  of  duty  satisfied,  iiermission 
was  given  to  Colonel  Pinkney  to  withdraw  his  command  along  the  line 
of  field  works  affording  shelter,  which  was  done  deliberately,  officers 
and  men  retiring  together. 

The  casualties  were  1 killed  and  1 wounded. 


554  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


The  battery  on  the  Ghalmette  side  seemed  well  served,  and  no  doubt 
was  so,  judging  from  the  character  of  the  officers  present. 

The  enemy,  steaming  up  between  us  and  the  city,  prevented  the  retreat 
of  the  troops  to  that  point.  They  were  accordingly  directed  to  gain  the 
Opelousas  Eailroad  and  reach  Camp  Moore  via  La  Fourche  or  such 
route  as  might  be  found  best.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pinkney  has  ali-eady 
reported  with  his  command,  but  somewhat  reduced  in  numbers. 

In  concluding  the  report  I wish  particularly  to  call  attention  to  the 
admirable  assistance  rendered  by  Lieutenants  MacDonald  and  B.  M 
Harrod,  on  engineer  duty,  both  before  and  after  the  action.  Their  con- 
duct could  not  have  been  better. 

Lieutenant  Frost,  on  special  duty,  was  also  of  material  assistance,  but 
in  carrying  out  some  instructions  was  accidentally  absent  during  the 
engagement. 

Having  received  no  report  from  General  Buisson  concerning  the  opera- 
tions on  his  side  of  the  riv^er,  I am  unable  to  refer  to  them  more  particu- 
larly. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Brigadier- General y Commanding  Third  Brigade. 

Maj.  J.  G.  Pickett, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  8. 

Proceedings  of  the  Court  of  Inquiry  upon  the  fall  of  Netv  Orleans. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  8,  1804. 

To  the  House  of  Representatives : 

In  response  to  a resolution  of  the  House  of  Eepresentatives,  of  Jan- 
uary 15,  1864,  I herewith  transmit  for  your  information  a communica- 
tion from  the  Secretary  of  War,  covering  a copy  of  the  proceedings  of 
the  Court  of  Inquiry  relative  to  the  capture  of  New  Orleans. 

JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 

[Inclosures.] 

War  Department,' 
Richmond^  F«.,  June  0,  1804. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

Sir  : In  response  to  a resolution  of  the  House  of  Eepresentatives^ 
adopted  at  its  last  session,  I have  the  honor  to  forward  fur  transmission- 
to  Congress  a copy  of  the  record  of  the  Court  of  Inquiry  on  the  fall  of 
New  Orleans,  with  accompanying  documents,  the  preparation  of  whicE 
was  not  quite  completed  at  the  adjournment  of  the  last  Congress. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  A.  SEDDON, 

^Secretary  of  War.^ 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


555 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  A COURT  OF  INQUIRY,  ASSEMBLED  AT  JACKSON, 
MISS.,  PURSUANT  TO  THE  FOLLOWING  ORDERS: 

Special  Orders,  ( Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  41  f Richmond,  Va.,  February  18,  1803. 

# * * # * * # 

XYI.  By  direction  of  the  President,  on  the  application  of  Maj.  Gen. 
Mansfield  Lovell,  a Court  of  Inquiry,  to  consist  of  Brig.  Gens.  I.*  T.  F. 
Drayton,  T.  C.  Hindman,  and  W.  M.  Gardner,  will  assemble  at  Jack- 
son,  Miss.,  on  the  10th  day  of  March  next,  or  as  soon  thereafter  as 
practicable,  to  examine  into  the  facts  and  circumstances  attending  the 
capture  of  the  city  of  NTew  Orleans  by  the  enemy  in  April,  1862,  and 
the  defense  of  the  city  and  the  evacuation  of  the  same  by  our  troops, 
under  the  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell.  Maj.  L.  K.  Page, 
assistant  adjutant- general,  is  appointed  judge-advocate  and  recorder  of 
the  court.  The  Court  of  Inquiry  appointed  in  Special  Orders,  Xo.  177, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  July  31,  1862,  paragraph  XX, 
is  hereby  revoked.! 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

Xo.  43.  ( Richmond,  Ya.,  February  20,  1863. 

XXIY.  The  Court  of  Inquiry  directed  in  paragraph  XYI,  Special 
Orders,  Xo.  41,  current  series,  will  sit  without  regard  to  hours,  and  will 
consider  itself  authorized  to  adjourn  from  place  to  place  for  the  con- 
venience of  taking  testimony  of  witnesses  serving  with  the  Army,  in  the 
field  or  elsewhere,  and  whose  testimony  may  not  be  otherwise  con- 
veniently obtained,  without  embarrassment  to  the  interests  of  the 
service. 

The  court  will  finally  report  the  facts  resulting  from  the  investigation, 
together  with  their  opinion  thereon,  for  the  information  of  the  Presi- 
dent. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JXO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

Xo.  46.  ) Richmond,  Va.,  February  24,  1863. 

******* 

XXIY.  A mistake  having  occurred  in  paragraph  XYI,  Special  Orders, 
Xo.  41,  current  series,  designating  General  T.  0.  Hindman  as  brigadier- 
general,  he  is  hereby  announced  as  major-general,  and  senior  officer  of 
the  Court  of  Inquiry  convened  in  said  order  and  paragraph. 

*****  * * 

Bv  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JXO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

* An  error;  see  proceedings  of  the  court  of  April  6,  1863. 

t Under  that  order  Maj.  Gens.  L.  Polk  and  Sam.  Jones,  and  Col.  B.  Huger  consti-- 
tuted  the  court.  * 


556  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA,  [Chap.  XYL 

April  4,  1863—12.30  p.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  the  above  orders. 

Present,  Maj.  Gen.  T.  C.  Hindman,  Brig.  Gens.  T.  F.  Drayton  and  W. 
M.  Gardner,  and  Maj.  L.  K.  Page,  judge-advocate.  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield 
Lovell  also  present. 

The  judge  advocate,  having  read  the  orders  convening  the  court,  asked 
Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  if  he  had  any  objections  to  any  member  named 
therein,  to  which  he  replied  he  had  none.  The  court  was  then  duly 
sworn  by  the  judge-advocate,  and  the  judge-advocate  was  duly  sworn 
by  the  presiding  officer  of  the  court  in  the  presence  of  Maj.  Gen.  Mans- 
field Lovell.  It  was  then  resolved  by  the  court  to  sit  with  closed  doors, 
and  ordered  that  W.  H.  Houston  be  employed  as  clerk  to  aid  the  judge- 
advocate. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  the  6th  instant. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  April  6,  1863—11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Major- 
General  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over.  It  was  then  ordered 
by  the  court  that  the  letter  I,”  prefixed  to  the  name  of  Brig.  Gen.  T. 
F.  Drayton  in  the  order  convening  the  court,  should  be  hereafter  omit- 
ted in  the  records,  it  appearing  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  court  that  the 
insertion  of  the  said  letter  ‘H”  was  a clerical  error. 

It  was  then  ordered  by  the  court  that  the  word  accused  ” should  not 
be  used  to  designate  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  in  these  proceedings, 
there  being  no  accusation  or  imputation  against  him  before  the  court  j 
and  it  was  further  ordered  that  the  evidence  in  the  case  should  be  in- 
troduced without  regard  to  the  mode  or  order  of  proof  governing  in 
courts -martial  or  courts  of  inquiry  when  charges  are  made  and  an  issue 
joined. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a 
witness. 

By  the  Judoe-Advocai>e  ; 

Question.  When  did  you  assume  command  of  the  city  of  iNew  Orleans  ? 

Answer.  On  October  18,  1881,  pursuant  to  paragraph  VIII,  Special  Orders,  No.  173, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generals  Office,  October  7, 1861. 

(The  original  of  the  order  was  read  to  the  court  and  a copy  thereof 
appended  as  document  No.  1.) 

Question.  State  for  the  information  of  the  court  the  limits  and  extent 
of  Department  No.  1,  its  topographical  features,  and  the  various  ap- 
proaches to  the  city  of  New  Orleans. 

Answer.  Department  No.  1 embraced  the  State  of  Louisiana  and  the  southern  half  of 
the  State  of  Mississippi,  except  that  part  of  the  latter  State  on  the  Mississippi  River 
included  between  the  New  Oi  leans,  Jackson  and  Great  Northern  Railroad  and  the  river, 
on  which  are  situated  Natchez  and  Vicksburg,  they  belonging  to  Department  No. 2. 
Department  No.  1 extended  on  the  sea-coast  more  than  300  miles,  from  Texas  on  the 
west  to  Pascagoula  Bay  ou  the  east.  The  city  of  New  Orleans  is  situated  in  an  allu- 
vial delta  on  the  left  or  northern  bank  of  the  river,  about  100  miles  from  the  mouth. 
From  below  New  Orleans  to  Donaldsonville,  a distance  of  about  90  miles,  the  riverruns 
in  nearly  an  east  course,  almost  parallel  with  the  Gulf  coast.  Bounding  the  city  limits 
on  the  north  lies  Lake  Pontchartrain,  which  is  almost  40  miles  long  by  25  broad,  its 
southern  shore  being  nearly  parallel  to  the  Mississippi  River  for  more  than  20  miles, 
thus  forming  a strip  of  land  between  the  two  of  an  average  width  of  5 or  6 miles,  on 
which  New  Orleans  is  situated,  thus  placing  it  on  an  island,  except  this  narrow  strip 
‘Of  land,  through  which  runs  the  New  Orleans,  Jackson  and  Great  Northern  Railroad; 
the  only  line  of  land  communication  the  city  has  wi^h  the  interior.  The  river,  before. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


557 


reacliing  New  Orleans,  finds  its  way  through  the  alluvial  country  in  various  channels 
to  the  sea  (as  will  he  further  described),  which  in  high  water  offer  facilities  for  navi- 
gation. Lake  Pontchartraiu  is  also  in  immediate  connection  with  the  Gulf  of  Mexico, 
independent  of  all  other  approaches  to  the  city.  Lake  Borgne,  likewise  connected 
with  the  Gulf,  gives  us  water  approach  to  within  a few  miles  of  the  Mississippi  River 
at  a point  not  far  below  the  city.  This  was  the  route  taken  by  the  British  in  1815. 
These  are  the  general  features  of  the  location  of  New  Orleans. 

The  coast  line  of  Department  No.  1 is  penetrated  bypasses  and  streams  navigable  in 
high-water  season  at  not  less  than  twelve  or  fifteen  different  points,  many  of  which,  as 
the  enemy  had  entire  command  of  the  sea,  required  immediate  attention.  Commencing 
at  Pascagoula,  on  the  east,  the  coast  could  be  entered  by  water  at  Biloxi  Bay  and 
[Bay]  Saint  Louis  and  Pearl  Rivers,  which  latter  empties  itself  into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico 
by  two  mouths  outside  that  entrance  to  Lake  Pontchartraiu,  on  which  Fort  Pike  was 
located,  to  be  hereafter  described.  A short  distance  up  the  Pearl  River  a bayou  con- 
nected the  river  with  the  lake,  thus  avoiding  entirely  the  guns  of  Fort  Pike,  beside 
which  a fair  road  led  west  to  the  Mississippi  River,  giving  access  to  the  Jackson  Rail- 
road, as  well  as  the  whole  northern  shore  of  Lake  Pontchartrain.  This  lake  was  con- 
nected Avith  the  Gulf  by  two  outlets — the  Rigolets  and  Chef  Menteur  Pass — on  the 
former  of  which  was  located  Fort  Pike  and  on  the  latter  Fort  Macomb,  formerly  called 
Fort  Wood.  From  the  shore  of  Lake  Borgne  four  bayous  put  into  the  land,  through 
which  access  could  be  had  by  water  to  points  near  to  and  couA^enient  for  attack  on  the 
city.  Two  of  them  had  small  works  upon  them  (Bien  venue  and  Phillippon)  and  others 
(Geutilly  and  Ciletche)  were  unguarded.  Proceediug  west,  three  large  streams  gave 
access  directly  from  the  ocean  to  firm  ground  near  the  river  more  than  40  miles  above 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  viz  : Bayous  I’Outre,  Terre  auxBoeuff',  and  Aux  Ch^ne, 
the  enemy  occupying  Breton  Isle  with  land  forces  directly  off  the  mouths  of  these 
bayous.  The  next  main  point  of  entrance  is  the  Mississippi  River,  which  enters  the 
Gulf  by  five  mouths  or  passes.  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  are  located  on  opposite 
sides  of  the  river,  about  25  miles  above  the  Head  of  the  Passes  and  75  below  New  Or- 
leans. ■ Further  Avest  is  Barataria  Bay,  at  the  entrance  of  which  is  an  island,  on  the 
west  end  of  Avhich  Fort  Livingston  is  situated.  The  pass  at  the  east  end  is  not  de- 
fended. From  Barataria  Bay  there  is  a direct  water  communication  with  the  river 
just  aboA^e  New  Orleans  Aua  Bayous  Barataria  and  Families  and  a short  canal.  The 
next  principal  inlets  are  Bayous  La  Fourche  and  Grand  Caillou,  the  former  of  which 
is  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi  River,  from  which  it  off  sets  at  DonaldsonviUe 
and  crosses  the  Opelousas  Railroad  at  Thibodeaux  ,*  the  other  heads  near  that  rail- 
road. Atchafalaya  Bay  and  River  afford  the  next  important  Avater  approach.  This 
river  also  connects  with  the  Mississippi  through  Bayou  Plaquemine  above  Donald- 
sonAulle,  and,  besides,  giA*es  access,  via  Bayou  Teche  and  other  streams,  to  a very  rich 
and  important  section  of  country,  as  well  as  to  the  terminus  of  the  Opelousas  Railroad 
at  Brashear  City.  West  of  this  are  Bayous  Sayle  and  Dead  Cypress,  and  Calcasieu 
Bay,  the  latter  of  which  gave  entrance  to  a large  cattle-range  country.  Besides  these 
important  points  there  are  numerous  smaller  creeks  and  bayous  through  which  an 
enterprising  enemy  could  penetrate  and  obtain  access  to  important  approaches  above 
the  defenses. 

West  of  Lake  Pontchartrain,  and  between  it  and  the  Mississippi  River,  is  situated 
Lake  Maurepas,  connected  with  Pontchartrain  by  the  North  and  South  Manchac 
Passes,  which  are  separated  by  an  island,  and  with  the  river  by  Bayou  Manchac,  in 
former  years  leveed  so  as  to  destroy  the  river  connection.  The  New  Orleans,  Jackson 
and  Great  Northern  Railroad  runs  through  the  narrow  strip  of  land  between  Lake 
Pontchartrain  and  the  river,  skirting  the  southern  and  western  shores  of  the  lake,  and 
passing  between  it  and  Maurepas  across  the  North  and  South  Manchac  Passes  goes  north- 
ward into  the  interior.  The  New  Orleans  and  Opelousas  Railroad  starts  from  Algiers, 
opposite  Ne,w  Orleans,  and  runs  westward,  crossing  Bayous  La  Fourche,  Des  Alle- 
mandes,  and  others,  terminating  at  Brashear  City,  on  the  Atchafalaya,  about  80  miles, 
where  the  great  road  led  to  Texas.  This  road  was  the  principal  means  of  transpor- 
tation for  beef  cattle  and  supplies  from  Texas  for  New  Orleans  and  the  East,  and  its 
security  was  a matter  of  great  importance. 

The  Mexican  Gulf  Railroad  connected  the  city  with  Proctorsville,  on  Lake  Borgne, 
distant  28  miles.  There  were  also  two  short  railroads  from  the  compact  part  of  the 
city  to  Lake  Pontchartrain,  besides  a water  connection  with  the  lake  by  the  new 
canal  and  the  Bayou  Saint  John,  both  of  which  led  into  the  heart  of  the  city.  Through 
the  latter  the  Confederate  States  steamers  Bienville  and  Carondelet  were  taken  from 
their  place  of  building  to  the  lake.  There  were  two  good  roads  from  the  city  to  Lake 
Pontchartrain,  one  along  the  Bayou  Saint  John  and  the  other  on  the  Metairie  Ridge. 
Also  a road  following  Gentilly  Ridge  to  Fort  Macomb,  near  which  road  heads  Bayou 
Gentilly,  emptying  into  Lake  Borgnfe,  by  which  route  the  forts  would  be  avoided.  The 
city  coiild  also  be  approached  by  the  enemy’s  fleet  from  the  Upper  Mississippi  descend- 
ing the  river. 

New  Orleans  is  situated  on  low,  flat  ground,  which  is  the  character  of  all  the  sur- 


558  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

rounding  country.  To  protect  it  against  the  annual  rise  of  the  river,  which  commences 
usually  in  January  and  lasts  through  the  spring,  embankments  of  earth,  called  levees, 
have  been  thrown  up  along  its  course,  which  levees  extend  from  a long  distance  above 
the  city  in  its  front  and  for  30  miles  below.  The  tops  of  these  levees  are  much  above 
the  surface  of  the  country,  so  that  when  the  river  rises  to  the  height  of  the  levees  it 
is  above  the  level  of  the  adjacent  land.  Below  these  levees  the  river,  in  years  of  very 
high  water,  overflows  the  adjoining  country  almost  entirely.  The  land  above  the  city, 
with  the  exceptions  indicated,  is  generally  low  and  swampy,  the  city  itself  extending 
for  miles  immediately  along  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  River,  but  the  inhabited  part 
not  extending  far  back  towards  the  swamp. 

For  further  answer  of  this  question,  and  as  explanatory  of  the  above,  I submit  the 
accompanying  map,  which,  while  not  correct  in  all  minor  details,  gives  all  the  general 
features  of  the  country  with  sufficient  accuracy  to  enable  the  court  to  understand  the 
numerous  routes  by  which  the  department  could  be  entered. 

(The  map  above  referred  to  was  inspected  by  the  court,  and  is  hereto 
.appended  as  document  No.  2.*) 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  7th  instant. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  April  7,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge- advocate,  and  Maj. 
’ Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  continued. 

By  the  JuDaE-ADVOCATE : 

Question.  What  instructions,  if  any,  did  you  receive  on  assuming 
. command,  from  the  War  Department?  What  report  was  made  to  you 
by  your  predecessor  of  the  existing  state  of  affairs  at  the  time;  and 
what  was  the  general  military  condition  of  Department  No.  1 as  you 
.found  it? 

Answer.  I received  no  specific  instructions  whatever  from  the  War  Department. 
iThe  subject  was  referred  to  by  the  Secretary  of  War  and  Adjutant-General  Cooper, 
but  they  seemed  to  think  it  not  necessary,  expressing  confidence  in  my  judgment  and 
ability  to  do  what  was  right  and  proper.  I requested  authority  to  control  all  matters 
• for  the  defense  of  my  department,  naval  and  military,  on  the  water  as  well  as  on 
land,  assigning  my  reason  therefor;  but  this  authority  was  declined,  as  will  appear 
by  the  letters  of  the  President  and  Secretary  of  War  hereunto  appended.  (Marked 
. documents  Nos.  3 and  4.)  When  I arrived  in  New  Orleans,  my  predecessor,  Major- 
' General  Twiggs,  made  no  official  report  of  the  condition  of  affairs,  but  stated  to  me 
verbally  that  the  department  was  almost  entirely  defenseless ; that  he  had  been  unable 
to  get  anything  done,  and  that  at  many  points  we  could  not  make  an  hour’s  fight.  He 
dwelt  particularly  upon  the  want  of  guns  and  ammunition.  He  gave  me  little  or  no 
information,  as  he  said  his  feeble  state  of  health  had  prevented  him  from  making  per- 
sonal inspections  of  the  various  points  of  the  department. 

I assumed  command  on  October  18,  and  in  order  to  acquaint  myself  with  the  exact 
condition  of  the  defenses,  the  topography  of  the  country,  the  approaches,  &c.,  of  all 
of  which  I was  entirely  ignorant,  I made  personal  inspections  and  criticaj.  examina- 
tions throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  department.  These  inspections,  together 
> with  the  details  of  the  office,  occupied  me  night  and  day  for  more  than  two  weeks.  I 
found  matters  generally  so  deficient  and  incomplete,  that  I was  unwilling  to  commit 
their  condition  to  paper  for  fear  of  their  falling  into  wrong  hands,  and  so  stated  to 
the  Secretary.  The  troops  (three  regiments)  on  the  Mississippi  coast  were  badly 
armed  and  had  very  little  ammunition — one  of  the  regiments  not  more  than  five 
rounds  per  man.  The  entrances  to  Pearl  River  were  entirely  unobstructed,  as,  indeed, 
were  all  the  other  inlets  and  approaches  into  the  country.  In  addition  to  the  works 
. hereafter  to  be  named,  there  was  an  open  battery  of  ten  24-pounder8  on  Bayou  Bien- 
venue,  one  of  five  on  PhiUippon,  and  two  small  earthworks,  intended  for  five  guns 
. each,  had  been  thrown  up  guarding  the  approaches  to  Berwick  Bay,  but  had  not 
been  completed. 

The  forts  in  the  department  viz.  Pike,  Macomb,  Saint  Philip,  Jackson,  and  Liv- 
I ingston,  were  originally  small  works  of  a very  inferior  class,  built  of  brick  and  earth, 

' *.Not  found. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


559 


and,  Laving-  been  unoccupied  for  niany  years,  Lad  become  mucL  dilapidated,  and  in 
places  I found  tLem  crumbling  witL  tLeir  own  weight.  On  inspection  I found  them 
armed  principally  with  smootL-bore  24  and  32  pounders,  there  not  being  in  the  whole 
department  more  than  nine  guns  mounted  of  a greater  caliber  than  a 32-pounder,  and, 
indeed,  but  twenty-six  of  tlrem  mounted.  Seven  or  eight  of  the  328  had  been  rifled, 
but  there  was  neither  shot  nor  shell  for  them.  The  gun-carriages  were  generally  old 
and  defective  from  long  exposure  to  the  weather.  Many  of  them  were  so  decayed 
that  I could  insert  a penknife  with  ease  into  the  wood.  There  was  likewise  a very 
great  deficiency  in  all  the  implements  and  equipments  necessary  for  the  service  of 
heavy  guns,  as  sponges,  rammers,  priming-wires,  friction-tubes,  primers,  haversacks, 
handspikes,  hot-shot  implements,  budge-barrels,  &c.  The  ammunition  did  not  aver- 
age more  than  twenty  rounds  per  gun. 

Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  owing  to  the  exertions  of  General  (then  Colonel) 
/)uncan,  were  in  a better  state  of  preparation  tha#  the  other  works,  but  still  sadly 
deficient  in  very  many  respects  for  their  full  defense,  and  much  of  the  ammunition 
on  hand  was  so  inferior  in  quality  as  not  to  give  more  than  half  range.  The  Macomb 
had  nothing  but  24-pounders,  which,  indeed,  composed  the  main  armament  of  all  the 
works.  There  were  no  guns  or  works  at  Pass  Manchac,  or  Bayou  La  Fourche,  Grand 
Caillou,  or  on  the  approaches,  or  Barataria  Bay,  to  the  river  near  the  city.  No  meas- 
ures had  been  taken  for  obstructing  any  of  the  rivers  or  passes,  either  by  felling  tim- 
ber, driving  piles,  or  making  rafts,  except  that  the  materials  had  been  collected  in  part 
for  making  a raft,  to  be  placed  in  the  Mississippi  River  at  the  forts,  and  work  on  it  had 
been  commenced.  A line  of  intrenchments  around  the  city  itself  had  been  planned, 
and  was  commenced  some  weeks  before  my  arrival,  by  Maj.  (now  General)  M.  L.  Smith, 
but  it  was  entirely  unfinished  ; not  a gun  was  mounted,  a magazine  built,  nor  a plat- 
form laid.  The  length  of  this  line  was  more  than  8 miles.  General  Twiggs  had, 
shortly  before  being  relieved,  received  from  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  more  than  100  old 
navy  guns,  many  of  which  had  been  long  in  use  and  the  rest  so  worn  as  to  be  unfit  for 
friction  tubes.  Many  of  the  guns  had  been  cast  more  than  forty  years.  There  were 
none  above  a 42-pounder,  and  a number  were  32-pounder  carronades,  a gun  entirely 
useless  except  for  firing  grape  and  canister  at  short  distances.  No  carriages,  chassis, 
or  implements  came  with  these  guns,  and  none  of  them  were  mounted  when  I took 
command.  There  was  a vast  amount  of  engineer  and  ordnance  work  to  be  done,  and 
both  of  these  important  branches  were  imposed  upon  Major  Smith,  who  found  it  im- 
possible to  do  justice  to  them  both. 

On  the  water  there  were  two  small  vessels,  the  McRae  and  the  Joy,  and  the  ram 
Manassas,  with  one  guu.  Two  river  steamboats  were  being  strengthened  and  ironed 
for  service,  the  keels  of  two  iron-clad  ships— the  Louisiana  and  Mississippi — had  been 
lately  laid,  and  two  smaller  gunboats,  for  service  on  Lake  Pontchartrain,  were  on  the 
stocks  in  the  Bayou  Saint  John. 

This  is  about  the  condition  of  the  preparations  on  November  1,  about  the  time  I 
assumed  command.  I would  add  that  several  new  regiments  were  in  process  of  organ- 
ization and  preparation  at  Camp  Moore,  78  miles  north  of  the  city,  but  were  only  par- 
tially armed  aud  equipped.  There  were  in  all  five  new  regiments,  which  were  unfit 
to  take  the  field. 

The  court  adjourned  to  10  a.  m.  the  8th  instant. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  April  8,  1863. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Major-General 
Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  Major-General  Lovell  continued. 

By  the  Judge-Ad vocate  : 

Question.  What  steps  did  you  take  to  organize  and  perfect  the  de- 
fenses of  the  department?  Give  a full  account  of  your  preparations  and 
administration  up  to  the  time  of  the  evacuation  of  the  city. 

Answer.  Thinking  it  probable  that  an  attack  would  be  made  sometime  in  January, 
I commenced  at  once,  with  all  the  available  means  at  my  disposal,  to  supply  the  defi- 
ciencies and  to  provide  against  the  dangers  indicated  in  my  last  answer.  In  making 
these  preparations,  however,  I was  materially  delayed  by  the  want  of  a sufficient 
number  of  competent  officers  of  experience  and  detailed  knowledge.  This  deficiency 
was  made  known  to  the  War  Department  and  relief  asked  on  several  occasions,  but 
without  success.  (See  my  letters  to  the  War  Department  of  various  dates.) 


560  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  IChap.  XVX 

Having  completed  my  inspection  in  the  early  part  of  November,  I telegraphed  on 
the  5th  to  Colonel  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  at  Richmond,  for  mortars  and  colum- 
hiads.  He  replied  the  next  day  that  he  had  no  mortars  or  columbiads  to  spare  at 
present.  ^ I then  telegraphed  General  Bragg,  at  Pensacolji,  to  send  me,  if  possible, 
some  10-inch  guns  and  mortars.  He  answered,  “ Not  a gun  to  spare.”  Knowing  that 
there  was  no  other  point  to  look  to  for  guns,  I then  turned  my  attention  to  making 
arrangements  in  New  Orleans  with  Messrs.  Leeds  & Co.,  Bennett  & Surges,  and  S. 
Wolfe  & Co.  for  putting  up  reverberating  furnaces  and  making pther  preparations  for 
casting  8 and  10  inch  columbiads  and  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars.  I procured  all  the 
large  chains  and  anchors  that  could  be  had  from  Pensacola,  Savannah,  and  other 
places,  for  the  purpose  of  constructing  rafts  and  booms  to  place  in  the  various  water 
approaches,  giving  particular  attention  to  that  in  the  Mississippi  River  ; contracted  for 
the  building  and  sinking  of  an  obstruction  in  Pearl  River;  had  Salt  Bayou,  as  also 
Gentilly  and  Ciletche  Bayous,  with  tows  of  piles  driven  across  the  channels,  and  Bay- 
ous rOutre,  Terre  Aux  Boeuff,  and  Aux  Cheue  obstructed  by  felling  the  timber  on  the 
banks,  and  eventually,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Safety  Committee  of  New  Orleans, 
had  two  rows  of  piles,  each  more  than  1,000  yards  long  and  braced  at  the  top,  driven 
in  the  channel,  under  the  guns  of  Fort  Pike,  where  the  water  was  nearly  50  feet  in 
depth.  The  channel  leading  into  Atchafalaya  Bay  was  also  filled  up  by  sinking  green 
live-oak  trees,  forming  an  obstruction  40  feet  wide  at  the  base  and  8 at  the  tops,  and 
a raft  was  placed  on  the  river  just  below  Fort  Berwick,  Judge  Baker,  of  Louisiana, 
superintended  this  latter  work. 

I replaced  the  24-pounders  en  barbette,  bearing  on  the  water,  at  Forts  Jackson,  Saint 
Philip,  Pike,  and  Macomb,  with  the  42  and  32  pounders  received  from  Norfolk,  and 
added  materially  to  the  strength  of  the  various  garrisons.  Obtaining  sulphur  and 
saltpeter  wherever  it  could  be  found,  I pressed  to  completion  a large  powder-mill, 
under  charge  of  Messrs.  Hobart  &.  Foster,  and  soon  commenced  the  manufacture  of 
I)owder,  which  was  submitted  to  the  ^prouvetie  test  before  it  was  received.  Having 
arrangements  made  with  the  found eries  in  New  Orleans  for  casting  shot  and  shell,  I 
proceeded,  with  the  permission  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  to  convert  one-half  of  the 
large  new  Marine  Hospital  into  an  arsenal,  where  I had  a steam-engine  put  up  for  driv- 
ing the  machinery,  small-arms  prepared,  and  the  various  implements,  equipments, 
and  munitions  made  for  the  service  of  heavy  guns.  A cartridge  manufactory  was 
established,  in  which  a number  of  hands  were  employed,  and  which  not  only  supplied 
my  department,  but  enabled  me  to  send  more  than  1,000,000  rounds  to  the  army  in 
Tennessee. 

A considerable  quantity  of  powder  was  brought  in  by  the  steamers  Vanderbilt,  Mir- 
amon,  and  Victoria,  but  it  was  all  old  and  unfit  for  use,  and  every  pound  was  reraan- 
ufactured  in  New  Orleans;  and  from  this  source  I transferred  to  the  Navy  25,000 
pounds,  sent  17,000  pounds  to  other  departments,  and  12,000  pounds  to  Richmond,  be- 
sides furnishing  ammunition  to  all  the  troops  sent  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston  in  Ten- 
nessee, and  giving  the  river-defense  fleet  what  they  required. 

Earthwork  forts,  mounting  from  two  to  six  guns  each,  were  commenced  on  the  Grand 
Caillou  and  on  Bayou  La  Fourche  ; on  Bayou  Barataria,  at  the  Manchac  Passes,  and 
at  Proctorsville ; and  two  forts  on  Berwick  Bay  were  almost  entirely  reconstructed. 
On  the  Mississippi  River  works  were  also  put  up  above  the  city  and  on  the  southern 
and  western  shores  of  Lake  Pontchartrain. 

The  general  plan  adopted  was  to  have  two  lines  of  works — an  exterior  line  passing 
through  the  forts  and  earthworks  erected  to  defend  the  various  water  approaches,  and 
an  interior  line,  embracing  New  Orleans  and  Algiers,  which  was  intended  principally 
to  repel  an  attack  by  land.  Commencing  at  the  swamp  on  the  west  side  of  the  river, 
about  4^  miles  below  Algiers,  this  interior  line  extended  across  the  firm  ground  of  the 
right  bank  of  the  river,  and  from  the  right  bank,  at  a point  Just  opposite  across  the 
dry  ground,  to  a swamp  which  occupied  the  space  between  it  and  Gentilly  Ridge, 
where  the  line  extended  across  the  ridge  to  the  adjoining  swamp.  It  was  resumed  at 
the  various  points  of  firm  ground  on  the  railroad,  canal,  and  roads,  when  they  issued 
through  the  swamp  in  rear  of  the  city,  towards  Lake  Pontchartrain.  Above  the  city 
it  also  extended  from  the  swamp  to  the  left  bank  of^the  river  again,  and  from  the  op- 
posite side  it  ran  along  the  Barataria  Canal  from  the  bank  of  the  river  to  the  swamp 
above  Algiers.  The  total  length  of  the  intrenchments  on  this  line  was  more  than  8 
miles,  and,  when  completed,  it,  in  connection  with  the  swamp,  put  New  Orleans  in 
an  impregnable  position  so  far  as  regarded  any  attack  by  land.  It  mounted  more 
than  sixty  guns,  of  various  calibers,  and  was  surrounded  by  wide  and  deep  ditches. 

One  regiment  of  troops  was  taken  from  the  Mississippi  coast  and  stationed  at  Ber- 
wick Bay,  a point  of  vital  importance,  where  I also  located  a battery  of  field  artillery 
and  a company  of  cavalry.  Twenty  independent  companies  of  infantry,  raised  by  my 
l>redecessor,  were  organized  by  me  into  regiments,  placed  as  garrisons  in  the  various 
works  of  the  exterior  line,  and  thoroughly  drilled  in  the  heavy  artillery  service.  The 
infantry  at  Camp  Moore  was  brought  to  the  city  and  placed  in  camp,  and  when  Gen- 
eral Ruggles  (after  four  weeks  of  severe  illness)  reported  for  duty  he  was  charged  with 


Chap.  XVL] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


561 


tlie  organization  ot  a brigade  out  of  these  troops.  They  were,  after  imich  difficulty, 
well  armed,  equipped,  and  provided  in  all  resi'yects,  and  held  at  the  central  position,  to 
be  sent  to  any  point  of  the  exterior  line  required  or  to  defend  the  interior  line  if  at- 
tacked. I laid  a railway  track  in  the  city  between  the  Pontchartraiu  and  Mexican 
Gulf  Railroads,  so  as  to  transfer  troops  rapidly  from  point  to  point,  and  established 
telegraph  lines  to  Proctorsville  and  to  Brashear  City,  on  Berwick  Bay.  We  were 
already  in  telegraphic  communication  with  Forts  Pike,  Macomb,  Saint  Philip,  and 
Jackson,  and  the  Passes  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  River.  1 also  made  every 
effort,  through  the  citizens,  to  endeavor  to  accumulate  a su])ply  of  flour  and  meat  suffi- 
cient for  sixty  days  for  the  whole  city,  to  enable  the  inhabitants  to  stand  a siege  ; but 
from  causes  beyond  my  control  their  efforts  failed  entirely,  and  this  want  of  provisions 
for  more  than  i50,000  inhabitants  was  an  important  element  in  determining  the  evac- 
uation of  the  city  in  April.  In  addition  to  the  great  amount  of  labor  imposed  upon 
myself  and  the  small  number  of  experienced  officers  with  me,  by  the  details  of  the 
works  above  indicated,  I received  orders  about  January  15, 1862,  from  the  Secretary  of 
War,  to  seize  fourteen  steamers,  then  at  New  Orleans,  which  were  to  be  strengthened, 
protected  with  cotton  bales,  armed,  mounted,  and  equipped,  under  my  general  super- 
vision, by  Captains  Montgomery,  Townsend,  and  others  named  by  them.  For  this 
purpose  $1,000,000  was  placed  to  my  credit,  and,  although  not  favorably  impressed 
with  the  plan  myself,  I labored  assiduously  to  carry  out  the  view  of  the  Department. 
Montgomery  and  Townsend  were  sent  from  Richmond,  and  the  twelve  other  captains 
were  selected  by  them,  the  matter  being  placed  in  their  hands  by  instructions  from 
the  Secretary  of  War.  All  these  vessels  were  completed  and  put  in  service  before 
April  1,  eight  of  them  being  sent  up  the  river  to  Fort  Pillow  and  the  other  six  retained 
for  reasons  indicated  by  me  in  ray  letter  of  March  10  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  hereto 
appended. 

Immense  requisitions  of  all  kinds  were  constantly  made  on  my  department,  and  pro- 
visions, clothing,  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  powder,  and  munitions  of  war  of  vari- 
ous kinds  were  sent  to  the  different  parts  of  the  Confederacy.  My  chief  quartermas- 
ter, chief  commissary,  and  ordnance  officer  not  only  performed  their  department  duties, 
but  acted  as  agents  for  the  heads  of  their  respective  bureaus  at  Richmond.  I had 
twelve  launches  fitted  up  and  armed  with  one  gun  each,  for  service  on  the  small 
bayous  and  canals  by  which  the  department  is  intersected  in  all  directions.  This  w^as 
mainly  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  marauding  expeditions  and  to  keep  negroes  and 
others  from  communicating  with  the  enemy. 

I reported,  quite  in  detail,  to  the  War  Department  my  progress  in  the  duties  of  my 
command  on  December  5, 1861.  During  the  succeeding  four  weeks  I was  directed  from 
Richmond  to  send  out  of  the  department  twenty-two  heavy  guns  to  Tennessee  and 
Charleston,  S.  C.  (see  dispatches  herewith,  marked  5, 6,  and  7),  and  to  provide  one  gun 
each  for  the  fourteen  vessels  of  the  river-defense  fleet  intended  for  service  on  the  upper 
river.  I also  turned  over  to  the  Navy  t^n  42-pounders  for  arming  the  steamers  Bien- 
ville and  Carondelet  for  service  in  Lake  Pontchartrain  and  Mississippi  Sound ; besides 
which  I supplied  them  with  powder  and  the  men  to  serve  their  guns,  as  they  had 
neither  guns,  powder,  nor  crews  to  make  the  ships  available.  I reported  to  the  Sec- 
retaries of  War  and  the  Navy  that  I had  turned  over  these  ten  guns.  I also  notified 
the  former  that  I had  sent  two  regiments  of  troops  to  Columbus,  Ky.,  upon  the  urgent 
request  of  the  general  in  command  there. 

/ In  February  I was  ordered  by  the  War  Department  to  send  5,000  men  also  to  Colum- 
bus, which  took  away  all  my  available  force  in  New  Orleans,  leaving  me  without  a 
single  armed  regiment  of  Confederate  troops  in  the  city.  Every  vessel  of  war  ready 
for  service  in  the  river  was  also  ordered  up  to  the  same  point,  and  the  department  left 
without  ships  or  men,  except  the  garrisons  of  the  works  on  the  exterior  line. 

On  February  25  I made  requisitions  on  the  governor  of  Louisiana  for  10,000  militia 
for  the  defense  of  the  city,  but  the  adjutant-general  of  the  State  reported  that,  in 
November,  1861,  he  had  only  about  6,000  armed  militia  available,  and  that  since  that 
time  5,000  of  the  best  armed  of  these  troops  had  been  sent  to  re-enforce  the  army  in 
Tennessee  upon  there  quisition  of  General  Beauregard.  This  gave  me  for  the  defense 
of  New  Orleans  less  than  3,000  militia,  of  which  1,200  had  muskets,  and  the  remainder 
very  indifferent  shot-guns.  These  troops  were  commanded  by  their  own  State  officers, 
and  a part  of  them,  when  ordered  to  the  support  of  Fort  Jackson,  mutinied  and  refused 
to  go,  and  had  to  be  forced  on  board  the  transports  by  other  regiments. 

If  eported  to  the  War  Department  the  manner  in  which  my  district  had  been  stripped 
of  men,  guns,  and  ships,  and  objected  thereto.  (See  my  letters  to  the  Secretary  of 
War,  February  12  and  March  6,  9,  10,  and  22,  hereto  appended,  marked  documents  Nos. 
8,  9,  10,  11,  and  12,  as  well  as  subsequent  letters  to  the  Department.*) 

The  strength  of  the  land  defenses  around  the  city  was,  however,  so  great  that  I felt 
confident  of  repelling,  even  with  the  troops  at  my  disposal,  any  attack  that  might  be 

* See  dispatches  of  dates  indicated  in  Correspondence,  etc. — Confederate,’' 

36  R R — VOL  VI 


562 


OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


made  by  land,  and  I felt  sure  that  the  enemy  was  well  posted  as  to  the  strength  of  our 
works. 

With  regard  to  the  water  approaches,  I had  put  every  gun  in  position  that  I could 
get  and  had  obstructed  every  river  of  any  size  leading  into  the  department,  relying 
upon  the  Navy  to  have  such  iron-clad  ships  and  other  gunboats  as  would  enable  us 
to  oppose  successfully  every  attack  by  water. 

I desire  to  state  that  there  were  two  separate  and  distinct  organizations  for  the 
defense  of  Department  No.  1,  viz,  that  under  the  control  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of 
which  I was  the  senior  officer,  and  that  under  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy[  of  which 
Commodore  Hollins  and  afterwards  Commander  Whittle  were  the  seniors.  We  were 
entirely  independent  of  each  other,  but  were  directed  to  co-operate  cordially  for  the 
defense  of  the  city.  I had  no  control  whatever  over  them,  but  the  best  feeling  existed, 
and  there  was  very  seldom  any  dilference  of  opinion  between  us  as  to  what  should  be 
done.  I made  requests  at  various  times  of  them  that  they  were  unable  to  com])ly 
with.  They  complained  frequently  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  means  and  material 
placed  at  their  disposal  to  assist  me,  and  regretted  that  they  had  no  power  to  hasten 
the  completion  of  the  proper  ships  for  our  defense.  What  few  they  had  were  sent  u]> 
the  rivers,  and  the  others  were  directed  to  follow  as  soon  as  completed.  Against  this 
I protested  by  telegram  on  April  11  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  (See  dispatches,  here-' 
unto  appended,  marked  document  No.  13.)  These  A^essels,  however,  were  never 
entirely  linished.  On  land  we  had,  for  the  defense  of  the  department,  sixteen  diifer- 
ent  forts,  large  and  small  (seven  of  which  were  built  before  the  war),  upon  the  va- 
rious water  approaches,  besides  an  intrenched  line,  with  numerous  batteries,  around 
the  city,  in  all  of  which  there  were  in  position  nearly  300  guns  of  various  calibers, 
while  on  April  24  there  was  not  a single  war  vessel  of  any  great  size  or  power  ahoat 
on  the  Mississippi  River  in  serviceable  condition  for  the  defense  of  Department  No.  1. 

There  was  an  additional  part  of  my  administration  of  affairs  which  cost  much  time 
and  labor. 

On  March  15,  1862,  by  direction  of  the  President,  New  Orleans  and  the  adjacent 
parishes  were  placed  under  martial  law.  Eight  provost-marshals  were  appointed,  four 
for  the  city  and  four  for  the  parishes,  and  for  valid  reasons  I felt  compelled  to  give  a 
good  deal  of  time  and  attention  personally  to  their  plans  and  course  of  action. 

In  the  latter  part  of  February  the  great  raft  in  the  Mississippi  River  began  to  show 
signs  of  giving  way.  The  drift  had  accumulated  greatly  and  the  river  was  higher 
than  ever  known  before.  I employed  steamboats  and  skiffs  to  remove  the  drift,  but 
it  gained  on  us  so  rapidly  that  the  attempt  was  given  up.  The  raft  gave  way  at  vari- 
ous points,  and  by  the  end  of  the  first  week  in  March  the  main  chains  snapped,  and 
it  ceased  to  be  any  longer  an  obstruction.  I determined,  therefore,  to  detain  six  of 
Montgomery’s  boats  at  New  Orleans,  contrary  to  orders  from  the  War  Department, 
but  reported  the  fact  and  the  reasons  therefor  on  March  10  by  letter  to  the  Secretary 
of  War. 

Previous  to  taking  command  at  New  Orleans  I had  verbally  stated,  both  to  the 
President  and  Secretary  of  War,  that,  in  my  opinion,  batteries  on  shore  could  be  passed 
by  ships  of  war  under  steam  with  the  loss  of  but  few  vessels,  and  had  repeated  this 
opinion  to  the  latter  in  my  letter  of  November  19,  1861. 

As  soon  as  the  raft  had  given  way  I applied  for  and  got  $100,000  from  the  city  coun- 
cil of  New  Orleans,  by  whom  the  money  for  the  previous  raft  had  been  furnished,  and 
sent  Colonel  Higgins,  an  able  and  efficient  officer,  formerly  of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  down, 
to  endeavor  to  repair  the  raft.  I gave  him  full  authority  to  take  or  hire  steamers, 
employ  men,  and  do  anything  that  might  be  necessary  to  accomplish  his  pinqiose.  It 
was  found  impossible  to  restore  the  raft ; but  a new  obstruction  was  made  of  parts  of 
the  old  raft  and  with  schooners  anchored  and  fastened  together  by  chains.  This 
obstruction  was,  however,  far  inferior  to  the  other,  and  was  by  no  means  satisfactory ; 
but  heavy  chains  for  anchoring  a more  formidable  obstruction  could  not  be  obtained 
by  the  most  strenuous  endeavors.  I had  prepared  and  sent  down  forty  or  fifty  fire 
rafts  loaded  with  lightwood  and  mixed  with  cotton,  rosin,  and  tar  oil,  which  were 
placed  above  and  below  the  new  obstruction.  This  second  obstruction  was  pretty 
much  broken  up  and  carried  away  before  the  final  attack.  I also  sent  to  Memiihis 
and  procured  the  services  of  Mr.  J.  B.  Cook,  who  had  much  experience  with  torpe- 
does, and  endeavored  to  have  them  placed  in  the  river;  but  the  great  depth  (more 
than  130  feet)  and  the  powerful  current  rendered  such  attempts  nugatory.  I ordered 
a Drummond  light  to  be  made  and  sent  to  Fort  Jackson ; but  it  was  destroyed  by  one 
of  the  enemy’s  shells  during  the  bombardment. 

Governor  Moore,  at  my  request,  took  two  steamers,  lying  in  the  river,  had  them 
strengthened  with  cotton  bales  and  provided  with  officers  and  crews,  which  he  placed 
under  my  orders.  I armed  them  with  two  heavy  guns  each  and  furnished  them  with 
ammunition,  &c.,  and  sent  them  to  Fort  Jackson,  under  Captains  Kennon  and  Grant. 

The  arrangements  for  casting  heavy  guns  were  meanwhile  pressed  forward  under  my 
frequent  supervision,  but  many  difficulties  presented  themselves.  Pits  for  casting 
could  not  be  used  on  account  of  water,  which  in  that  low,  flat  country  rapidly  filled 


Chai’.  XVI.  ] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


563 


them.  It  became  necessary  to  make  casings  in  the  pits  to  exclude  the  water,  but  I 
succeeded,  just  before  the  evacuation,  in  having  two  8-inch  columbiads  and  two  10- 
inch  mortars  completed  and  the  model  for  10-inch  columbiads  was  ready. 

Learning  by  accident  in  the  early  part  of  March  that  Pensacola  was  to  be  aban- 
doned, I renewed  my  ai^plication  to  the  War  Department  for  some  of  the  columbiads 
and  mortars,  of  which  there  was  a large  number  there.  I telegraphed  Mr.  Benjamin, 
Secretary  of  War,  March  7,  1862,  as  follows : “In  case  of  evacuation  of  points  now  forti- 
fied, please  order  10-inch  guns  andmortars  here.”  To  this  telegram  I received  no  reply. 
On  March  15  I telegraphed  to  Maj.  Gen.  S.  Jones,  commanding  at  Mobile,  to  send  me 
10-inch  mortars,  and  also  wrote  on  the  21st.  (See  letter  marked  document  No.  14.) 
Receiving  no  answer,  I telegraphed  the  Secretary  of  War,  requesting  him  to  order  Gen- 
eral Jones  to  send  the  columbiads  and  mortars  promptly  ; to  which  he  replied  by  tele- 
graph that  he  had  ordered  them  to  be  sent  as  requested.  On  the  29th  1 telegraphed 
the  Secretary  of  War  that  the  enemy  were  in  force  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  to 
please  order  the  commanding  officer  at  Mobile  to  send  immediately.  General  Ran- 
dolph, who  in  the  mean  time  had  become  Secretary  of  War,  telegraphed  me  on  March 
29  to  know  what  guns  I meant,  whether  guns  in  battery  or  guns  on  the  way  to  me. 
I replied,  “ A part  of  the  10-inch  columbiads  and  sea-coast  mortars  which  were  at 
Pensacola that  New  Orleans  had  only  one  of  the  former  and  none  of  the  latter.  On 
April  4 the  Secretary  of  War  telegrax)hed  me  that  he  had  endeavored  to  get  from 
Pensacola  columbiads  and  sea-coast  mortars,  but  found  that  all  had  been  sent  to  Mo- 
bile that  could  be  spared.  Finding  I could  not  obtain  guns  by  authority,  I sent  Major 
Duncan,  an  energetic  officer,  to  get  possession  of  as  many  guns  of  that  caliber  as  he 
could  and  to  bring  them  through  unless  stopped  by  some  superior  officer.  Major 
Duncan  is  now  dead.  He  reported  to  me  that  General  Jones,  at  Mobile,  would  let  mo 
have  two  10-inch  guns  if  he  were  in  command,  but  that  he  had  been  ordered  away; 
that  he  telegraphed  General  Bragg,  who  replied  that  the  commanding  officer  was 
authorized  to  give  the  guns  if  he  thought  proper,  but  that  they  regarded  the  points 
above  Memphis  as  the  best  for  the  defense  of  New  Orleans.  The  commanding  officer 
at  Mobile  refused  to  give  them.  Major  Duncan  then  went  to  Pensacola  and  took  three 
guns,  which  he  brought  to  New  Orleans.  I also  telegraphed  and  wrote  to  General 
Beauregard  to  request  General  Bragg  to  order  me  the  guns.  (See  letters  hereunto 
appended,  marked  documents  Nos.  15,  16,  and  17.)  I borrowed  some  guns  from  Com- 
mander Whittle  in  the  latter  part  of  March,  which  were  intended  for  the  iron-clads 
Louisiana  and  Mississippi,  and  on  April  4 suggested  that  the  remaining  guns  of  the 
Louisiana  be  sent  to  Fort  Jackson,  as  I feared  that  vessel  would  not  be  ready  in  time 
for  the  fight.  On  the  11th  the  commodore  demanded  the  return  of  the  guns,  against 
which  I protested.  (See  letters  on  these  points  hereunto  appended,  marked  docu- 
ments Nos.  18,  19,  20,  21,  and  22.)  I urged  the  completion  of  the  Louisiana  and  Mis- 
sissippi upon  Commander  Whittle ; but  he  replied  that  they  were  not  under  his  control, 
the  contracts  being  made  independent  of  his  order  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

I sent  a regiment  of  troops,  under  Colonel  Szymanski,  to  the  quarantine  to  prevent 
an  approach  to  the  river  bank  above  Fort  Saint  Philip  by  the  enemy ; but  the  unpre 
cedented  high  water  dislodged  the  troops,  who  were  removed  to  the  west  bank,  where 
they  were  located  until  they  were  captured  by  the  enemy’s  fleet.  Sharpshooters  were 
also  organized  by  my  orders  for  service  on  the  banks  of  the  river  below  the  forts. 
Obtaining  a few  heavy  guns  from  Pensacola,  I got  120  negroes  from  the  planters  on 
the  river  and  sent  them  to  General  Duncan  for  mounting  those  guns  in  an  additional 
water  battery  outside  of  Fort  Jackson.  General  Duncan,  lately  promoted,  had  been 
placed  by  me  in  command  of  all  the  works  of  the  exterior  lines  and  made  his  head- 
quarters at  Fort  Jackson.  I also  sent  to  General  Beauregard  for  the  ram  Manassas, 
which  he  finally  sent  down,  and  she  took  part  in  the  battle  of  the  24th. 

Commodore  Hollins  came  down  in  April  with  the  McRae,  and,  after  consultation 
with  Commander  Whittle,  I telegraphed  the  Secretary  of  War,  on  April  17,  to  try 
and  have  Hollins  put  in  command  afloat  below  until  he  could  strike  a blow.  (See 
document  No.  23,  hereunto  appended.)  This,  however,  was  not  done.  The  water 
meanwhile  had  risen  in  the  river  to  an  extraordinary  height.  Places  heretofore  free 
from  overflow  were  entirely  submerged,  and  the  water  was  nearly  2 feet  deep  even  in 
Fort  Jackson.  For  miles  above  the  forts  the  river  formed  one  vast  sheet  of  water  in 
connection  with  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  nearer  the  city,  where  the  banks  are  leveed, 
the  surface  of  the  river  was  not  less  thau  8 or  9 feet  above  the  level  of  the  land  adja- 
cent. Maj.  M.  L.  Smith,  whose  promotion  I had  urged  for  some  time,  was  i)i’omoted 
a brigadier-general  in  April,  and  assigned  by  me  to  the  command  of  the  interior  line. 
Ten  32-pounders,  smooth  bore,  and  two  8-inch  columbiads,  just  finished  in  New  Or- 
leans, were  mounted  at  the  interior  line  where  it  abuts  upon  the  river  below  the  city 
(half  the  guns  on  each  side),  and  they  were  provided  with  seventy  rounds  of  ammu- 
nition per  gun. 

On  April  20,  Commander  Whittle  informed  me  that  the  Louisiana,  although  not 
entirely  ready  with  her  motive  power,  would  go  down  at  once  to  the  forts,  but  he 
could  get  no  powder  for  the  guns,  except  the  3,000  pounds  which  I had  already  turned 


564  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

over  to  Mm.  As  she  was  an  iron-clad  sMp,  mounting  sixteen  guns,  a number  of  which 
were  rifled,  of  the  heaviest  caliber  and  longest  range,  I determined,  in  the  emergency, 
to  take  50  rounds  from  my  battery  of  smooth-bore  32s  on  the  lower  line,  which  would 
give  the  Louisiana  5,000  pounds  additional,  but  only  left  20  rounds  at  the  interior  line 
battery.  I thought  that  the  powder  would  do  better  serviee  on  the  Louisiana  than, 
with  my  light  guns  and  new  recruits,  on  the  inner  line.  I issued  no  ammunition  to 
the  militia  at  the  camp  near  the  interior  line  because  they  were  utterly  useless  against 
ships;  no  land  attaek  was  anticipated,  and,  above  all,  they  had,  in  some  regiments, 
manifested  such  an  insubordinate  disposition,  that  I felt  unwilling  to  put  ammunition 
in  their  hands.  I had,  however,  600,000  rounds  of  shot-gun  cartridges  made  up  for 
their  use,  and  put  in  the  arsenal  ready  for  use  when  the  proper  time  should  arrive. 

I employed  two  small  steamers,  with  officers  selected  by  myself,  and  sent  them  to 
General  Duncan,  for  towing  the  fire-rafts  into  position  for  setting  them  adrift.  Several 
other  steamers  were  also  employed  to  carry  down  sand  bags,  already  filled,  for  i)ro- 
tection  to  the  magazines,  &c.,  of  the  forts.  For  full  particulars  of  the  long  and 
arduous  contest  at  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  reference  is  made  to  General  Dun- 
can’s official  report. 

On  April  20,  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  fire,  I turned  over  to  Captain  Mitchell  the 
control  of  the  fire  rafts,  the  steamers  for  towing  them,  and  all  other  floating  defenses 
at  the  forts,  as  General  Duncan  found  it  impossible  to  take  proper  charge  of  them.  I 
sent  orders  to  that  effect  to  Captain  Stephenson,  the  senior  officer  of  the  six  boats  of 
the  river-defense  fleet,  and  to  the  captains  of  the  two  ships  turned  over  to  me  by  Gov- 
ernor Moore. 

This,  I believe,  answers  the  question  in  the  most  material  points.  A vast  number 
of  smaller  matters  gave  me  much  trouble  and  labor  and  took  up  a great  deal  of  my 
time.  I refer  the  court  especially  to  my  correspondence  with  the  War  Department 
for  additional  partieulars  as  to  all  that  was  done  by  me  in  the  administration  of  the 
affairs  of  Department  No.  1. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  the  0 th  ins  taut. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  April  9,  1863. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  also 
31aj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

Examination  of  Major  General  Lovell  continued. 

By  the  Judge -Advocate  : 

Question.  Describe  particularly  the  obstruction  of  the  Mississippi 
Kiver  near  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  and  state  what,  if  any,  con- 
fidence you  placed  in  that  obstruction  as  a permanent  work. 

Answer.  The  obstruction  in  the  Mississippi  River  was  placed  just  under  the  guns  of 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  and  work  upon  it  had  been  begun  before  my  arrival. 
It  consisted  of  cypress  trees  40  feet  long  and  averaging  4 to  5 feet  at  the  larger  end. 
'fhese  were  placed  longitudinally  in  the  river,  about  3 feet  apart,  so  as  to  leave  a 
water-way.  They  were  held  together  by  (or  rather  strung  upon)  two  2^-inch  chain 
cables,  which  were  passed  through  mortises  in  the  under  side  of  the  logs  and  held  in 
place  by  heavy  iron  staples.  To  give  it  stiffening  large  timbers,  6 by  4 inches,  were 
securely  pinned  down  transversely  to  the  upper  side  of  the  logs.  This  raft  was  placed 
in  the  river  by  securing  the  chains  on  the  left  bank  to  large  trees,  and  on  the  right 
bank,  where  there  were  no  trees,  they  were  fastened  to  crab  capstans  and  to  immense 
anchors  buried  in  the  ground  and  held  by  heavy  timbers.  In  addition,  all  the  anchors 
that  could  be  had  were  got  from  various  points  in  the  Confederacy,  and  the  raft  was 
anchored  up  stream,  the  large  anchors  being  laid  singly  and  the  smaller  ones  backed 
by  a second  anchor.  The  depth  of  the  river  being  about  130  feet  at  that  point,  this 
required  an  immense  amount  of  chain,  which  was  difficult  to  procure,  as  well  as  a 
sufficiency  of  anchors. 

The  difficulty  of  anchoring  a heavy  mass  in  the  Mississippi  arises  from  the  fact  that 
the  bottom  is  a shifting  sand,  and  in  high  water  the  swift  current  soon  cuts  out  the 
anchors  or  other  obstruction  placed  on  the  bottom.  In  this  manner  the  raft  began  to 
sag  by  the  drifting  of  the  anchors,  and  the  whole  weight  was  thrown  upon  the  chains; 
and,  when  an  immense  amount  of  drift-wood  had  accumnlated  above  the  raft,  these 
eventually  parted.  This  occurred  about  the  early  part  of  March.  I employed  steamers 
to  remove  the  drift,  but  it  accumulated  much  faster  than  it  could  be  removed.  I then 
authorized  General  Duncan  to  employ  50  or  100  boatmen,  with  skiffs,  to  assist  in  the 
operation ; but  only  a few  boats  could  be  obtained.  Persons  well  acquainted  with  the 


Chai-.  XVI.  ] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


oGo 


river  told  me  tliat  any  obstruction  of  such  character  could  not  be  made  to  hold  in  the 
Mississippi  River  for  the  reason  above  indicated;  but  I thought  it  ])08sible  that  I 
could  make  it  so  that  it  would  hold  for  several  months ; at  all  events  until  the  middle 
of  January,  at  which  date  I was  informed  by  those  superintending  their  construction 
that  the  iron-clad  vessels  would  be  completed. 

In  constructing  this  raft  I employed  the  best  engineering  and  nautical  ability  at  my 
command,  Major  Smith  and  Colonel  Duncan,  and  Colonel  [W.  S.  ] Lovell  (formerly  of 
the  U.  S.  Navy),  being  charged  with  its  construction  and  anchorage.  Its  position  was 
fixed  upon  after  consultation  with  General  Beauregard,  who,  as  an  engineer  in  the  U. 
S.  Army,  had  been  in  service  in  that  country  for  many  years.  I had  a long  boom  con- 
structed to  stretch  diagonally  across  the  river  above  the  forts,  so  as  to  shed  the  drift 
over  through  the  opening;  but  all  my  endeavors  to  get  chains  and  anchors  to  secure 
it  in  position  proved  futile. 

I omitted  stating  that  on  April  23  I requested  Commander  Whittle  to  order  the  iron- 
clad steamer  Louisiana  to  take  position  just  below  Fort  Saint  Philip,  and  endeavor  to 
dislodge  the  enemy’s  mortar  boats,  so  as  to  give  some  relief  to  the  garrisons  and  enal)le 
them  to  repair  damages.  He  said  she  was  not  in  condition  for  effective  service,  and 
she  would  probably  be  lost.  I told  him  we  had  better  lose  her  than  the  city  of  New 
Orleans,  and  he  telegraphed  Captain  Mitchell  to  strain  a point  to  endeavor  to  comply 
with  ray  request.  The  naval  commanders  held  a consultation  on  the  subject,  and,  for 
reasons  which  they  considered  satisfactory,  declined  to  place  the  vessel  in  the  position 
indicated. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  to-morrow,  the  10th  in.staiit. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  April  10,  1803. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Major- 
General  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  Major-General  Lovell  continued. 

By  the  Judge- Advocate: 

Question.  State  your  reasons  for  the  evacuation  of  the  other  forts 
and  works  of  the  exterior  line  and  the  city  of  l^ew  Orleans  after  the 
passage  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  by  the  enemy’s  fleet;  the 
measures  you  adopted  for  the  removal  of  public  property ; the  amount 
of  such  property,  and  the  number  of  troops  removed  from  the  city; 
state  also  the  facts  and  circumstances  attendant  uj>on  the  evacuation. 

Answer.  I was  present  in  a small  river  steamboat  at  the  engagement  which  resulted 
in  the  passage  of  the  forts  by  the  enemy’s  fleet  on  the  morning  of  April  24,  and  pro- 
ceeded immediately  to  the  city.  I had  taken  down  on  the  boats  with  me  to  Fort  Jack- 
son  a number  of  large  cartridges,  already  made  up,  for  General  Duncan’s  heavy  guns, 
which  I was  unable  to  deliver  On  my  return  I directed  them  to  be  left  at  the  bat- 
teries on  the  lower  interior  line,  stopped  there  myself,  and  told  the  officers  that  the 
cartridges  must  be  reduced  to  8 pounds  each  for  service  with  their  guns,  which  were 
32-pounders,  which,  I believe,  was  not  done.  I had  already  determined  upon  th(5 
course  to  be  pursued  in  case  of  the  passage  of  the  forts,  and  had  made  arrangements 
to  meet  the  emergency,  having  particularly  directed  my  chief  commissary  (Major 
Laniet)  to  send  out  quietly  from  the  city  several  hundred  thousand  rations,  which 
were  deposited  at  Covington  and  at  points  on  the  Jackson  Railroad.  I had  also, 
through  Colonel  Lovell,  of  my  staff,  made  arrangements  to  have  several  large  steam- 
ers kept  in  such  a state  of  preparation  that  they  could  be  made  available  at  a few 
hours’  notice. 

I determined  to  evacuate  the  city  when  the  enemy  succeeded  in  passing  the  forts 
for  the  following  reasons:  The  principal  concentration  in  men,  guns,  and  ships  had 
been  made  at  this  point.  It  had  been  selected  as  the  spot  where  the  battle  for  tho 
defense  of  New  Orleans  against  a fleet  coming  up  the  Mississippi  River  should  be 
fought,  and  everything  available  for  the  defense  below,  both  ashore  and  afloat,  had 
been  collected  there,  except  the  twelve  guns  on  the  river  at  the  lower  interior  line, 
which  were  put  there  to  flank  that  line.  The  obstacles  had  been  placed  there  and 
swept  away  and  had  been  a complete  bar  to  the  passage  of  a hostile  fleet,  and  the 
naval  and  river  defense  officers  had  brought  to  bear  at  that  point  alLthe  available 
strength,  and  although  New  Orleans  was  still  in  a condition  to  resist  an  attack  by 
land,  yet  when,  after  six  days  and  nights  of  incessant  conflict,  the  forts  were  passed 


566  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

and  all  our  defenses  afloat  were  either  burned  or  sunk,  I knew  there  was  no  ma- 
terial obstacle  to  prevent  the  fleet  from  proceeding  at  once  to  the  city,  and  that  all  the 
guns,  forts,  and  men  on  the  other  ten  or  twelve  water  approaches  would  go  for  naught. 
The  twelve  guns  in  the  upper  earthworks  on  the  lower  line  had  but  20  rounds  of  pow- 
der each  (the  remainder  having  been  given  to  the  steamer  Louisiana,  for  reasons  which 
I have  already  stated),  and  could  offer  no  serious  resistance  to  a fleet  which  had 
already  passed  more  than  100  guns  in  masonry  works,  better  mounted  and  amply 
supplied  with  powder.  The  city  was  surrounded  by  swamps,  and  there  was  hut  one 
outlet  by  land,  viz,  through  the  narrow  neck,  heretofore  described,  between  the  river 
and  Lake  Pontchartrain. 

At  Kenner,  on  the  Mississippi,  10  miles  above  the  city,  the  firm  ground  between  the 
river  and  the  swamp  which  borders  the  lake  is  narrowed  to  about  three-quarters  of  a 
mile,  through  which  passes  the  Jackson  Railroad.  The  river  at  this  time  was  full  to 
the  top  of  the  levees,  and  a single  one  of  their  large  ships  of  war  anchoring  at  this  point 
would  have  commanded  with  her  broadside,  at  point-blank  range,  the  only  land  exit 
from  the  city,  sweeping  with  her  guns  (which  would  have  been  higher  than  the  sur- 
face of  the  country)  every  foot  of  land  between  the  river  and  the  lake.  The  obstruc- 
tions placed  across  the  Rigolets  at  Fort  Pike  had  been  swept  away  in  a storm  shortly 
before,  by  some  vessels  which  had  broken  adrift,  and  there  was  an  open  channel,  fully 
as  wide  as  the  Mississippi  River,  into  Lake  Pontchartrain,  which  could  easily  he 
passed  by  the  enemy  at  night.  Such  a movement,  in  connection  with  the  placing  of 
one  or  more  ships  at  Kenner,  would  have  completely  surrounded  New  Orleans,  cutting 
off  all  communication,  by  land  or  water,  with  the  interior.  (See  the  map  heretofore 
submitted.)  My  efforts  to  accumulate  provisions  enough  in  the  city  to  feed  the  pop- 
ulation had  proved  abortive,  and  an  examination,  made  a few  days  previous  to  the 
evacuation,  had  satisfied  me  that  there  were  not  in  the  city  provisions  enough  to  sus- 
tain the  population  for  more  than  eighteen  days.  Taking  it  for  granted  that  the 
enemy  would  occupy  Kenner,  as  indeed  he  did,  in  a few  days,  we  should  have  been 
starved  into  a surrender  in  less  than  three  weeks ; for  when  the  hostile  fleet  anchored 
in  front  of  the  city  we  were  entirely  cut  off  from  Texas  and  the  Red  River,  our  main 
source  of  supply.  I had  more  than  three  months’  rations  available  for  my  troops  (less 
than  3,000  men),  but  this  would  have  answered  hut  a few  days  for  a population  of 
more  than  150,000  persons.  Some  of  the  steamers  on  the  levee  had  been  destroyed 
and  a number  had  fled  up  the  river,  so  that  the  Jackson  Railroad  was  the  only  means 
of  transportation  for  removing  the  women,  children,  and  non-combatants  from  the 
city,  which  removal  it  would  have  required  months  to  accomplish. 

In  the  vicinity  of  New  Orleans  and  for  many  miles  above  there  was  nothing  hut 
swamps  filled  with  water,  in  which  the  families  could  take  refuge,  and,  moreover,  a 
great  portion  of  the  male  protectors  of  these  families  Avere  absent  with  our  armies  in 
Tennessee  and  Virginia,  and  of  course  could  not  superintend  their  removal.  The 
plan,  therefore,  of  removing  the  non-combatants  and  remaining  with  toe  troops  was 
entirely  impracticable.  Thirteen  of  the  enemy’s  ships  were  anchored  abreast  of  the 
city,  with  their  guns  looking  down  upon  the  streets,  which  they  could  have  swept  to 
the  swamps  in  rear  of  the  houses  or  set  on  fire  at  a number  of  points ; and,  had  I con- 
tinued to  occupy  it  with  troops,  they  would  have  been  justified,  by  the  laws  of  war, 
in  opening  fire,  after  due  notice  to  the  women  and  children  to  withdraw  from  danger. 
I knew  that  they  had  not,  and  could  not  have  for  several  days,  land  forces  to  take 
possession,  and  havdng  determined,  for  the  reasons  above  stated,  to  evacuate  the  city,  I 
thought  it  best  to  remove  the  troops  at  once  and  speedily,  and  thus  convert  New  Orleans 
from  a military  position  into  that  of  an  ungarrisoned  city.  By  so  doing  I should  deprive 
the  enemy  of  all  pretext  for  a wanton  and  useless  sacrifice  of  life  and  property,  and, 
as  they  were  unable  to  occupy  it,  I would  have  a number  of  days  tor  the  undisturbed 
remoA’^al  of  the  vast  amount  of  public  property  which  was  on  hand  at  the  time.  My 
troops,  however,  were  placed  at  Camp  Moore,  only  four  hours’  run  from  the  city  by  rail, 
and  I could  have  reoccupied  it  at  any  time  for  several  days  after  the  evacuation,  if  it 
had  been  deemed  advisable.  Had  I regarded  the  outside  popular  clamor  that  would 
ensue,  I should  have  subjected  the  people  of  New  Orleans  to  a bombardment ; hut  I 
did  not  think  myself  justified,  for  such  a purpose,  in  spilling  the  blood  of  women  and 
children,  when  I knew  that  in  two  or  three  weeks  at  furthest  want  of  food  for  the 
inhabitants  would  compel  me  to  evacuate  the  city,  or,  if  that  had  been  impossible,  to 
surrender.  I spoke  to  the  mayor,  several  members  of  the  city  council,  and  many 
prominent  citizens  on  the  subject,  and,  while  none  seemed  unwilling  to  undergo  the 
dangers,  if  by  so  doing  they  could  arrive  at  favorable  results,  yet  all,  without  excep- 
tion, under  the  circumstances,  approved  of  and  advised  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops. 
In  determining  upon  the  evacuation,  I,  necessarily,  as  soon  as  the  enemy’s  fleet  had 
passed  the  forts,  regarded  the  position  the  same  as  if  both  their  Army  and  Navy 
were  present  before  the  city,  making  due  allowance  simply  for  the  time  it  would  take 
them  to  transport  their  army  up.  Inasmuch  as  their  ships  had  passed  Forts  J acksoii 
and  Saint  Phttip,  they  could  at  once  place  themselves  in  open  and  uninterrupted  com- 
munication with  their  army  at  points  from  6 to  20  miles  above  the  forts  through 


Chai*.  XVL] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


r)fJ7 

various  small  water  communications  from  the  Gulf,  made  more  available  by  the  extra- 
ordinary height  of  the  river,  and  which,  while  they  were  in  possession  of  the  latter,  I 
had  easily  and  without  risk  defended  with  launches  and  a part  of  the  river-defense 
fleet.  I had  also  stationed  Szymanski’s  regiment  at  the  quarantine  for  the  same  object. 
These  were,  however,  all  destroyed  or  captured  by  the  enemy’s  fleet  after  they  got  pos- 
session of  the  river  between  the  forts  and  the  city.  There  was  a further  and  very 
important  reason  for  the  course  which  I pursued.  I knew  that  if  I remained  in  New' 
Orleans  we  should,  in  all  probability,  lose,  in  a short  time,  troops,  guns,  and  supplies 
of  all  kinds,  and  the  enemy  would  then  be  in  full  possession  of  the  river  as  far  as 
Memphis,  w'hich  eventiially  fell  also  into  their  hands.  By  w ithdrawing  my  command, 
however,  I would  be  enabled  to  fortify,  arm,  and  organize  Vicksburg,  a strong  ancl 
defensible  position. 

On  April  17  I had  written  to  General  Beauregard  (see  document  No.  24,  hereunto 
appended)  recommending  the  fortiflcation  of  Vicksburg,  and  asking  him  for  an  engi- 
neer officer,  and  two  days  after  the  evacuation  I advised  the  Adjutant-General  at 
Richmond,  General  Cooper,  that  I should  occupy  that  place  and  Jackson.  (See  docu- 
ment No.  25,  hereunto  appended).’’  I sent  thither  a number  of  heavy  guns  and  quan- 
tities of  ammunition  with  the  artillerists  from  the  various  forts  near  New  Orleans,  and 
sent  General  Smith,  with  a brigade  of  infantry,  to  take  command  of  the  whole.  The 
officers,  troops,  and  guns  wffiich  held  Vicksburg  last  summer  were  almost  entirely  the 
same  which  I withdrew  from  New  Orleans  ratlier  than  remain  and  submit  to  an  inev- 
itable surrender.  Results  have  fully  proved  the  wisdom  of  the  military  policy  pur- 
sued by  me  of  collecting  all  the  means  in  Department  No.  1 and  taking  a new  and 
stronger  position  on  the  Mississippi  River.  The  evacuation  of  New  Orleans  and  its 
occupation  by  the  enemy  would  necessarily  be  followed  sooner  or  later  by  the  aban- 
donment of  the  various  forts  and  small  works  of  the  exterior  line,  which  were  erected 
principally  to  defend  the  approaches  to  that  city,  and  after  its  evacuation  could  no 
longer  serve  any  useful  purpose.  As  the  position  of  the  enemy  (in  the  river  abreast 
of  the  city)  gave  him  control  of  the  Opelousas  Railroad,  thus  enabling  him  to  get  in 
rear  of  the  works  on  Barataria  Bay,  Grand  Caillou,  Bayou  La  Fourche,  and  at 
Berwick  Bay,  by  which  he  could  cutoff  and  capture  all  the  garrisons,  with  small-arras, 
ammunition,  and  stores,  all  of  which  were  greatly  needed  at  that  time,  I directed  them 
to  be  abandoned  at  once.  The  officers  in  command  were  ordered  to  report  with  their 
troops  and  all  transportable  supplies  at  Camp  Moore  or  Vicksburg.  Some  of  them 
complied  with  this  order,  but  a portion  of  the  garrisons,  after  marching  part  of  the 
way,  refused  to  go  farther  and,  in  spite  of  their  officers,  disbanded  and  went  to  New 
Orleans. 

Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  surrendered  in  consequence  of  a mutiny  among  the 
men  on  April  28.  (See  General  Duncan’s  report).!  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb  were 
abandoned  without  my  orders.  When  I returned  to  the  city  from  the  lower  forts,  on 
the  24th,  I directed  Colonel  Fuller,  who  was  in  command  of  the  works  on  the  lakes, 
which  comprised  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb,  to  have  everything  ready  to  abandon  those 
forts  in  case  I should  order  it. 

Supposing  that  the  enemy  would  occupy  Kenner  and  thus  deprive  me  of  the  use  of 
the  Jackson  Railroad,  it  was  my  intention  to  remove  the  troops,  supplies,  &c.,  across 
Lake  Pontchartrain  to  Pass  Manchac  and  Madisonville,  holding  the  entrance  to  that 
lake  by  forts  as  long  as  possible.  The  enemy,  however,  did  not  interfere  with  the 
railroad  at  Kenner,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  men  and  public  property  were  removed 
by  rail. 

I went  to  Camp  Moore  on  the  night  of  the  25th  to  arrange  matters  there,  and  on  the 
morning  of  the  27th  received  information  that  Colonel  Fuller  had  arrived  at  Coving- 
ton, La.,  with  the  garrisons  of  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb.  This  was  the  first  knowledge'll 
had  of  the  abandonment  of  those  works.  I immediately  directed  them  to  be  reoccu- 
pied, and  sent  a letter  to  Captain  Poindexter,  of  the  Navy,  in  command  of  the  ships 
on  the  lake,  requesting  his  co-operation  in  this  movement.  Colonel  Fuller  replied,  on 
the  28th,  that  the  forts  had  been  dismantled,  the  guns  spiked,  and  the  carriages  de- 
stroyed, and  that  it  was  impossible  to  reoccupy  them. 

I was  officially  informed  of  the  surrender  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  on  the 
29th,  and  deemed  it,  therefore,  useless  to  make  any  further  attempts  to  reoccupy 
Forts  Pike  and  Macomb.  The  cisterns  in  the  two  last-named  works  only  held  wateV 
enough  to  serve  the  garrison  a short  time,  and  had  to  be  supplied  by  steamer  from  a 
distance.  They  could  not  have  held  out  for  any  great  length  of  time  for  this  reason, 
and  I deemed  it  best  to  save  their  garrisons  (composed  of  well-drilled  artillerists)  for 
the  works  at  Vicksburg,  where  they  have  ever  since  rendered  such  good  service,  but 
it  was  not  intended  to  abandon  them  so  soon,  nor,  indeed,  until  I had  transferred  all 
the  public  property  from  New  Orleans. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  to-morrow  at  10  a.  m. 


A duplicate  of  report  printed  on  p.  510. 


t Page  521. 


568  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVT. 

April  11,  1863—10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

It  was  ordered  by  the  court  that  the  examination  of  Maj.  Gen.  Maus- 
field  Lovell  as  a witness  be  suspended,  so  that  the  testimony  of  S.  L. 
James,  an  important  witness,  now  en  route  to  Europe,  might  be  takeu. 

S.  L.  James  was  then  duly  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge- Advocate  : 

Question.  Were  you  an  officer  in  the  C.  S.  Army,  under  the  command 
of  General  Mansfield  Lovell,  at  the  time  of  the  evacuation  of  NTew  Or- 
leans? If  yea,  how  long  had  you  been  under  his  command  and  what 
position  did  you  hold  ? 

Answer.  I was  in  New  Orleans  at  that  time  and  in  the  service,  but  only  as  a volun- 
teer aide  to  General  Lovell,  with  the  nominal  rank  of  major.  My  services  as  such 
began  April  24,  1862,  the  day  before  the  evacuation. 

Question.  State  what  orders  you  received  from  General  Lovell ; what 
services  were  rendered  by  you  in  obedience  to  those  orders,  and  the  cir- 
cumstances attendant  upon  their  execution. 

Answer.  On  the  afternoon  of  April  24  General  Lovell  ordered  me  to  detain  all  the 
steamboats  at  the  landing  until  they  could  be  loaded  with  Government  stores.  I gave 
notice  of  this  at  once  to  the  captains  and  owners  of  these  steamboats.  During  the 
day  there  were  large  quantities  of  Government  stores  placed  upon  these  boats  by  the 
ordnance  officers,  but  during  the  excitement  of  the  evacuation  some  of  the  engineers 
and  pilots  deserted  their  posts  and  left  the  boats  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy  or  the  peo- 
ple. Those  that  were  loaded  went  up  the  river,  leaving  some  nine  or  ten  at  the  levee. 
During  that  evening  General  Lovell,  to  gratify  the  people,  ordered  me  to  call  for  1,000 
men  to  man  these  boats  for  a hand-to-hand  fight  with  the  enemy’s  vessels,  although 
General  Lovell  said  it  was  impracticable. 

The  citizens  promised  to  have  the  men  ready  the  next  morning  at  9 o’clock.  I was 
authorized  to  take  the  boats  that  were  left  and  make  such  arrangements  as  I thought 
necessary  to  carry  out  the  plan.  I published  this  order  (with  an  appeal  of  my  own 
to  the  people)  in  all  the  city  papers.  In  the  mean  while  I sent  down  cotton  bales  to 
protect  the  boats,  and  molasses  barrels  to  put  in  their  hulls  to  keep  them  afloat  in  the 
event  they  were  penetrated  by  shot.  I called  upon  General  Lewis  and  other  militia 
officers  to  assist  me  in  carrying  out  this  scheme,  which  they  failed  to  do,  and  I only 
received  in  response  to  the  call  140  men,  without  arms,  under  Captain  Dupiere. 

Hearing  that  the  enemy’s  vessels  were  at  Camp  Chalmette,  about  5 miles  below  the 
city,  I sent  an  officer  to  the  landing,  who  ascertained  that  the  citizens  had  burned  a 
number  of  the  boats  and  the  owners  of  the  others  had  gone  off  with  them.  I then 
ordered  these  140  men  to  proceed  to  the  Jackson  Railroad  depot  to  go  to  Camp  Moore, 
and  I then  went  to  Camp  Moore. 

The  morning  of  my  arrival  at  Camp  Moore  General  Lovell  ordered  me  to  return  to 
New  Orleans,  and  take  with  me  Major  Bell,  Captain  Venable,  and  Mr.  Caul  Rives,  and 
remove  what  Government  property  there  was  in  the  city,  stating  that  the  railroad 
authorities  would  give  me  every  facility  for  its  removal.  I went  to  New  Orleans  the 
same  day  in  a special  train,  and  hired  drays,  wagons,  &c.,  to  remove  the  Government 
property  to  the  depot,  whence  it  was  removed  out  of  the  city  by  the  railroad  authori- 
ties. There  were  many  citizens  who  assisted  me  and  pointed  out  private  property 
which  would  be  of  use  to  the  Government,  which  was  also  removed.  I obtained  funds 
from  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  to  pay  for  drayage  and  other  charges  incident  to 
the  removal.  I also  used  the  mayor’s  office. 

After  delivering  at  the  depot  all  the  Government  property  I could  find,  I ordered  the 
military  property  of  the  State  to  be  seized  and  removed.  After  that  I removed  such 
supplies  as  were  in  the  hands  of  cbntractors  for  the  Government.  We  also  moved 
two  batteries  belonging  to  the  State,  two  guns  of  which  had  been  spiked.  We  were 
engaged  four  days  and  nights  in  removing  from  the  city  property  available  for  military 
purposes.  Some  18  or  20  mounted  men  were  sent  over  to  the  city  to  get  such  military 
supplies  as  might  have  been  taken  by  citizens.  There  was,  however,  but  little  found 
in  this  way. 

I requested  the  mayor  to  give  me  an  order  upon  General  Paul  Juge  for  the  arms  in 
the  hands  of  the  Foreign  Brigade.  This  he  would  not  do,  but  gave  me  a request  for 
them  to  the  general,  which  was  refused.  All  the  property  available  for  military  uses 


GIIAI’.  XVI.J 


CAPTURE  OE  NEW  ORLEANS. 


569 


that  I could  find  was  removed,  except  some  heavy  gnus,  which  had  to  be  left  because  I 
could  not  get  the  men  aud  sling-carts  necessary  to  their  removal. 

Question.  Did  you  make  any  communications  with  the  mayor  and 
council  of  New  Orleans  on  behalf  of  General  Lovell  ? If  so,  what  was 
the  substance  of  those  communications  and  what  w as  their  result  ? 

Answer.  On  April  28  General  Lovell  telegraphed  me  to  inform  the  mayor  and  council 
that  he  would  return  with  his  forces  to  the  city  if  they  desired  it,  provided  they  Avould 
incur  the  hazards  of  a bombardment.  They  replied  that  General  Lovell  could  do 
nothing  further  with  his  troops;  that  if  they  were  brought  back  it  would  only  cause 
a bombardment  of  the  city,  which  would  result  in  the  death  of  many  women  and 
children ; but  they  told  me  they  would  like  the  general  to  come  down.  I notified  the 
general,  and  he  came  down  that  night.  We  went  together  to  the  mayor’s  house, 
where  the  general  repeated  the  proposition  he  had  made  to  him  through  me.  He 
replied  as  before,  and  asked  the  general  to  remain,  so  that  he  might  have  the  benefit 
of  his  counsel. 

During  the  morning  of  the  29th  the  mayor  received  a communication  from  the  com- 
mander of  the  Federal  fleet,  stating  that  it  was  useless  to  hold  out  longer,  that  the 
forts  had  fallen,  and  demanding  the  surrender  of  the  city.  In  the  afternoon  the 
enemy  landed  their  forces  to  take  down  the  State  flag.  General  Duncan  also  arrived 
in  the  city,  a paroled  prisoner  of  war.  About  this  time  a policeman  told  me  that  the 
mayor  of  the  city  was  anxious  to  see  me.  I immediately  called  ujjon  him,  when  ho 
asked  me  for  God’s  sake  to  get  General  Lovell  out  of  town. 

Question.  Were  you  present  at  any  interview  between  General  Lovell 
and  Commander  Whittle  in  reference  to  the  location  of  the  steamer 
Louisiana  ? If  yea,  state  where  such  interview  occurred  aud  what  passed 
between  them. 

Answer.  On  the  morning  of  April  23  I was  present  at  such  an  intervicAV,  in  which 
General  Lovell  stated  to  Commander  Whittle,  commanding  the  naval  station,  that  he 
had  received  intelligence  to  the  efiect  that  the  forts  and  magazines  had  been  very 
much  damaged  and  the  sand  bags  over  the  magazines,  and  that  the  latter  were  in 
danger  of  being  blown  up  by  the  enemy’s  shells,  and  that  the  sally-ports  were  injured 
to  such  an  extent  that  it  was  impossible  to  replace  the  sand  bags  under  the  enemy’s 
heavy  fire.  General  Lovell  then  said  he  was  satisfied  that  by  placing  the  iron-clad 
gunboat  Louisiana  on  the  Fort  Saint  Philip  side,  about  half  a mile  below  the  raft, 
where  she  would  be  under  the  protection  of  the  cross-fire  of  both  forts,  she  could 
enfilade  the  position  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  and  drive  them  off,  Avhen  the  men  in  the  forts 
could  get  some  rest  and  replace  the  sand  bags.  The  commander  replied  that  he  had 
every  confidence  in  the  officers  in  command  of  our  fleet  below,  and  that  he  did  not  like 
to  interfere  with  them.  General  Lovell  then  stated  to  him  that  Captain  Mitchell  had 
already  refused  to  make  the  desired  change,  and  that  he  came  to  him  as  chief  in  com- 
mand. Comma;nder  Whittle  replied  that  the  vessel  was  not  entirely  ready  with  her 
motive  power,  and  that  by  placing  her  there  he  w^as  afraid  she  would  be  lost.  The 
general  answered,  saying  that  he  did  not  Avish  her  to  be  sent  down  amid  the  enemy’s 
fleet,  but  that  she  could  be  towed  doAvn  and  placed  in  position  as  a battery ; that  the 
necessity  was  such  that  it  was  better  to  lose  the  A^’essel  than  the  city  of  New  Orleans. 
Commander  Whittle  then  dispatched  Captain  Mitchell,  which  dispatch  I saAv  and 
heard  read.  As  near  as  lean  recollect  it  was  in  these  words : ‘‘I  am  informed  by 
General  Lovell  that  the  garrisons  need  relief,  and  that  by  placing  the  Louisiana  iii 
position  in  the  eddy  on  the  Fort  Saint  Philip  side  of  the  river,  below  the  fort,  under 
the  protection  of  the  cross-fire  of  both  forts,  she  can  dislodge  the  mortar  boats  and 
relieve  the  garrison.  If  in  your  judgment  this  can  be  accomplished  strain  a point  to 
do  so.”  He  then  turned  to  General  Lovell  and  asked  if  that  would  do.  The  general 
replied  that  nothing  short  of  placing  her  in  the  position  indicated  would  answer  his 
purposes,  aud  remarked  to  the  commander  that  he  was  going  doAvn  in  a special  boat 
to  the  forts  that  afternoon,  and  asked  him  to  go  with  him  and  judge  for  himself.  The 
commander  replied  that  his  business  in  the  ofidee  was  such  that  he  could  not  spare  the 
time. 

Question.  Were  the  steamboats  that  you  say  were  burned  by  the 
citizens  at  the  levee  private  property  State  how  many  there  were^ 
and  whether  other  vessels  than  those  steamboats,  private  property, 
were  destroyed. 

AnsAver.  The  gunboat  Yankee  was  also  burned,  and,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge 
and  belief,  with  her  armament  aboard.  I do  not  know  by- whose,  if  anybody’s,  order 
she  was  burned.  The  remaining  A-^cssels  were  priA^ate  property. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  April  13. 


570  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  A^pril  13,  1863—10  a.  m. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  the  11th  instant  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  General  M.  Lovell  resumed. 

Answer  (continued).  In  answer  to  the  latter  part  of  the  question  asked  previous  to 
the  examination  of  Major  James,  as  to  the  removal  of  public  property,  I will  state,  in 
general  terms,  that  I gave  orders  to  my  staff  officers  to  employ  every  means,  by  ves- 
sels on  the  Mississippi  River  and  the  lake,  and  by  the  Jackson  Railroad,  to  remove 
the  public  property  in  their  charge.  I also  sent  from  Camp  Moore  several  active  and 
energetic  officers,  who  were  well  acquainted  with  the  city,  to  search  out  and  to  trans- 
I)ort  from  thence  all  the  Government  property  and  all  property  of  the  State  of  Louisi- 
ana available  for  war  purposes.  Before  the  arrival  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  several  steamers 
had  been  sent  up  the  river  loaded  with  ordnance  and  commissary  stores  and  with  the 
machinery  of  the  rifle  factory  and  powder-mills.  I took  possession  of  all  the  rolling 
stock  of  the  Jackson  Railroad,  a;nd,  with  the  co-operation  and  assistance  of  the  super- 
intendent, Mr.  Williams,  kept  the  whole  force  of  the  road  moving  night  and  day, 
employed  in  bringing  out  such  property  as  my  agents  collected  for  transportation. 
Majors  James,  Venable,  and  Bell,  with  Captains  McDonald  and  Caulkins,  were  busily 
employed  in  this  matter  under  my  orders  until  they  reported  to  me  that  they  had 
brought  everything  that  could  be  found  belonging  either  to  the  State  of  Louisiana  or 
the  Government,  or  that  was  in  the  hands  of  contractors,  that  could  be  made  availa- 
ble for  military  purposes.  For  details  1 will  have  to  refer  the  court  to  other  witnesses. 
I know  that  an  enormous  amount  of  property  was  brought  from  New  Orleans,  which 
I should  estimate  to  be  worth  several  millions  of  dollars.  I advised  the  officer  in 
command  of  the  gunboats  on  the  lake  to  take  his  ships  to  Mobile,  but  he  determined, 
for  his  own  reasons,  to  destroy  them.  I then  got  from  there  ten  or  twelve  heavy 
guns,  with  ammunition,  which  I sent  up  and  put  in  position  at  Vicksburg. 

On  the  afternoon  of  April  24,  after  my  return  to  the  city,  it  was  intimated  to  me 
that  1,000  volunteers  might  be  got,  who,  if  placed  on  steamers,  partly  protected  by 
cotton  bales,  would  undertake  to  board  and  take  possession  of  the  enemy’s  ships  by  a 
hand-to-hand  flght.  I did  not  think  it  practicable,  because  I did  not  believe  that  the 
requisite  number  of  desperately  bold  men  could  be  had ; but  I concluded  to  make  the 
attempt,  and  published  an  order  calling  for  the  volunteers,  placing  the  whole  matter 
in  charge  of  Maj.  S.  L.  James.  Advertisements  to  that  effect  were  published  in  all 
the  papers  of  the  city,  but  less  than  150  men  volunteered  for  the  enterprise,  and  it 
was  accordingly  abandoned. 

I returned  to  the  city  from  Camp  Moore  on  the  evening  of  the  28th,  three  days  after 
the  evacnation,  as  it  was  intimated  to  me  that  the  citizens  intended  to  resist  the 
onemy  at  all  hazards,  and  had  they  concluded  to  do  so,  I determined  to  support  and 
assist  them  at  any  cost.  I found,  however,  that  no  such  idea  was  entertained.  I was 
at  the  mayor’s  house  when  Commodore  Farragut  announced  by  letter  the  surrender  of 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  and  demanded  the  surrender  of  the  city.  Soon  after 
I met  General  Duncan,  who  confirmed  the  news  of  the  surrender  of  the  forts.  The 
flag  was  taken  down  from  the  city  hall  on  the  same  day  and  replaced  by  the  United 
States  flag  while  I was  yet  in  the  city.  I remained  six  or  eight  hours  after  that  event 
took  place,  and  finally  returned  to  Camp  Moore  on  the  night  of  the  29th,  as  my  pres- 
ence could  no  longer  be  of  any  hse  in  New  Orleans.  Three  days  later  I addressed  the 
following  letter  to  the  Adjutant-General : 


Camp  Moore,  La.,  May  2,  1862. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

A djutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  Department  will  appoint  a board  of  competent  officers  to 
examine  into  and  report  upon  the  circumstances  preceding  and  attendant  upon  the  evacuation  of  the 
city  of  New  Orleans,  as  well  as  the  passage  of  the  forts  (Jackson  and  Saint  Philip)  by  the  fleet  of  the 
enemy,  which  brought  about  the  evacuation.  This  is  necessary  as  an  act  of  justice  to  myself  and  offi- 
cers, as  well  as  to  vindicate  the  truth  of  history. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ ■ M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 


No  official  nofice  was  taken  of  this  application. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  12  m.  the  14th  instant. 


CHAi\  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


571 


Jackson,  Miss.,  April  14,  1863—12  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Major- 
General  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

The  judge-advocate  then  read  in  evidence  to  the  court  a certified  copy 
of  the  official  correspondence  between  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  and  the 
War  Department  (hereto  appended,  and  marked  document  A),*  and  cer- 
tified copies  of  the  official  reports  of  Major-General  Lovell  and  Briga- 
dier-General Duncan  upon  the  fall  of  Kew  Orleans  and  the  passage  of 
Ports  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip.  (Hereto  apiiended,  and  marked  docu- 
ments B and  C.t) 

General  Lovell  then  offered  in  evidence  the  letter-book  of  Department 
No.  1,  for  the  purpose  of  supplying  the  omission  of  certain  letters  he 
had  written  to  the  War  Department,  already  referred  to  and  hereafter 
to  be  mentioned  in  his  testimony,  and  to  show  his  conduct  while  in  com- 
mand of  said  Department  No.  1,  special  reference  to  be  made  to  such 
of  its  contents  as  will  be  used  for  the  purposes  indicated. 

The  judge-advocate  admitted  the  genuineness  of  said  letter-book, 
when  it  was  received  in  evidence  by  the  court. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  7 p.  m.  the  15th  instant. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  April  15,  1863—7  p.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge- advocate,  and  Major- 
General  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

It  was  ordered  by  the  court  that  Mr.  K.  Hammett  be  employed  as  an 
additional  clerk,  to  aid  the  judge-advocate. 

The  judge-advocate  then  stated  to  the  court  that  a question  would 
arise  as  to  the  jurisdiction  of  this  court  to  inquire  into  the  conduct  of 
naval  officers  on  duty  in  Department  No.  1,  at  the  time  Forts  Jackson 
and  Saint  Philip  were  passed  by  the  enemy’s  fleet,  and  that  he  was  of 
opinion  that  the  court  had  no  jurisdiction  to  make  such  inquiry.  It 
was  thereupon  ordered  by  the  court  that  the  judge-advocate  communi- 
cate the  question  for  decision  to  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  by 
telegraph,  and  in  the  following  words : 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Bichmond,  Va. : 

General  : The  court  of  inquiry  instruct  me  to  ask  whether  it  is  intended  to  restrict 
them  in  their  investigation  and  opinion  to  the  conduct  of  officers  of  the  Army,  or  is  it 
their  duty  to  inquire  into  and  express  their  opinion  upon  the  conduct  of  the  officers  of 
the  Navy,  so  as  to  embrace  the  whole  subject  of  the  capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of 
New  Orleans? 

L.  R.  PAGE, 

Major,  Adjutant-GeneraVs  Department,  Judge- Advocate. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

April  16,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge  advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell.  7 ^ 7 j 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

* Not  found.  This  is  probably  the  correspondence  referred  to  in  message  of  President 
Davis.  See  No.  9,  p.  654.  ■ 

t See  pp.  510,  521. 


572  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Cuap.  XVI. 

The  examination  of  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  continued. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  State  what  preparations,  if  any,  were  made  by  you,  and, 
if  so,  when  begun,  to  resist  the  progress  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  up  the 
river,  after  the  raft  ceased  to  be  an  obstruction,  and  when  you  believed 
the  passage  of  the  forts  could  be  accomplished. 

Answer.  I made  my  preparations,  from  the  beginning,  on  laud,  to  resist  the  passage 
of  the  fleet  up  the  river  to  the  city,  precisely  as  if  there  had  been  no  obstructions  in 
the  river,  and  brought  everything  to  bear  that  I could  obtain  for  that  purpose.  I 
never  did  believe  that  the  forts  could  have  been  passed  if  those  who  had  charge  of 
the  construction  of  the  vessels  of  war  which  were  intended  to  co-operate  with  me  in 
the  defense  had  had  them  ready  at  the  time  named  to  me  by  themselves,  as  two 
powerful  iron-clad  steamers,  heavily  armed  and  manned,  could  have  averted  the  neces- 
sity of  any  obstructions;  with  this  assistance,  which  I was  informed  would  undoubt- 
edly be  aflorded,  I did  not  think  the  enemy  could  get  up  the  river.  When  the  first 
obstructions  were  carried  away,  having  done  all  I could  by  way  of  defense  on  land, 
I endeavored  to  urge  forward  the  completion  of  th(*,  iron-clad  steamers,  and  was  told 
by  the  builders  that  they  would  undoubtedly  be  ready  about  April  1.  Previous  to 
this  time  I endeavored  to  get  the  heavy  guns  from  Pensacola,  as  mentioned  already  in 
my  testimony. 

Question.  When  you  considered  the  passage  of  the  fort  practicable, 
did  you  then  or  at  any  time  urge  upon  the  Government  the  speedy  com- 
pletion of  the  iron- clads,  which  were  then  being  built  in  NTew  Orleans, 
as  necessary  to  its  successful  defense,  and  did  you  at  any  time  advise 
the  War  Department  of  any  tardiness  on  the  part  of  those  building 
them? 

Answer.  I did  not.  I had  been  distinctly  informed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  and 
President  that  I was  to  have  no  control  over  those  matters.  The  Navy  Department 
had  experienced  officers  at  New  Orleans  in  charge  of  its  affairs,  and  I should  have  con- 
sidered it  a reflection  upon  these  officers  for  me  to  undertake  their  duties.  I did,  how- 
ever, represent  the  matter  frequently  and  forcibly  to  the  naval  officer  in  command  of 
New  Orleans,  who  inlormed  me  that  it  had  been  represented  by  him  to  Richmond.  It 
was  also  stated  day  after  day  that  the  Louisiana  would  be  ready,  and  she  did  go  down 
the  river  on  the  20th  to  the  forts,  and  I supposed  that  with  her  assistance  the  enemy 
could  be  driven  off.  When  she  got  there  she  proved  not  to  be  ready. 

Question.  What  officers  informed  you  from  day  to  day  that  the  Louisi- 
ana would  be  ready ; and  did  you  not  know  before  she  went  down  that 
she  was  not  ready  ? 

Answer.  Various  persons  connected  with  her  construction  and  her  crew.  I did  know 
that  she  was  not  entirely  ready,  but  supposed  she  was  all  prepared,  except  some  works 
upon  the  propellers,  for  the  completion  of  which  work  she  took  down  a number  of 
mechanics,  and  I was  informed  that  she  would  be  entirely  ready  in  less  than  two  days 
by  some  of  her  officers  or  master-mechanics. 

Question.  When  it  became  evident  to  you  that  the  security  of  IS'ew 
Orleans  required  that  the  Louisiana  should  be  placed  as  indicated  by 
you  to  Commander  Whittle,  and  that  officer  declined  to  give  a positive 
order  to  that  effect,  did  you  or  not  communicate  the  fact  to  the  War 
Department  ? If  not,  what  were  your  reasons  ? 

Answer.  I did  not.  From  information  received  I felt  convinced  that  the  final  pas  • 
sage  would  be  attempted  within  twenty-four  hours,  and,  if  so,  I knew  it  was  too  late 
to  communicate  with  Richmond,  and  went  down  myself  to  endeavor  to  effect  tlie 
change  by  personal  application  to  Captain  Mitchell,  and  arrived  a few  moments  before 
the  battle  commenced,  and  was  unable  to  see  him. 

Question.  By  what  considerations  were  you  induced  not  to  attempt 
the  construction  of  defensive  works  on  the  river  between  Forts  Jackson 
and  Saint  Philip  and  your  interior  line  ? 

Answer.  I had  no  guns  wherewith  to  arm  them  and  could  get  none.  I bad  concen- 
trated almost  all  the  guns  for  the  defense  of  the  river  at  those  forts  after  consultation 
with  General  Beauregard,  who  understood  well  thti  nature  of  the  country,  because  I 


Chap.  XVI. J 


CAl’l'UJiE  OF  NFW  ORLEANS. 


573 


could  i)ut  men  and  gnus  tlieni  under  the  protection  of  masonry  Avorks,  and  because  I 
inteuded  to  obstiuct  the  river  at  that  point,  aud  wished  to  bring  to  hear  upon  theeuemy’s 
deet,  Avhen  checked  by  such  obstructions,  the  greatest  possible  Aveight  of  metal.  The 
country  for  many  miles  above  the  forts  offered  no  location  for  guns  in  high  stages  of 
the  river,  and  nearer  to  New  Orleans,  Avhere  the  banks  are  leveed,  guns  aboard  shij) 
m high  water  would  command  guns  ashore.  There  Avas  also  great  deficiency  of  earth 
for  the  erection  of  Avorks,  and  had  I located  guns  there  the  position  could  have  been 
overfloAved  by  breaking  the  levees ; besides,  I had  not  troops  enough  to  act  as  a pro- 
tecting force  to  a number  of  detached  works. 

Question.  When  did  you  make  the  arrangements  with  Leeds  & Co. 
and  S.  Wolfe  & Co.  in  regard  to  the  erection  of  the  reverberating  fur- 
naces State  what  those  arrangements  were,  and,  if  you  know,  where 
S.  Wolfe  & Co.  and  Leeds  & Co.  are. 

Answer.  I cannot  state  the  precise  time.  It  was  soon  after  I became  satisfied  that 
if  I Avanted  heavy  guns  I must  have  them  made  myaelf  in  New  Orleans,  The  arrange- 
ments were  to  put  up  the  necessary  furnaces,  and  to  get  for  S.  Wolfe  & Co.  the  large 
lathe  at  the  Bellville  Iron  Works.  Mr.  Leeds,  the  member  of  Leeds  & Co.,  with  whom 
I made  the  arrangements,  is  since  dead,  and  Mr.  Wolfe  is  at  Columbus  or  Athens,  Ga. 

Question.  Did  not  the  War  Department  uniformly  approve  and,  when 
necessary,  ratify  every  step  taken  by  you  in  perfecting  the  defenses  of 
New  Orleans,  and  were  you  not  authorized  to  adopt  such  measures  as 
you  deemed  essential  to  its  safety  ? 

AnsAver.  In  answer  to  the  first  part  of  the  question,  I answer  yes ; to  the  latter  part 
I answer  that  I was  authorized  by  the  department  to  adopt  many,  but  not  all,  of  the 
measures  which  I thought  essential  to  the  safety  of  New  Orleans.  I wanted  control 
of  the  defenses  afloat  as  Avell  as  ashore,  and  of  their  preparations,  and  I wanted  gnns 
transferred  from  points  that  I considered  of  minor  importance  (for  instance,  Pensacola) 
to  NeAv  Orleans.  There  were  other  smaller  points  of  difference,  which  appear  fully  in 
my  correspondence.  I had  no  funds  placed  nnder  my  control  for  river  obstructions, 
although  I directed  Major  Smith  to  make  estimates,  Avho  reported  that  they  had  been 
made  and  sent  forward.  He  may  have  obtained  some  money  for  this  purpose,  but  the 
bulk  of  the  money  expended  upon  the  obstructions  was  obtained  from  the  city  of  New 
Orleans,  amounting  in  all  to  nearly  a quarter  of  a million  of  dollars.  The  estimates 
made  by  General  Smith  were  not  forwarded  until  I had  been  in  New  Orleans  some 
months,  because  when  I assumed  command  the  city  had  already  placed  at  my  disposal 
nearly  $100,000,  which  I could  apply  to  the  making  of  obstructions. 

Question.  Did  not  the  Safety  Committee  of  New  Orleans  repeatedly 
desire  to  know  your  necessities,  and  tender  you  money  and  every  other 
means  in  their  power  to  strengthen  and  perfect  its  defenses  ? 

Answer.  The  Safety  Committee  several  times  offered  me  any  assistance  in  money 
that  I might  desire,  or  their  personal  services,  and  desired  to  know  more  of  the  neces- 
sities of  my  position  than  I thought  proper  to  confide  to  fifty  persons  (the  number  of 
the  committee),  many  of  them  unknown  to  me.  I availed  myself  of  their  personal 
services  in  many  instances,  and  got  from  them  about  $250,000  in  money.  They  offered 
me  more  money,  to  which  I replied  that  I could  not  use  the  additional  funds,  as  the 
articles  of  which  I stood,  most  in  need — to  wit,  guns  of  heavy  caliber,  anchors,  chains 
and  small-arms — were  not  to  be  had  in  the  Confederacy ; but  I urged  them  to  obtain 
these  things  by  running  the  blockade  and  to  apply  their  funds  to  laying  in  a sufficient 
store  of  provisions  to  supply  the  population  in  case  of  a siege.  In  reply  to  my  last 
call  on  them  for  funds,  which  they  stated  that  I should  have  immediately  upon  my 
requisition,  they  waited  several  days,  and  then  sent  a sub-committee  to  me  to  know  what 
i intended  to  do  with  the  money  before  they  would  grant  the  request.  This  I declined 
to  do,  as  I did  not  wish  to  make  public  the  weak  points  of  my  department. 

Question.  When  you  ceased  to  feel  secure  as  to  the  defense  of  the 
city  why  did  you  not  begin  the  removal  of  public  stores;  and  did  you 
or  not  advise  the  removal  of  the  iron-clads,  particularly  the  Mississippi, 
to  some  other  point  ? 

Answer.  Believing  that  the  iron-clads  would  probably  be  completed  before  the  enemy 
AA’ould  make  his  final  attack,  I did  not  feel  so  inseenre  as  to  justify  me  in  removing  the 
public  stores,  Avhich  removal  I knew  would  not  be  kept  secret  and  would  create  a great 
panic  among  our  own  people,  and  also  convey  to  the  enemy  the  impression  that  Ave 
•despaired  «f  holding  our  position.  I did  not  advise  the  removal  of  the  iron-clads,  be- 


574  OPEKATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 


cause  there  were  naval  officers  of  age  and  experience  present  who  were  as  well  or  bet- 
ter able  than  myself  to  decide  as  to  what  steps  should  be  taken  with  regard  to  the 
property  intrusted  to  their  charge.  I did,  however,  make  arrangements,  as  already 
stated,  to  remove  the  property  under  my  control  in  case  of  disaster  at  the  lower  forts. 

Question.  Give  the  names  of  the  officers  commanding  the  exterior  lines 
of  defense  in  your  department  and  the  names  of  the  officers 'ufion  your 
staff.  State  also  their  rank  and  specific  duties. 

Answer.  The  whole  exterior  line  was  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  K.  Duncan 
(now  dead),  Colonel  Fuller  commanding,  under  him,  the  works  on  Lakes  Pontchartraiu 
and  Borgne.  Major  Clinch  commanded  at  Fort  Pike ; Captain  Capers  at  Fort  Macomb  ; 
Captain  Robertson  at  Battery  Bien venue;  Captain  Plazuier  at  Tower  Duprd ; Captain 
Patton  at  Proctorsville  works ; Colonel  Higgins  at  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philij), 
the  latter  being  under  the  immediate  command  of  Captain  Squires ; Colonel  Heard  at 
Fort  Livingston  and  Little  Temple.  The  works  on  Bayou  La  kourche  and  Grand 
Caillou  were  under  the  command  of  two  captains  named  Marks.  Major  Fry  commanded 
at  Forts  Berwick  and  Chene,  and  Captain  Davis  commanded  at  Calcasieu  Pass,  where 
I had  placed  two  guns,  which  fort  I omitted  to  state  previously  in  my  testimony. 
General  Duncan’s  headquarters  were  at  Fort  Jackson. 

My  staff  was  composed  as  follows : Majors  Pickett  and  Palfrey,  assistant  adjutants- 
general;  Lieut.  J.  G.  Devereux,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general;  Major  Pickett  dis- 
bursed recruiting  funds  for  the  army  generally;  Maj.  M.  L.  Smith  was  my  engineer  and 
ordnance  officer  for  several  months,  and  acted  also  as  the  agent  of  the  Ordnance  De- 
partment at  Richmond,  x>urchasing  supplies  for  the  Army  at  large ; Lieut.  Col.  W.  S. 
Lovell  relieved  him  subsequently  as  ordnance  officer,  and,  in  addition,  was  charged  by 
me  with  the  general  supervision  of  the  preparations  of  the  river-defense  fleet;  Maj.  W. 
L.  Larice,  my  chief  commissary,  acted  also  as  the  general  agent  of  the  Commissary 
Department ; Major  Winnemore  was  the  chief  quartermaster,  assisted  by  Cai^tains 
Powell  and  Banks,  the  latter  acting  as  paymaster  ; my  quartermaster  was  the  general 
agent  of  the  department  at  Richmond  for  the  supplies  pertaining  to  his  office,  which 
devolved  an  immense  additional  labor  upon  him ; Surgeon  Hayden  was  the  medical 
director,  and  Surg.  Howard  Smith  the  general  medical  purveyor.  My  aides  were  Fir  .t 
Lieuts.  J.  Lovell  and  A.  J.  Toutant,  besides  whom  I had  several  volunteer  aides. 

Question.  Who  informed  you  that  the  irou-clads  would  be  finished  by 
the  January  rise  of  the  river 

Answer.  One  of  the  Messrs.  Tift,  shortly  after  I assumed  command. 

Question.  What  were  the  names  of  the  contractors  building  the  iron- 
clad steamers,  and  who  was  the  principal  naval  constructor? 

Answer.  Mr.  Pearce  was  the  principal  naval  constructor,  as  I was  informed.  I do 
not  know  the  names  of  the  contractors. 

Question.  Who  were  the  Kavy  officers  who  regretted  that  they  had 
not  sufficient  means  at  their  disposal  to  assist  you  in  hastening  the  com- 
pletion of  the  iron-clad  steamers  ? 

Answer.  Commodore  Hollins,  Commander  Whittle,  and  Captain  Mitchell  often  spoke 
of  the  insufficiency  of  the  means  under  their  control. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  to-morrow,  the  17th  instant. 

April  17,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  firoceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  continued. 

By  a Member  of  the  Court  : 

Question.  Did  you  at  any  time  order  all  non-combatants,  women,  and 
•hildren  to  leave  the  city  of  Orleans  ? 

Answer.  I did  not. 


Chap.  XVI.  ] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


575 


The  following  statement  was  then  made  by  General  Lovell : 

I desire  to  add,  that  when  I have  stated  in  my  testimony  I have  done  thus  and  so,  it 
is  to  be  understood  that  in  many  instances  these  matters  were  personally  attended  to 
by  officers  of  my  staff  or  members  of  the  Safety  Committee,  but  under  my  orders  or 
with  my  knowledge  and  advice. 

A certified  copy  of  certain  letters,  a part  of  the  official  correspondence 
between  the  War  Department  andMaj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell,  was  then  offered 
in  evidence  by  the  judge-advocate,  which  said  copy  was  read  to  the  court, 
and  is  hereto  appended  as  document  N.* 

Surg.  D.  W.  Brickell  was  then  duly  sworn  and  examined  as  a wit- 
ness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  Were  you  in  New  Orleans  during  the  six  months  prior  to 
its  capture  by  the  enemy  in  April,  1862  ? If  yea,  state  what,  if  any, 
public  duties  were  devolved  upon  you  in  that  time. 

Answer.  I was  in  New  Orleans  during  that  time,  and  my  only  public  duty  was  as  a 
member  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  from  its  organization  to  the  fall  of  the  city, 
a period  of  about  sixty  days. 

Question.  State  by  what  authority  this  committee  wafe  organized,  the 
number  and  character  of  its  members,  and  what  it  did  or  endeavored  to 
do  while  in  existence. 

Answer.  The  committee  consisted  originally  of  about  fifty  persons;  several  members 
of  the  city  council  and  other  persons  were,  however,  added  to  it,  until  the  number  was 
probably  more  than  sixty.  It  consisted  of  persons  from  all  classes  and  pursuits,  selected 
for  their  worth,  usefulness,  and  intelligence,  and  was  created  by  authority  of  the  city 
council.  Its  object  was  to  co-operate  in  every  possible  way  with  the  Confederate  and 
State  authorities  to  defend  and  preserve  the  city.  The  first  act  of  the  committee  was 
to  tender  to  the  commanding  general  its  services,  pecuniary  aid,  and  every  other  aid 
in  its  power  to  render.  The  committee  took  charge  of  and  urged  the  piling  of  the 
passage  of  the  Rigolets.  It  also  waited  upon  and  urged  the  governor  to  have  Messrs. 
Cook  & Brothers’  factory  of  small-arms  enlarged  so  as  to  have  100,  instead  of  2.5, 
Enfield  rifles  turned  out  per  day,  and  to  this  end  we  induced  the  governor  to  appropri- 
ate $40,000  ; but  this  he  would  not  do  until  the  committee  had  appropriated  a like  sum. 
The  establishment  at  that  time  was  making  guns  for  the  State  of  Alabama  alone.  We 
wanted  that  contract  executed  fii  the  shortest  time,  so  that  the  State  of  Louisiana 
might  have  the  benefit  of  its  works.  The  committee  ascertained  that  the  work  on  the 
Mississippi,  an  iron-clad  gunboat,  was  almost  at,a  dead  stand,  and  we  proposed  to  the 
Messrs.  Tift  money  without  limit.  We  proposed  also  to  light  up  the  sides  of  the  vessel 
at  night,  so  that  the  work  might  be  pressed  forward  both  day  and  night,  and  also 
Tendered  them  mechanics,  both  white  and  black,  to  relieve  their  hands  and  to  be 
entirely  under  their  control.  It  was*  offered  to  do  these  things  at  the  expense  of  the 
city,  without  cost  to  them ; but  every  single  proposal  was  rejected,  and  we  were  uni- 
formly assured  that  the  vessel  would  be  completed  within  thirty  days  after  our  organ- 
ization. They  declined  the  service  of  negro  mechanics,  stating  that  the  hands  would 
not  work  in  the  day  if  negroes  were  employed  at  night.  To  this  we  replied  that  we 
would  form  nulitary  organizations  and  compel  his  hands  to  work. 

As  a member  of  the  sub-committee  to  inquire  into  the  condition  and  progress  of  the 
Mississippi,  Ifoundthat  the  contracts  made  for  engines,  sheet-ironwork,  and  othermate- 
rial  of  construction  by  the  Messrs.  Tift  were  with  men  altogether  secondary  in  their 
lines,  of  limited  capital,  generally  in  great  need  of  money,  and  wholly  unable  to  fulfill 
their  contracts.  There  were  two  or  three  machinists  in  the  city  of  much  larger  capi- 
tal and  works — Messrs.  Leeds  & Co.  and  Bennett  & Surges — who  stood  much  higher 
with  the  citizens  than  these  men.  The  committee  sent  an  agent — Mr.  James  Beggs— 
to  various  places  between  Atlanta  and  New  Orleans  to  collect  the  iron  that  was  being 
made  for  plating  the  vessel,  who  brought  it  to  the  city.  The  corUmittee  also  sent 
Major  James  to  Richmond  to  bring  the  center  shaft,  which  he  did  bring  to  the  city. 
A large  quantity  of  lightwood  was  collected  by  the  agents  of  the  committee  for  the 
purpose  of  making  fire  rafts  to  send  down  to  the  forts.  Large  quantities  of  iron  and 
other  metals  were  brought  by  the  agents  from  various  points  on  the  Mississippi,  con- 
tributed by  the  planters,  and  turned  over  to  the  military  authorities.  Every  requisi- 
tion for  money  made  by  the  commanding  general  and  his  subordinates  was  promi)tly 


Not  found. 


576  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

complied  with  by  the  committee.  The  same  course  was  pursued  towards  those  in 
charge  of  naval  affairs ; their  bills  were  paid  and  money  furnished  them  to  go  ahead. 
We  discovered  that  the  naval  department  was  largely  indebted,  without  credit,  and 
we  sent  a special  agent  to  Richmond  to  obtain  for  it  the  necessary  relief.  The  com- 
mittee also  sent  out  agents  through  the  country  obtaining  food  for  the  citizens,  keep- 
ing a capital  of  $250,000  in  circulation,  and  selling  the  supplies  thus  secured  at  cost. 
The  committee  never  refused  assistance  to  any  reliable  man  who  was  endeavoring  to 
develox)  the  strength  of  the  citj". 

By  the  Court  : 

Question.  Did  the  Committee  of  Safety  communicate  to  any  persons  in 
authority  the  result  of  their  inquiries  as  to  the  contractors  Tift  & Co.? 
If  so,  to  whom,  when,  and  what  was  the  exact  purport  of  such  com- 
munication ? 

Answer.  The  committee  did  communicate  the  results  of  their  investigations,  partic- 
ularly in  regard  to  the  Mississippi,  to  Captain  Mitchell,  Commander  Whittle,  and  Gen- 
eral Lovell.  They  all  replied  it  was  a matter  not  under  their  control.  The  Tifts  re- 
X)lied  to  the  sub-committee,  after  they  had  waited  upon  them  many  times,  that  they 
were  responsible  to  nobody  in  New  Orleans,  and  exhibited  a pax)er  to  that  effect. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  State  all  you  may  know,  and  your  means  of  knowing,  of 
the  ability  of  the  founderymen  in  NTew  Orleans  to  cast  guns  of  heavy 
caliber. 

Answer.  When  the  committee  organized,  some  of  our  earliest  efforts  were  directed 
to  obtain  such  guns.  Wo  found  all  the  founderymen  willing  to  undertake  the  manu- 
facture of  large  guns,  but  Bennett  & Surges  was  the  only  firm  ready  to  go  to  work 
upon  them  immediately,  and  they  would  only  work  upon  condition  that  no  army  offi- 
cer should  have  anything  to  do  or  say  about  the  matter,  except  to  test  the  guns  after 
they  were  complete.  They  might  subject  them  to  any  test  they  pleased ; if  the  guns 
stood  the  test  we  should  pay  for  them ; if  they  burst  it  should  be  their  loss  entirely. 
They  were  then  ready  to  make  8-inch  guns,  and  they  were  willing  to  make  models  for 
and  begin  the  manufacture  of  guns  of  any  caliber  that  we  might  call  for.  We  at  once 
contracted  with  them,  without  stipulation  as  to  price,  for  all  the  8-inch  guns  they 
could  make  until  ready  to  make  larger  ones.  At  the  time  the  city  fell  they  had  cast 
five  8-inch  guns,  two  or  three  of  which  were  completed  and  the  others  on  the  lathes 
in  process  of  completion.  The  models  for  9-inch  rifle  guns  were  in  a forward  state. 
The  guns  that  where  completed  were  immediately  turned  over  to  the  military  authori- 
ties. I was  on  the  sub-committee  that  superintended  the  construction  of  the  heavy 
8-inch  guns  ; not  at  first,  but  taking  the  place  of  a piember  who  had  retired.  I was 
in  the  foundery  nearly  every  day  and  saw  the  work  progressing.  Messrs.  Bennett  & 
Surges  complained  that  they  had  nqt  been  patronized  by  the  Government.  In  my 
opinion  heavy  guns  could  have  been  made  in  the  city  from  the  beginning  of  the  war. 
Bennett  & Surges  were  most  anxious  to  engage  in  such  work.  They  had  made  a heavy 
gun,  which  was  mounted  at  Columbus  and  Island  No.  10.  They  complained  that  they 
had  always  been  willing  and  able  to  make  heavy  guns,  but  had  received  no  encourage- 
ment from  the  Government.  Messrs.  Bujac  & Bennett,  by  their  individual  efforts, 
built  air-furnaces,  had  six  lathes  all  abreast  for  making  guns  up  to  11  inches  in  cali- 
ber, and  when  the  city  fell  they  were  engaged  in  casting  their  first  heavy  guns.  Their 
machinery  and  works  had  been  begun  and  completed  within  the  six  months  prior  to 
the  fall  of  the  city. 

Question.  Were  you  present  in  the  city  during  the  evacuation  and 
the  removal  of  public  stores  by  our  troops  ? If  yea,  state  all  you  may 
know  on  these  subjects. 

Answer.  I was  there.  On  the  day  in  which  the  enemy’s  vessels  were  coming  up  to 
the  city,  hearing  that  the  Marine  Hosx)ital,  which  had  been  converted  into  a factory 
for  the  repairing  of  arms  and  the  making  of  cartridges,  had  been  broke  open  by  the 
X)opulace,  I went  in  that  direction.  I found  them  carrying  off  arms  and  everything 
X)ertaining  to  an  establishment  of  that  sort.  In  the  foundery  of  Bennett  & Surges 
several  brass  pieces,  nearly  completed,  were  left,  also  a heavy  gun,  and  these  should 
have  been  removed.  After  the  troops  under  General  Lovell  had  been  removed,  the 
foreign  guard,  at  the  instance  of  the  city  council,  was  keeping  guard  over  many  of  the 
Government  warehouses,  to  prevent  the  people  from  breaking  into  them.  This  is  all  I 
know  of  my  own  knowledge  on  these  subjects.  On  the  day  of  the  arrival  of  the 
enemy’s  ships,  but  previous  to  their  arrival,  I saw  large  quantities  of  sugar,  molasses. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


577 


bacon,  and  some  corn  being  seized  and  carried  off  from  the  town  by  the  populace — 
men,  women,  and  children  ; black  and  white — and  all  without  restraint ; on  the  con- 
trary, with  the  encouragement  of  a man  on  horseback,  dressed  in  Confederate  uniform. 
This  same  man  on  horseback  ordered  a pile  of  corn  to  be  burned.  I personally  remoii- 
sfjrated,  telling  him  it  was  corn,  the  bread  the  people  required.  lie  repeated  his  order, 
and  the  corn  was  burned.  I saw  private  individuals  trying  to  save  the  sugar,  &c., 
from  the  depredations  of  the  populace,  claiming  some  of  it  as  their  own,  but  they  were 
disregarded. 

Cross-examiDation  by  Major-General  Lovell  : 

Question.  Wbat  was  the  quality  of  the  iron  offered  by  Messrs.  Leeds 
& Co.j  Bennett  & Surges,  and  others  for  casting  heavy  guns  when  you 
made  inquiries  on  the  subject,  and  what  amount  had  they  on  hand  that 
was  fit  for  that  purpose  ? 

Answer.  The  best  opinion  I can  offer  as  to  the  quality  of  that  used  by  Bennett  &. 
Surges  is  that  it  was  good,  as  a gun  made  by  them  had  been  tested  by  the  military 
authorities  and  approved.  Messrs.  Bujac  & Bennett  had  a large  amount  of  Tennessee 
iron,  part  of  which  they  tendered  to  us  to  be  used  by  other  founderies,  so  as  to  expedite 
the  making  of  heavy  guns  in  the  event  of  such  shops  getting  out  of  iron.  I know 
nothing  more  as  to  the  quantity  and  quality  of  iron  to  be  used  in  making  heavy  guns. 

Question.  How  many  such  lathes  and  furnaces  had  Bennett  & Surges,, 
and  what  time  is  necessary  to  cast  and  bore  an  8-inch  columbiad  ? 

Answer.  They  had  no  lathes  completed,  but  one  was  nearly  done  for  boring  large 
guns.  I do  not  know  that  they  had  more  than  one  furnace.  A lathe  in  the  machine- 
shop  of  the  Jackson  and  Great  Northern  Railroad  and  another  in  the  Shakspeare  found- 
ery, through  the  exertions  of  the  committee,  were  placed  at  their  disposal.  I am  a 
novice  in  such  matters,  but  should  think  that  thirteen  days  would  be  sufficient  to  cast 
and  bore  such  a gun — five  days  and  nights. 

QuestioD.  Do  you  know  whether  the  committee  advised  and  consulted 
with  General  Lovell  on  the  subject  of  engaging  Bennett  & Surges  in 
making  heavy  guns  ? 

Answer.  I cannot  say  whether  they  did  or  not.  Bennett  & Surges  said  that  they 
would  not  make  a heavy  gun  under  the  direction  of  a military  officer. 

Question.  Did  Bennett  & Surges  inform  the  officers  engaged  in  the 
removal  of  property  that  they  bad  some  unfinished  guns , 

Answer.  I cannot  say. 

Question.  Do  you  know  whether  any  attempts  were  made  to  carry 
away  heavy  guns,  and  why  those  attempts  did  not  succeed  ? 

Answer.  I do  not. 

Question.  Were  Bennett  & Surges  largely  engaged  in  making  other 
war  material  for  the  Government 

Answer.  They  were. 

Question.  Are  you  aware  that  the  piling  at  Fort  Pike  was  carried 
away  on  April  9 

Answer.  I never  heard. 

By  the  Court  : 

Question.  Did  the  Committee  of  Safety  delegate  any  person  to  repre- 
sent to  the  Confederate  Government  at  Eichmond  the  condition  of  the 
defenses  of  New  Orleans?  If  so,  state  the  name  of  the  person  sent, 
with  the  date,  what  representations  he  was  instructed  to  make,  and 
what  action,  if  any,  was  taken  by  the  Government  or  anj^  Department 
thereof  in  consequence  of  such  representations. 

Answer.  About  six  weeks  before  the  fall  of  the  city  the  committee  sent  ]\ir.  William 
Henderson  to  Richmond,  to  represent  to  the  President  and  other  authorities  their  con- 
viction that  the  city  was  insecure  and  the  deplorable  condition  of  naval  affairs,  the 
want  of  credit  from  which  that  department  suffered,  and  its  extraordinary  indebted- 

37  R R VOL  VI 


578  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

ness,  whicL  the  committee  ascertained  to  amount  to  $600,000.  This  latter  point  re- 
ceived the  attention  of  the  President  and  the  matter  was  arranged.  I do  not  know 
that  any  other  action  was  taken  upon  the  representations  of  the  committee. 

Question.  Did  the  Committee  of  Safety  urge  the  launching  of  the 
steamer  Mississippi  ? When  and  by  whom  was  it  undertaken  ? State 
all  the  facts  connected  with  the  launching  of  this  vessel  from  first  to 
last,  with  names  of  the  parties  engaged. 

Answer.  About  four  weeks  before  the  city  fell  the  Committee  of  Safety,  through  the 
sub-committee,  as  well  as  various  members  who  certainly  visited  the  Mississippi,  became 
convinced  that  the  vessel  should  be  launched  without  delay,  and  for  the  following 
reasons : 

1st.  That  the  vessel  was  in  such  a condition  of  completion  that  to  launch  her  would 
not  at  all  interfere  with  subsequent  work  on  her,  and  then,  in  case  of  the  fall  of  the 
city,  she  could  at  any  moment  be  towed  otf  to  a place  of  safety. 

2(1.  That  the  river  was  rising  rapidly  ; the  stern  of  the  vessel  was  being  deeply  im- 
mersed in  the  water  ; the  bottom  on  which  she  lay  was  being  softened,  and  the  least 
giving  way  of  the  mud  would  result  in  “ logging”  her  on  the  ways,  thereby  rendering 
it  impossible  to  launch  her. 

They  made  these  representations  to  Mr.  Tift,  and  repeatedly  urged  him  to  launch 
her.  lie  positively  refused.  Desiring  to  do  only  that  which  was  right,  and  willing 
to  admit  the  judgment  of  Mr.  Tift  in  opposition  to  their  own,  they  called  his  con- 
structor (Mr.  Pearce)  before  them,  and  asked  his  opinion  on  the  subject.  He  unquali- 
fiedly approved  our  recommendation  to  launch  her,  and  assured  the  committee  that  he 
had  personally  urged  the  launching  of  the  vessel.  He  expressed  the  greatest  anxiety 
for  the  safety  of  his  vessel,  and  expressed  his  fears  that  she  would  never  be  launched. 
The  committee  then  appointed  a sjiecial  committee,  composed  of  eminently  practical 
andiutelligeiit  men,  mostly  outside  the  committee,  to  survey  the  vessel  and  report  forth- 
with. The  survey  was  cheerfully  and  promptly  made,  and  the  committee  unanimously 
reported  in  favor  of  launching,  and  for  the  reasons  stated.  This  report  was  sent  to 
Mr.  Tift,  with  renewed  api)lication  for  the  launch.  He  refused  ultimately,  and,  as  I 
hrmly  believe,  under  the  pressure  of  public  opinion,  a few  days  before  the  city  fell  he 
attempted  the  launch  by  attaching  steamers  to  the  ram,  which  steamers  were  to  pull 
her  olf  her  ways.  He  worked  all  day  before  a large  crowd,  of  which  I was  one,  and 
utterly  failed.  That  he  would  fail  was  the  opinion  of  every  intelligent  man  I met  on 
the  ground,  as  the  vessels  pulling  were  lower  than  the  vessel  pulled,  and  the  mechan- 
ical effect  was  to  pull  the  ram  more  and  more  ffrmly  down  on  her  ways  at  every  effort. 
A conference  was  held  with  our  practical  men,  and  the  result  was  that  they  went  to 
the  ship  next  morning  with  hydraulic  rams  and  imshed  her  right  out  into  the  river. 
Bitterly  disappointed  by  the  persevering  refusal  of  Mr.  Tift  to  launch  the  vessel,  and 
despairing  of  even  her  safety,  the  committee  was  on  the  eve  of  making  a public  an- 
nouncement of  the  condition  of  things  and  calling  on  them  to  take  the  matter  in  hand, 
when  one  of  its  members  (Mr.  J.  M.  Marks,  if  I am  not  greatly  in  error  as  to  name) 
received  a private  note  from  the  commanding  general,  telling  him  that  he  was  apprised 
of  the  probable  action  of  the  committee ; that  such  an  act  on  their  part  would  apprise 
the  enemy  of  our  weakness,  and  intimating  clearly  that  he  would  not  liermit  such  an 
act  on  the  part  of  the  committee.  This  note  was  read  to  the  committee  and  I read  it 
personally.  The  committee  then  abandoned  all  idea  of  the  safety  or  utility  of  the 
ram. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  the  18th  instant. 

April  18,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  ])ursuaut  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

T.  S.  Williams  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  is  your  present  occupation  and  how  long  have  you 
been  engaged  in  it*? 

Answer.  I am  general  superintendent  of  the  New  Orleans,  Jackson  and  Great  North- 
ern Railroad  ; have  been  such  for  four  years,  and  engaged  on  the  road  for  the  last  ten 
years. 


Chap.  XVI.  1 


CAPTURE  OE  NEW  ORLEANS. 


579 


Question.  Describe  the  country  for  the  first  10  or  12  miles  above  New 
Orleans,  over  which  the  New  Orleans,  Jackson  and  Great  Northern  Kail- 
road  runs. 

Answer.  From  the  city  limits  to  the  four-mile  post  on  the  railroad  the  country  is  a 
swamp ; from  that  mile-post,  which  is  about  a mile  and  a half  from  the  river,  the  road 
passes  over  a narrow  strip  of  firm  laud ; from  the  six  to  the  seven  mile  post  it  is  about 
a mile  in  width ; and  at  Kenner  the  railroad  is  about  1,500  feet  from  the  river.  From 
the  river  to  Lake  Pontchartrain  the  distance  at  Kenner  is  about  4 miles,  3 miles  of  which 
country  is  a swamp.  The  ridge  upon  which  the  road  runs  extends  2 miles  north  of 
Kenner. 

Question.  State  when  the  enemy^s  ships  of  war  took  position  at  or 
near  Kenner  and  cut  off  the  communication  from  New  Orleans  by  the 
New  Orleans,  Jackson  and  Great  Northern  Railroad. 

Answer.  I think  it  was  about  seveu  days  after  the  city  was  evacuated  before  the 
enemy’s  vessels  compelled  the  stoppage  of  the  trains  at  Kenner. 

Question.  State  what  arrangements  were  made  with  you  by  General 
Lovell,  or  by  his  order,  and  what  work  was  done  in  removing  public 
property  and  military  stores  at  and  after  the  evacuation  of  New  Orleans. 

Answer.  On  Thursday,  April  24, 1 received  orders  to  hold  everything  iu  readiness  for 
the  removal  of  troops  and  Government  property,  and  as  it  was  necessary  that  this 
should  first  be  removed,  to  allow  no  citizens  or  private  property  to  be  transported  upon 
the  trains.  The  next  morning  I ordered  all  trains  coming  south  to  be  unloaded  and 
sent  to  Kenner  to  await  further  orders.  For  four  days  aud  nights  wo  had  every  train 
and  engine  on  the  road  at  work  for  the  Government,  removing  its  property.  Some  of 
this  property  was  put  on  at  Kenner,  Carrollton  Crossing,  and  Mauchac;  that  at  Man- 
chac  having  been  brought  across  the  lake. 

Question.  Give,  if  you  can,  a general  idea  of  the  value  of  the  property 
removed  over  your  road. 

Answer.  I do  not  know  its  value,  but  it  required  three  or  four  trains  a day  for  three 
weeks  to  take  from  Camp  Moore  the  property  which  we  had  removed  from  the  city. 

Cross-examination  by  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  Was  there  any  unhecessary  delay  or  confusion  in  loading 
the  trains  at  the  depot  ? 

Answer.  There  was  some  confusion,  but  it^^was  unavoidable.  No  delay.  The  trains 
were  sometimes  loaded  beforg  I was  able  to  move  them. 

Question.  Was  the  property  it  took  three  or  four  trains  a day  for  three 
weeks  to  move  from  Camp  Moore  all  of  it  Confederate  and  State  prop- 
erty? 

Answer.  It  was. 

Col.  J.  SzYMANSKi  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  Where  were  you  at  the  time  of  the  fall  of  New  Orleans,  and 
what,  if  any,  position  did  you  hold  in  the  C.  S.  Army? 

Answer.  I commanded  a regiment,  which  was  then  located  about  5 miles  above 
Forts  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson,  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  One  of  my  largest  com- 
panies was  in  Fort  Saint  Philip. 

Question.  Where  were  you  first  located  and  what  were  your  instruc- 
tions? 

Answer.  I arrived  at  the  quarantine  station,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  on  April 
5.  I was  ordered  there  to  guard  the  approaches  to  the  city  from  the  sea  through  the 
bayous  and  canals.  Afterwards  Brigadier-General  Duncan  ordered  one  of  my  compa- 
nies at  Fort  Saint  Philip  ; the  others  were  assigned  to  duty  at  the  various  bayous  and 
canals  that  intersect  the  country  that  lies  above  the  forts. 


580  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Question.  Was  it  practicable  for  the  enemy,  after  the  forts  had  been 
passed,  to  transport  his  army  through  these  bayous  and  canals  to  New 
Orleans  without  encountering  the  forts  ? 

Answer.  It  was  practicable  to  do  so.  A portion  of  the  enemy  did  come  that  way 
after  bis  fleet  passed  the  forts. 

Question.  How  long  have  you  lived  in  that  country,  and  what  was  the 
state  of  the  river  at  that  season  compared  with  other  years  ? 

Answer.  I have  lived  in  Louisiana  upwards  of  a quarter  of  a century,  and  for  many 
years  owned  a plantation  15  miles  below  the  city.  I was  very  familiar  with  the  whole 
country.  I never  have  known  the  river  so  high  as  it  was  that  year. 

Question.  What  was  the  condition  of  the  country  above  the  forts  for 
30  or  40  miles  in  regard  to  the  overflow  ? 

Answer.  On  the  left  bank  of  the  river  the  whole  country  was  one  vast  sheet  of  water 
from  the  river  to  the  Gulf,  commencing  at  Point  a laHache,  about  40  miles  below  New' 
Orleans.  On  the  other  side  the  country  was  not  overflowed,  but,  on  account  of  the  high 
water  and  the  transpiration  resulting  therefrom,  the  road  (there  being  but  the  one) 
was  impassable.  The  country  was  such  that  when  the  river  was  high  no  earth  could 
be  had  for  a levee  in  the  rear  without  letting  in  water  from  the  Gulf.  In  the  front  an 
alluvial  mud  from  the  river,  when  low,  might  be  had  for  levees.  While  General  Lov- 
ell was  in  command  at  New  Orleans  the  water  was  high,  and  no  earthworks  could  be 
put  up  in  that  neighborhood.  Even  at  Fort  Jackson,  at  the  time  of  the  bombardment, 
the  water  was  from  a foot  and  a half  to  two  feet  deep. 

Cross-examination  by  tbe  Judge-Adyocate: 

Question.  State  the  reasons  for  the  surrender  of  yourself  and  a por- 
tion of  your  command. 

Answer.  When  the  forts  were  passed,  just  about  break  of  day,  the  fleet  came  upon 
my  small  camp  and  opened  fire.  After  losing  some  30  men  killed  and  wounded,  with- 
out a possibility  of  escape  or  rescue — perfectly  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy,  he  being 
able  to  cut  the  levee  and  drown  me  out — I thought  it  my  duty  to  surrender.  A single 
shell  could  have  cut  the  light  embankment. 

# 

Question.  Could  not  earthworks  have  been  put  up  on  the  river  banks 
a distance  of  20  or  25  miles  below  New  Orleans? 

Answer.  They  might  have  been  put  up  at  English  Turn,  a commanding  position, 
where  the  river  makes  a sharp  turn,  commanding,  not  from  its  height,  but  from  the 
course  of  the  river. 

Question.  State  the  elevation  of  that  point  above  the  water  in  high 
stages  of  the  river. 

Answer.  It  was  not  more  than  6 inches  above  high  water,  but  the  ground  was  firm, 
and  would  have  supported  heavy  works. 

Question.  Is  English  Turn  above  the  debouches  of  the  bayous  and 
canals  through  which  the  enemy  might  have  turned  Forts  Saint  Philip 
and  Jackson  ? 

Answer.  It  is ; but  there  is  above  that  point  water  communication  through  Lake 
Borgne  with  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  by  other  bayous  and  canals  of  the  same  character, 
principally  by  Bayou  Bienvenue. 

Examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  : 

Question.  In  that  high  stage  of  water,  during  the  year  1861,  was  not 
the  river  higher  than  the  surface  of  the  country  below  New  Orleans  ? 
If  so,  state  about  how  much. 

Answer.  It  was,  varying  in  depth  from  2 to  14  feet. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


581 


The  deposition  of  R.  F.  Nichols,  a citizen,  taken  at  Jackson,  Miss., 
pursuant  to  an  order  of  the  court,  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  and  the  judge- 
advocate  being  present  at  the  time,  was  then  read  to  the  court. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  April  18,  1863. 

R.  F.  Nichols,  having  been  duly  sworn  by  the  judge-advocate,  testified  as  follows: 

Question.  Whore  did  you  reside  in  the  years  1861  and  1862,  up  to  the  time  of  the 
evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  and  what  was  your  occupation  previous  to  October  18, 
1861? 

Answer.  I resided  in  New  Orleans.  My  occupation  was  that  of  a merchant,  engaged 
in  the  Mediterranean  trade.  About  the  month  of  August,  1861,  I was  solicited  by 
Governor  Moore  to  procure  chains  and  anchors  for  him.  I was  engaged  in  this  when 
General  Lovell  took  command  of  New  Orleans. 

Question.  State,  when  General  Lovell  took  command  at  New  Orleans,  whether  you 
were  employed  by  him  in  any  capacity  ; if  so,  what ; and  state  fully  what  steps  were 
taken  by  you  under  his  orders  or  under  those  of  his  staff  to  procure  chains  and  anchors, 
•cordage,  and  other  materials. 

Answer.  Immediately  on  General  Lovell’s  taking  command  I was  introduced  to  him 
by  Governor  Moore,  and  General  Lovell  thereupon  employed  me  at  once  to  procure 
chains,  anchors,  cordage,  and  other  necessary  materials  which  would  be  required  for 
constructing  and  anchoring  rafts  or  obstructions  that  might  be  necessary  for  the  pro- 
tection of  New  Orleans  in  the  water  approaches.  I immediately  proceeded  to  procure 
all  the  chains  and  anchors  suitable  in  the  city  of  New  Orleans  which  could  be  found 
in  all  the  stores  or  otherwise,  and  also  all  on  board  of  each  and  every  ship,  bark, 
schooner,  and  steamboat  in  port,  as  well  as  on  all  the  plantations  and  saw-mills  on  the 
coast  and  in  the  city  of  New  Orleans.  I further  was  authorized  and  did  take  one  of 
the  tow-boats  for  the  purpose  of  taking  the  mooring  chains  from  all  the  crafts  afloat 
then  in  port,  which  I did,  securing  these  vessels  by  such  other  means  as  I could,  to 
wit,  by  cordage  and  chains  of  smaller  dimensions.  I continued  incessantly  at  this 
business  day  by  day  up  to  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the  forts,  having  in  my  employ 

large  number  of  seamen  and  stevedores  to  assist  me.  Oftentimes  I encountered  se- 
rious difficulty  in  effecting  my  object  by  the  parties  owning  or  controlling  the  chains 
and  anchors  concealing  them  from  me.  In  several  ships  I found  from  500  to  600 
fathoms  of  chains  laid  under  10  to  15  feet  of  ballast,  and  some  were  sunk  in  the  Missis- 
sippi River  under  the  wharf,  which  I discovered  and  obtained.  I further  state  that 
at  was  then,  and  is  now,  my  firm  belief  that,  through  the  means  I adopted,  I did  obtain 
and  turn  over  to  General  Lovell  all  the  articles  above  named  which  were  in  and  about 
the  city  of  New  Orleans  that  were  in  any  way  useful  for  the  purposes  required.  After 
I had  exhausted  all  that  could  be  found,  and  more  being  required,  as  a laJt  resort  I 
did,  under  the  advice  of  General  Lovell,  procure  from  the  mayor  of  the  city  permission 
to  take  the  chains  from  around  the  parks  in  the  city,  which,  although  far  too  small 
and  not  suitable  for  the  purpose,  was  thought  to  be  the  best  that  could  be  done  in  our 
■extremity. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  on  Tuesday,  the  21st 
instant,  at  12  m.  or  as  soon  thereafter  as  practicable. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  April  22,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  Maj.  Gen.  T.  C.  Hindman,  Brig.  Gen.  T.  F.  Drayton,  and  W. 
M.  Gardner,  Maj.  L.  E.  Page,  judge-advocate,  and  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield 
Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  the  18th  instant  were  read  over. 

Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

. Question.  Were  you  in  the  Army  of  the  Confederate  States  during 
the  years  1861  and  1862  ? If  yea,  state  what  was  your  rank,  where  you 
were  located,  and  to  what  duty  you  were  assigned  from  May,  1861,  to 
May,  1862. 

Answer.  I entered  the  service  early  in  April,  1861,  as  a major  of  engineers.  I was 
located  in  New  Orleans  from  May,  1861,  until  April  26,  1862.  I was  assigned  to  engi- 
neer and  ordnance  duty  until  April  11,  1862,  w^hen  I was  made  a brigadier-general,  and 
placed  in  command  of  the  interior  line  of  works  around  New  Orleans. 


582  OPERApTIONS  in  W.  FLA.,  S.  ala.,  S.  miss.,  and  la.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Question.  State  generally  your  knowledge  of  the  condition  of  the 
defenses  in  Department  No.  1 at  the  time  General  Lovell  assumed  com- 
mand of  it. 

Answer.  The  defenses  consisted  of  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb,  guarding  the  approaches 
to  New  Orleans  by  way  of  Lake  Pontchartrain ; of  Battery  Bienvenue  and  Tower 
Dupr6,  guarding  the  streams  leading  from  Lake  Borgne  to  the  main-land  between  the 
city ; of  a field  work  at  Proctorsville,  prepared  for  six  guns,  but  not  armed,  guarding 
the  approach  to  the  city  by  way  of  the  Proctorsville  Railroad  ; of  Forts  Jackson  and 
Saint  Philip,  guarding  the  apin'oach  to  the  city  by  way  of  the  river  from  the  Gulf ; of 
Fort  Livingston,  guarding  the  approach  by  way  of  Barataria  Bay;  of  Forts  Berwick 
and  Chene,  on  Berwick  Bay,  guarding  the  approach  by  the  Opelousas  Raib-oad,  and 
a little  work  called  Fort  Guion,  on  La  Fourche,  was  nearly  completed  and  ready  for 
guns.  These  constitiited  the  outer  line  of  defense. 

In  July,  1861,  the  inner  line  of  defense  was  projected  and  in  about  the  following 
condition  when  General  Lovell  assumed  command,  viz:  It  consisted  of  a continuous 
line  across  the  Gentilly  Ridge,  prepared  for  artillery  and  infantry  (this  work  was,  I 
think,  finished,  but  no  guns  mounted) ; of  a continuous  line  at  Cbalmette,  stretching 
from  the  swami)  to  the  Mississippi,  also  intended  for  artillery  and  infantry  (about  half 
completed,  the  contractor,  with  his  full  power,  being  at  work  upon  it);  of  a contin- 
uous line  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  known  as  the  McGehee  line,  also  stretching 
from  the  river  to  the  swamj^y,  and  prepared  for  artillery  and  infantry  (not  more  than 
one-sixth  of  the  line  was  finished,  but  the  contractor  was  at  work  upon  it);  of  a line 
above  the  city,  known  as  the  Barataria  line,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  also  stretch- 
ing from  the  river  to  the  swamp  (not  more  than  a sixth  of  the  line  was  completed ; 
the  contractor  at  work  upon  it) ; of  a continuous  line  of  works  about  a mile  and  a 
half  above  Carrollton,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  then  known  as  the  Victor  line, 
intended  to  mount  fourteen  guns  between  the  bank  and  the  swamp  (this  work  was 
about  half  done;  the  contractor  at  work  with  full  force;  no  guns  mounted) ; of  a two- 
gun  battery,  guarding  the  Carrollton  Railroad  from  Lake  Pontchartrain,  together 
with  supporting  infantry  works  (I  do  not  think  this  work  Avas  then  commenced) ; of 
a battery  and  short  infantry  line,  guarding  the  shell  road  and  canal  leading  from  Lake 
Pontchartrain  to  the  city  (no  work  had  been  done  upon  this  line) ; of  a battery  and 
infantry  line  guarding  the  road  Bayou  Saint  John,  from  Lake  Pontchartrain  to  the 
city  (the  contractor  had  just  commenced  upon  this,  he  being  the  same  who  had  finished 
the  Gentilly  work) ; of  a battery  and  supporting  infantry  works  guarding  the  Pont- 
chartrain Railroad,  leading  into  the  city  ^ do  not  think  this  work  had  been  com- 
menced). These  works  constituted  the  interior  line. 

A raft  was  projected,  to  prevent  the  ascent  of  the  river,  by  Colonel  (now  Brigadier- 
General) 'Hubert  and  myself,  in  July,  1861,  Avhich  was  completed  and  swung  into  place 
about  the  middle  of  September,  stretching  from  Fort  Jackson  ta  Saint  Philip,  where 
it  remained  until  March  or  Ax)ril,  when  it  was  swept  away.  Much  labor  was  expended 
by  General  Lovell  in  securing  this  obstruction  by  additional  chains  and  anchors  ; in 
keeping  it  stretched  in  position  ; in  additionally  securing  it  to  the  banks,  and  in  pre- 
venting a too  great  accumulation  of  drift  against  it.  Fort  Pike,  guarding  the  Rigo- 
lets,  was  a complete  work  in  April,  1861,  as  originally  designed,  as  also  Forts  Macomb 
and  Jackson.  The  inner  or  main  work  of  Saint  Philip  had  once  been  complete,  but 
on  account  of  the  insecure  foundation  it  had  settled  ; the  walls  had  cracked  and  Avere 
insecure  in  the  rear.  An  encircling  outwork  had  been  projected  by  the  Engineer  De- 
partment of  the  United  States,  upon  which  about  one  season’s  work  had  been  done. 
This  was  unfinished  at  the  time  General  Lovell  assumed  command. 

At  Fort  Liviugstou  one  cistern  had  been  repaired ; the  other  two  were  incapable  of 
repair ; the  pintle-block  and  traverse  circles  were  laid,  and  it  had  five  or  six  guns 
mounted.  The  fort  was  gradually  sinking,  and  the  counterscarp  gallery  Avas  con- 
stantly filled  with  Avater,  and  remained  so.  All  these  forts  on  the  exterior  line  Avere 
armed,  except  Fort  Guion.  Their  precise  armament  you  can  better  ascertain  from  the 
officers  stationed  there  at  that  time,  as  also  the  amount  of  ammunition  on  hand.  The 
materials  of  Avar — guns,  powder,  projectiles,  &c. — had  to  some  extent  been  sent  away 
from  New  Orleans  and  Baton  Rouge  to  Pensacola,  and,  I think,  everything  of  material 
remaining,  except  some  guns,  recently  arrh^ed  fiom  Richmond  for  the  interio)'  line, 
had  been  distributed  to  the  forts  before  mentioned.  The  department  was  originally 
poorly  supplied. 

Question.  State  your  knowledge  of  tlie  causes  of  the  fall  of  New 
Orleans,  and  how  it  might  have  been  f)revented,  if  at  all,  with  the  means 
at  the  disposal  of  the  commanding  general. 

Answer.  New  Orleans,  in  my  judgment,  fell  of  necessity  Avhen  thirteen  of  the  ene- 
my’s vessels  succeeded  in  passing  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip.  These  vessels,  in 
my  judgment,  were  able  to  pass  at  any  time  after  the  river  was  free  from  obstructions. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


583 


Owing  to  the  narrowness  of  the  neck  of  land  above  Carrollton,  separating  the  Mis- 
sissippi from  the  impassable  swamp  and  marsh  bordering  Lake  Pontchartrain,  NeAv 
Orleans  may  be  considered  as  situated  on  an  island  and  subject  to  all  the  conditions 
of  a place  surrounded  by  water.  The  force  controlling  the  water  controls  the  supplies 
whieh  subsist  the  island,  and  it  can  neither  be  ai)proached  nor  left  except  bj-  consent. 
This  I understand  to  have  been  precisely  the  case  with  the  city.  Not  a barrel  of  Hour, 
not  a pound  of  bacon  or  beef,  could  have  been  brought  there  with  the  Federal  vessels 
in  possession  of  the  river  above  the  forts  and  of  the  lakes  as  they  practically  were. 
Without  firing  a gun,  without  making  a single  hostile  demonstration  other  than  keej)- 
ing  out  supplies,  the  city  would  most  probably  have  been  surrendered  in  a month  or 
two  from  starvation.  Had  the  fall  of  New  Orleans  depended  upon  the  enemy’s  first 
taking  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  I think  the  city  would  have  been  safe  against 
an  attack  from  the  Gulf.  The  forts,  in  my  judgment,  were  impregnable  so  long  as 
they  were  in  free  and  open  communication  with  the  city.  This  communication  was 
not  endangered  Avhilo  the  obstruction  existed.  The  conclusion,  then,  is  brielly  this  : 
Avhile  the  obstruction  existed  the  city  Avas  safe  ; Avhen  it  Avas  SAvept  aAvay,  as  the  de- 
fenses then  existed,  it  was  within  the  enemy’s  x)ower.  I do  not  uoav  think  it  Avas  pos- 
sible for  General  Lovell  or  any  other  person  to  have  kejDt  the  obstruction  in  place 
during  the  continuance  of  high  water  and  drift,  and  after  it  was  swept  away  there 
Avas  neither  time  nor  materials  for  building  another  on  a different  i)lan. 

Question.  In  the  evacuation  of  New  Orleans  were  any  means  neglected 
which  should  have  been  taken  to  save  the  public  property  or  any  part 
thereof;  and  was  the  evacuation  well  conducted  ! 

Answer.  My  command  lay  below  the  city.  I was  not  in  it  during  the  evacuation  ; 
in  fact,  was  not  aware  that  it  Avas  eAmeuated  until  after  the  soldiers  and  of(ic(?rs  h:)(l 
all  left.  As  to  public  property,  I had  none  in  charge,  and  am  not  sufficiently  familiar 
Avith  the  means  used  to  save  it  to  give  an  opinion  as  to  whether  or  not  any  means  nec- 
essary to  save  it  Avere  neglected. 

Question.  Was  it  possible  to  save  the  gunboat  Mississippi,  and  could 
she  not  have  been  removed  to  some  other  point  when  the  raft  ceased  to 
be  an  obstruction 

Answer.  I have  no  positive  knoAvledge  of  my  OAvn  regarding  the  gunboat  Mississippi, 
Avas  never  on  board  of  her,  and  am  not  cognizant  of  the  efforts  made  to  remove  her. 

Cross-examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  kind  of  works  were  Forts  Berwick  and  Ohene,  and 
what  were  their  condition  and  that  of  their  armament  when  General 
Lovell  assumed  command  . 

AnsAver.  They  were  the  ordinary  class  of  field  works,  intended  to  mount  three  or 
four  guns.  The  parapet  had  sunk  considerably  at  the  time  of  his  arriA  al  and  required 
fitting  uj)  again.  From  the  character  of  the  soil  they  required  a good  deal  of  work 
from  time  to  time,  and  Jiad  alreadj^  been  repaired  once  or  tAvice.  After  his  arrwal 
one  or  more  gun-carriages  had  been  substituted,  and  the  equipments,  nx)on  his  order, 
had  been  duplicated.  There  were  three,  perhaps  four,  guns  mounted.  There  was  one 
rifled  32-pounder ; whether  the  others  Avere  all  32-pounder  smooth  bores  or  24-pounders 
I do  not  recollect.  There  were  no  projectiles  for  the  rifled  32-pounder  in  the  depart- 
ment, the  kind  of  projectile  having  not  then  been  decided  upon.  These  pieces  had 
been  but  recently  rifled  by  direction  of  General  Twiggs. 

Question.  Were  any  platforms  for  guns  laid,  magazines  built,  or  kot- 
skot  furnaces  erected  for  tke  interior  line  at  tkat  time  ? 

Answer.  I think  not. 

Question.  You  say  Fort  Jackson  was  completed  as  originally  designed. 
Was  tkere  not  a water  battery,  wkick  was  subsequently  put  in  order, 
guns  mounted,  and  used  by  direction  of  General  Lovell 

Answer.  I believe  there  was  an  advanced  outwork,  not  then  ready  for  use,  put  in 
order  and  guns  mounted  by  General  Lovell ; but  not  being  done  under  my  directions 
I cannot  say  positively. 

Question.  Wkat  orders  were  given  by  General  Lovell  at  Fort  Living- 


584  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  LChap.  XVI. 

ston  iu  relation  to  the  preparation  of  the  covered  way  for  gnus,  and  what 
time  did  the  work  occupy  ? 

Answer.  He  directed  tke  gallery  to  be  pumped  out  and  prepared  for  two  flank 
howitzers,  which  were  mounted.  This  took  the  garrison  two  or  three  weeks,  but  the 
water  continued  to  flood  the  gallery. 

Question.  What  was  the  general  caliber  of  guns  mounted  at  the  various 
forts  when  General  Lovell  took  charge  of  the  department 

Answer.  The  general  armament  of  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb  was  24-pounders;  of 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  24  and  32  pounders,  the  majority,  I think,  being  24- 
pounders,  together  with  seven  8-inch  columbiads;  Battery  Bien venue  and  Tower 
Dupr6  had  24-pounders ; Fort  Livingston  had  24-pounders  and  a rifled  32-pounder. 

The. court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

April  23,  1863—10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Oen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith  continued. 

Cross-examined  by  Major-General  Lovell  : 

Question.  Did  you  make  any  attempt  to  have  heavy  guns  made  by 
Leeds  & Co.;  and  if  so,  with  what  success?  Was  their  foundery  em- 
ployed to  its  full  capacity  by  the  Government,  without  intermission,  in 
other  work? 

Answer.  About  .Tune,  1861,  Leeds  & Co.  cast  an  8-inch  coin mbi ad  for  a private  party 
in  New  Orleans.  This  fact  becoming  known,  I was  directed  by  the  Orunance  Bureau 
to  test  it  with  n specified  charge  and  continue  the  firing  until  it  burst,  the  object  being 
to  ascertain  the  quality  of  the  metal  used.  The  charge  was  the  ordinary  service 
charge — single  shot.  This  was  done  by  laying  the  gun  upon  a piece  of  timber  in  the 
ordinary  way.  It  burst  at  the  sixty-third  or  sixty-fifth  round.  In  proofs  of  this  kind 
metal  is  unhesitatingly  condemned  that  will  not  stand  from  800  to  1,000  discharges. 
It  is  considered  inferior  if  not  standing  over  1,200;  fair  when  standing  from  1,800  to 
2,000,  and  excellent  when  beyond  this  last  number  of  discharges.  I reported  against 
that  firm  as  being  unable  at  that  time  to  cast  guns  of  that  caliber.  The  firm  subse- 
quently conceded  that  without  changing  their  furnace  they  could  not  cast  heavy  guns. 
My  report  was  fully  indorsed,  I believe,  by  the  Ordnance  Bureau.  I think  that 
foundery,  during  my  entire  stay  in  New  Orleans,  had  about  all  it  could  do  making 
light  guns,  casting  shot,  shell,  *&c.,  for  the  Confederate  Government ; but  about  the 
time  of  the  evacuation  they  were  putting  np  reverberatory  furnaces. 

Questioil.  Why  were  not  arrangements  made  with  Bennett  & Surges 
and  Bujac  & Bennett  to  cast  heavy  guns  in  Kew  Orleans? 

Answer.  Bujac  & Bennett  were  erecting  works  with  a view  of  making  small-arms, 
and  would  not  take  contracts  for  making  heavy  guns  until  near  the  time  the  city  was 
evacuated.  Bennett  & Surges  were  fully  employed  by  the  Navy.  These,  I think, 
were  the  only  founderies  of  any  capacity  in  the  city. 

Question.  Was  any  foundery  and  rifle  factory  set  on  foot  in  l^ew 
Orleans  subsequent  to  the  arrival  of  General  Lovell  and  used  entirely 
for  Government  work  ? If  so,  whose  was  it,  and  did  it  furnish  any  heavy 
ordnance  ? 

Answer.  Subsequent  to  General  Lovell’s  arrival  Wolfe  & Co.  had  undertaken  the 
manufacture  of  heavy  ordnance  exclusively  for  the  Government,  as  far  as  I know. 
There  was  in  connection  with  this  foundery  a rifle  factory,  manufacturing  exclusively 
for  the  Government.  At  the  time  of  the  evacuation  they  had  made  two  mortars  and 
were  making  other  heavy  guns.  ' 

Question.  What  was  the  condition  of  the  interior  line  of  works  at  the 
time  of  the  evacuation  as  to  guns,  magazines,  hot-shot  furnaces,  imple- 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTUKE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


585 


meuts,  and  equipments  ? State  your  oijiiiiou  as  to  its  impregnability 
against  land  attacks. 

Auswer.  This  line  of  works  was  all  completed  ; provided  with  magazines  and  hot- 
shot  furnaces  on  the  river.  On  the  whole  series  of  works  there  were  i)robably  from 
Jfifty-live  to  sixty  guns  mounted.  I considered  them  of  the  very  best  class  of  held 
works,  and,  if  manned  and  properly  defended,  capable  of  resisting  any  force  that  could 
be  brought  against  them.  The  implements  and  e(piipments  tor  the  pieces  tliat  were 
juonnted  were  generally  in  duplicate. 

Question.  What  works  were  constructed  after  the  arrival  of  General 
Lovell  ? 

Answer.  There  was  one  inclosed  held  work  opposite  the  Victor  line  ,*  there  were  two 
advanced  works  higher  up  the  river,  about  half  completed  at  the  time  of  the  evacua- 
tion; a work  about  midway  between  New  Orleans  and  Fort  Livingston,  known  as  the 
Little  Temple ; three  batteries  were  put  up  at  Pass  Manchac,  mounting  two  guns  each, 
and  five  one-gun  batteries  on  the  western  shore  of  Lake  Pontchartrain.  There  was  a 
large  brick  hre-proof  magazine  erected  below  the  city  and  inclosed  Avith  substantial 
walls,  with  a railroad  leading  from  it  to  the  river,  a well-constructed  breakwater  pro- 
tecting the  river  bank  where  the  Chalmette  line  touched  it.  Pearl  River  was  obstructed 
and  three  bayous  leading  from  Lake  Borgne  in  the  direction  of  the  city.  These  were 
the  main  Avorks  that  I now  recall. 

Questiou.  At  the  time  of  the  evacuation  were  there  more  platforms, 
pintles,  and  traverse  circles  ready  in  position  bearing  on  the  river  below 
New  Orleans  than  there  were  guns  to  mount  on  them 

Answer.  There  Avere. 

Question.  What  orders  in  regard  to  the  occupation  of  Vicksburg  did 
you  receive  from  General  Lovell  shortly  after  the  evacuation  of  New 
Orleans,  and  what  means  were  placed  at  your  command  to  carry  out 
those  orders? 

Answer.  About  May  2 or  3 I was  directed  to  send  the  Twenty-sixth  Louisiana 
to  Jackson  and  the  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana  to  Vicksburg.  About  May  7 I was 
directed  to  proceed  to  Vicksburg  and  take  command  of  the  line  from  Vicksburg  to 
Jackson.  In  addition  to  these  two  regiments  mentioned  there  was  ijlaced  at  my  dis- 
posal, about  May  20,  the  Twenty-eighth  Louisiana,  the  First  Louisiana  Artillery, 
ani  the  Eighth  Louisiana  Battalion,  also  Avhat  was  left  of  the  Twenty-second  and 
Twenty-third  Louisiana  Regiments  and  the  Third  Mississippi,  in  all  about  2,632  men, 
and  about  23  heavy  guns,  ranging  from  .32-i)Ounders  to  8 and  10  inch  columbiads,  all 
■of  which  were  mounted  by  me  except  some  six  or  eight. 

Ke-examined  by  the  Judge-Advocate: 

Questiou.  Where  were  you  on  the  day  the  city  was  evacuated? 

Answer.  I AA^as  in  command  of  the  forces  on  the  Chalmette  and  McGehee  lines,  about 
4 miles  below  the  city.  These  forces  numbered  about  1,000  infantry  and  fiA^e  companies 
of  artillery. 

Question.  At  or  near  the  time  of  the  evacuation  did  you  receive  any 
orders  from  General  Lovell  in  regard  to  the  abandonment  of  the  Chal- 
mette  line  and  the  removal  of  the  troops  under  your  command?  If  so, 
state  what  those  orders  were. 

Answer.  I received  no  orders  from  General  Lovell  at  any  time  on  these  subjects ; no 
guns  or  implements  Avere  brought  away ; the  ammunition  was  exhausted  iu  resisting 
the  I'assage  of  the  gunboats;  the  camp  equipage  was  not  saved  because  Ave  had  no 
wago  is  and  Avere  dependent  upon  the  river  for  transportation,  which  was  in  posses- 
sion of  the  enemy. 

Question.  Was  it  practicable  for  General  Lovell  to  communicate  with 
you  after  the  enemy^s  fleet  passed  the  Chalmette  fortifications  ? 

Answer.  I cannot  say  that  it  was  impracticable,  as  I crossed  the  river  myself,  as 
did  also  three  other  officers.  I did  not  consider  that  I ran  any  risk  in  making  the 
crossing.  Orders  would  not  probably  have  reached  me  after  the  enemy’s  fleet  passed 
Chalmette. 


586  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  LChap.  XVI. 


Question.  Did  you  see  and  have  conversation  with  General  Lovell 
after  the  enemy’s  fleet  had  passed  Forts  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson  ? 

Answer.  I saw  him  on  the  afternoon  of  April  24,  1862,  the  evacuation  heino-  on  the 
25th. 


By  a Member  of  the  Court  : 

Question.  Were  you  at  any  time  delayed  or  embarrassed  in  the  dis- 
charge of  your  duties  as  engineer  and  ordnance  otflcer  by  the  want  of 
funds  ? ' 

Answer.  As  ordnance  officer  I was  embarrassed  for  want  of  funds,  but  not  materially 
delayed,  because  I borrowed  money  of  the  State  of  Louisiana.  I made  no  requisition 
for  money  to  expend  on  obstructions  already  alluded  to,  the  expenses  being-  borne  by  the 
State  of  Louisiana.  Subsequent  to  General  Lovell’s  arrival  I did  receive  funds  ifom 
the  Government  ou  requisitions,  which  were  applied  to  obstructions  and  defense  of 
the  river;  the  amount  received  was,  I think,  $25,000. 

Maj.  Henry  A.  Clinch  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 
By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  Were  you  in  command  of  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb  at  the 
time  General  Lovell  assumed  command  of  New  Orleans  ? If  so,  state 
their  condition  at  that  time. 

Answer.  On  January  19,  1861,  I was  ordered  to  the  command  of  Fort  Pike,  and  a few 
days  thereafter  I took  possession  of  Fort  Macomb  also  and  garrisoned! t.  The  arma- 
ment and  general  condition  of  these  works  were  nearly  similar.  They  each  mounted 
some  thirty  smooth  bore  24-pounders  en  harhette  and  casemate,  together  with  nine  24- 
pounder  howitzers  in  flank  defenses.  For  several  years  these  forts  had  been  under 
charge  only  of  militaiy  storekeepers,  and  their  general  condition  was  far  from  good. 
I at  once  made  every  eflbrt  to  place  them  in  fighting  order,  but  owing,  doubtless,  to  the 
then  deranged  condition  of  our  Ordnance  Bureau  the  work  progressed  slowly.  Major- 
General  Lovell  assumed  command  of  the  department  in  October  of  that  year.  At  that 
time  I had  received  from  Ship  Island  one  9-inch  Dahlgren  and  one  8-inch  shell  gun. 
These  were  in  position,  but  required  several  fixtures  and  appurtenances  for  their 
proper  working.  The  garrison  consisted  of  two  companies,  A and  I,  First  Artillery. 
I at  once  urgently  requested  General  Lovell  as  well  for  heavier  guns  as  a general  out- 
fit for  the  fort.  These,  I think,  were  supplied  to  me  as  fast  as  possible.  He  sent  me 
two  rifled  32-pounder  guns  and  four  42-pounder8,  together  with  a 10-inch  sea-coast 
mortar.  The  carriages  and  chassis  were  replaced  by  new  ones ; new  cisterns  sent 
down  and  the  old  ones  repaired,  and  a full  supply  of  ammunition  of  all  kinds  and  im- 
plements supplied.  The  garrison  was  also  re-enforced  by  three  companies,  making  five 
in  all — all  large  companies.  Such  was  the  condition  of  Fort  Pike  on  the  date  of  its 
evacuation  in  April,  1862. 

Question.  If  you  know,  state  what,  if  any,  work  was  done  in  obstruct- 
ing the  Eigolets  and  the  bayous  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Pike  after  Octo- 
ber, 18(31. 

Answer.  The  Rigolets  at  Fort  Pike  was  3.750  feet  wide  and  ranging  in  depth  from 
15  to  50  feet.  In  February,  1862,  General  Lovell  determined  to  throw  a raft  as  an 
obstruction  across  the  pass,  and  charged  me  with  the  general  superintendence  of  the 
work.  It  was  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  logs  of  sufficient  size  and  buoyancy  for  our 
purpose.  These  were  obtained  at  a heavy  cost* and  from  long  distances.  One  or  two 
steamers  were  placed  at  my  disposal  by  General  Lovell,  and  the  work  Avent  on 
night  and  day.  When  nearly  ready  to  be  laid  across  the  channel,  it  Avas  ascertained 
that  a sufficiency  of  chains  and  anchors  could  not  be  had  to  secure  it  in  its  destined 
position.  About,  this  time  seA'^eral  members  of  the  Safety  Committee,  as  it  Avas  called,, 
came  down,  took  soundings,  and  y)roposed  to  secure  the  raft  by  driving  heavy  piling 
on  either  side.  A few  days  after  they  returned  with  all  necessary  apparatus  for  piling, 
and  with  orders  from  General  LoA^ell  for  me  to  furnish  them  all  the  assistance  in  my 
power — an  order  very  cheerfully,  and  to  a large  extent,  obeyed  by  me.  After  a 
month’s  work,  and  only  a very  few  days  after  the  raft  had  been  got  into  position,  there 
came  on  a heavy  blow  of  wind.  One  or  two  steamers  and  schooners  lying  aboAm  the 
raft  dragged  anchor  and  lodged  against  the  structure.  The  consequencA*.  was  lhat  by 
next  morning  the  whole  affair  Avas  a AA^reck,  and  at  least  one-half  of  the  piling  broken  off 
and  washed  aAvay.  I at  once  reported  to  General  Lovell.  He  promised  assistance,  and 
we  were  in  a fair  Avay  to  renew  the  exyieriment,  when  farther  labor  was  rendered  futile 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


587 


by  tbe  fall  of  New  Orleans.  By  orders  from  department  headquarters  I obstructed, 
by  very  heavy  piling,  Salt  Bayou,  connecting  West  Pearl  River  witli  Lake  Poiitcliar- 
train,  and  avoiding  the  guns  of  Fort  Pike.  This  bayou  was  some  10  miles  long,  GO 
feet  in  width,  and  with  an  average  depth  at  high  tide  of  9 or  10  feet.  There  was  also 
Mill  feayou,  connecting  West  Pearl  and  West  Middle  Rivers.  The  mouth  of  West  Pearl 
having  been  obstructed  by  rafting,  it  became  important  to  secure  the  apj)roaches  to  it 
from  other  rivers  not  so  obstructed.  Mill  Bayou,  3^  miles  long,  40  feet  wide,  and  10 
feet  deep,  was  thoroughly  obstructed  under  my  xiersoual  direction,  by  cutting  dowu 
heavy  trees  on  either  bank  across  the  channel  for  nearly  its  whole  length. 

Question.  From  whom  did  you  receive  orders  to  evacuate  Fort  Pike  ? 
State  also  the  condition  of  that  fort  at  the  time  of  its  evacuation. 

Answer.  It  was  on  the  morning  of  April  26,  I think,  that  I received  a telegraj)hic 
order  to  prepare  to  evacuate  my  fort.  This  I prepared  to  do  by  impressing  one  or  two 
steamboats  aud  schooners  lying  at  the  wharf  or  in  the  stream,  and  holding  them  in 
readiness  for  any  emergency.  I do  not  remember  exactly  how  the  order  referred  to 
was  signed,  but  it  must  have  been  signed  by  order  of  Major-General  Lovell,  as  other- 
wise I would  have  x)aid  no  attention  to  it.  On  the  same  afternoon  I received  another 
telegraphic  order,  I think,  to  the  effect  that  I was  to  spike  my  guns  and  abandon  the 
fort  at  once.  This  order  was  signed  by  C.  A.  Fuller,  colonel,  commanding  First  Lou- 
isiana Artillery,  and  dated  New  Orleans.  I declined  obeying  this  order,  for  the  reason 
that  I had  never  rex)orted  to  or  received  orders  from  Colonel  Fuller  in  my  official  ca])a- 
city  as  commander  of  the  fort,  and  I refused  to  recognize  his  authority  in  so  grave  a 
matter  as  abandoning  a fortified  position  without  fighting  for  it.  I at  once  telegraphed 
Major  Devereux,  assistant  adjutant-general,  for  written  orders,  and,  if  it  was  decided 
to  abandon  the  fort,  I asked  for  transportation,  if  possible,  for  my  best  guns  at  least. 
About  12  o’clock  that  night  a steamer  arrived  from  the  city,  and  the  officer  in  charge 
handed  me  a written  order  to  immediately  evacuate  the  fort.  This  order  was  signed 
by  C.  A.  Fuller,  colonel,  commanding  Third  Brigade.  I supposed  that  some  accident 
had  occurred  to  General  Duncan,  and  that  Colonel  Fnller  had  assumed  command  of  the 
brigade  by  seniority.  Regarding,  therefore,  the  order  to  be  in  form  and  from  an  au- 
thoritative source,  nothing  was  left  to  me  but  to  obey  it.  I embarked  on  board  the 
transport  all  of  my  ammunition,  implements,  &c.,  all  quartermaster  and  commissary 
stores  (ninety  days’  sujiply),  and  in  fact  everything  of  value  save  the  guns,  for  which 
I had  no  room  on  board.  These,  the  moment  before  leaving  the  fort,  I thoroughly 
spiked  aud  destroyed  in  various  ways — burning  the  carriages  and  chassis  and  setting 
fire  to  all  the  outbuildings.  I left  the  fort  with  my  whole  command  at  daylight  on  ther 
27th. 

At  the  date  of  its  abandonment  Fort  Pike  was  in  as  good  fighting  trim  as  it  was 
possible  to  place  it,  with  the  serious  exception  of  the  lightness  of  most  of  its  arma- 
ment. Had  the  raft  held  its  intended  position  all  water  craft  would  have  been  forced 
within  50  yards  of  the  walls  of  the  fort  in  order  to  effect  a passage,  which  fact  would 
have  rendered  each  24-pounder  gun  nearly  as  destructive  as  guns  of  much  heavier 
caliber.  My  orders  had  been  to  fight  the  fort  to  the  last  extremity.  These  orders  I 
would  at  least  have  obeyed,  aud  with  the  most  sanguine  confidence  of  a successful 
, result. 

Lieut.  William *M.  Bridges  was  then  duly  sworn  and  examined  as 
a witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  What  position  did  you  hold  at  the  time  of  the  evacuation 
of  N^ew  Orleans  in  April,  1862,  and  where  were  you  stationed  for  the 
previous  six  months  ? 

Answer.  I was  first  lieutenant  in  the  First  Regiment  Louisiana  Artillery,  and  aide- 
de-camj)  to  General  J.  K.  Duncan ; stationed  at  Fort  Jackson  at  the  time  General 
Lovell  assumed  command,  and  was  there  at  the  time  the  fort  was  surrendered. 

Question.  What  additions,  if  any,  were  made  in  new  guns  and  muni- 
tions of  war  to  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  after  General  Lovell 
'assumed  command  of  Department  No.  1 ? 

Answer.  Several  companies  of  artillery  were  added  to  their  garrisons.  Three  10-inch 
columbiads,  five  8-inch  columbiads,  two  7-inch  rifled  guns,  two  unbauded  rifled  32- 
pounders,  twelve  42-pounders,  some  smooth-bore  32-pounders  (their  exact  number  I 
do  not  recollect),  aud  five  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars  were  added  to  the  armament  of 
both  forts.  A large  quantity  of  implements  were  added  to  these  after  General  Lovell 
assumed  command,  amply  sufficient  for  the  working  of  his  guns.  When  General 


588  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

Lovell  assumed  command  we  liad  about  18,000  or  20,000  pounds  of  powder,  some  of 
which  was  worthless,  and  was  sent  to  New  Orleans  and  reworked.  This  supply  was 
■trebled  by  him. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  the  24th  instant. 

April  24,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Oen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Col.  Edward  Hiogins  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judoe-Adyooate  : 

Question.  When  did  you  first  enter  the  service  of  the  Confederate 
^States  ? State  your  rank  at  that  time  j your  present  rank  j where  and 
to  what  duty  you  have  been  assigned  from  date  of  your  entry  into 
service. 

Answer.  I think  I entered  the  service  in  April,  1861,  as  captain  of  the  First  Louisiana 
Artillery.  I served  as  aide-de-camp  to  General  Twiggs  during  his  command  of  New 
•Orleans.  After  this  general  was  relieved  I was  placed  in  command  of  a light  battery. 
About  this  time  I resigned  and  remained  out  of  service  for  about  a mouth,  when  I was 
reappointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Twenty-second  Regiment  Louisiana  Volunteers. 
My  hrst  duty  as  lieutenant-colonel  was,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  General  Lovell,  to 
save  the  raft  between  Forts  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson.  I was  assigned  by  General 
Duncan  to  the  command  of  those  forts.  I was  engaged  upon  this  raft  about  two  weeks 
with  all  the  force  tliat  could  be  possibly  had ; it  was  a tremendous  job. 

Question.  Were  you  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  before  the 
secession  of  the  South  ? If  so,  in  what  capacity  and  for  w^hat  length  of 
time? 

Answer.  I was  in  the  Navy  of  the  United  States  from  1836  to  1854,  when  I resigned, 
a lieuteuant.  The  last  two  years  of  my  service  under  that  Government  was  spent  in 
'Commanding  an  ocean  steamer,  in  which  command  I remained  four  years  after  leaving 
the  United  States  service. 

Question.  State  generally  your  knowledge  of  the  causes  of  the  fall  of 
TNew  Orleans,  and  whether  or  not  the  same  might  have  been  prevented 
by  Major-General  Lovell  with  the  means  at  his  disposal. 

The  judge-advocate,  being  told  informally  by  the  witness  that  the  ineffi- 
ciency and  incompetency  of  the  naval  officers  in  command  at  or  near 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  was  the  principal  cause  of  the  fall  of 
^ew  Orleans,  here  asked  the  court  to  direct  the  witness  to  exclude  from 
his  reply  to  the  foregoing  question  the  expression  of  any  opinion  touch- 
ing the  efficiency  or  inefficiency  of  the  officers  of  the  0.  S.  Navy,  because 
the  court  has  no  jurisdiction  to  inquire  into  and  pronounce  an  opinion 
upon  the  official  conduct  of  such  officers. 

In  support  of  this  proposition  the  judge-advocate  submitted  the  fol- 
lowing 

ARGUMENT. 

The  ninety-first  article  of  war,  by  which  courts  of  inquiry  are  author- 
ized, declares  that  they  are  “to  examine  into  the  nature  of  any  trans- 
action, accusation,  or  imputation  against  an  officer  or  soldier.”  Their 
jurisdiction,  both  as  to  subject-matter  and  person,  is  thus  clearly  defined. 
The  person  must  be  an  officer  or  soldier ; the  subject-matter  must  be  the 
transaction  of  such  officer  or  soldier  or  the  accusation  that  may  be  made 
against  him;  but,  as  if  to  remove  all  doubt  or  uncertainty  as  to  parties 
within  the  jurisdiction  of  army  courts,  their  character  is  specifically 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


589 


designated  in  the  ninety-sixth  article  of  war,  and  in  that  specification 
naval  officers  are  not  mentioned.  It  should  also  be  observed  that  the 
Articles  of  War  are  acts  of  Congress,  declared  to  be  for  the  government 
of  the  armies  of  the  Confederate  States.  If,  however,  this  court,  com- 
IDOsed  exclusively  of  army  officers,  can  go  beyond  these  limits  to  hear 
testimony  imiJcaching  the  official  conduct  of  naval  officers  and  i^ronounce 
judgment  upon  such  conduct,  the  solecism  in  law  and  justice  is  presented 
of  men  being  tried  without  notice  and  condemned  without  a hearing. 
Such  a construction  of  the  order  convening  this  court  is  less  to  be  justi- 
fied when  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  officers  of  the  Kavy  belong  to  another 
anti  different  arm  of  the  service,  and  are  responsible  by  law  to  a separate 
and  distinct  Department,  clothed  with  full  power  and  every  facility  to 
ascertain  and  punish  its  own  delinquents.  Again,  such  a course  is  not 
necessary  to  determine  whether  or  not  General  Lov(‘ll  has  discharged 
the  duties  devolved  upon  him,  nor  does  he  ask  it  to  be  taken.'  He  was 
directed  by  the  President  to  concert  and  co-operate  with  the  naval  offi- 
cers on  duty  in  his  department.  If  he  obeyed  this  direction  and  was. 
faithful  to  his  other  well-known  trusts  he  should  be  acquitted  of  blame. 
The  President  and  the  Secretary  of  War  also  informed  him  that  he  had 
no  control  over  officers  of  the  Navy,  which  fact  of  course  exempts  him 
from  all  responsibility  for  their  acts  or  failure  to  act.  It  is  admitted 
that  the  witness  may  testify  that  General  Lovell  sought  the  co-opera- 
tion of  naval  men  and  suggested  certain  measures  for  their  adoption, 
and  that  this  co-operation  was  refused  and  the  proposed  measures 
designated.  To  be  more  specific,  it  may  be  shown,  and  the  court  may 
report,  if  proven,  that  the  Louisiana  was  not  placed  in  the  position  de- 
sired by  General  Lovell,  and  that  Commander  Mitchell  did  not  make  such 
use  of  the  fire  rafts  and  guard  boats  as  he  had  been  requested  and  had 
promised  to  make.  Should  such  facts  appear  in  the  report  of  the  court, 
the  basis  of  future  action  is  furnished  to  the  Government.  It  is  submit- 
ted that  this  line  of  procedure  is  in  accordance  with  the  law,  the  require- 
ments of  the  order,  and  substantial  justice.  The  court  does  that  which 
all  courts  of  inquiry  are  designed  to  do  ; it  enables  the  Government  to 
determine  whether  or  not  further  proceedings  shall  be  had.  A different 
course  tends  to  excite  strife  and  contention,  arraying  one  arm  of  the 
service  against  the  other  when  the  public  defense  demands  unity  of  spirit 
and  action. 

The  court,  however,  declined  to  make  the  direction,  as  requested  by 
the  judge-advocate,  for  reasons  set  forth  in  the  following  opinion : 

OPINION  OF  THE  COURT. 

On  the  16th  instant,  with  the  view  to  remove  all  doubt  upon  the  point 
raised  by  the  judge-advocate,  a telegram  was  sent  by  the  order  of  this 
court  to  the  Adjutant  General  at  Kichmond,  asking  specific  instruction 
in  the  premises.  No  reply  has  been  received.  It  therefore  remains  for 
the  court  to  act  upon  its  own  judgment.  The  order  convening  the  court 
does  not  restrict  its  investigations  to  the  conduct  of  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield 
Lovell  and  the  troops  of  his  command  except  as  to  the  mere  evacuation 
of  New  Orleans.  In  relation  to  the  capture  of  the  city  the  words  of  the 
order  preclude  the  idea  of  such  restriction,  and  they  do  not  imply  it  in 
respect  to  the  defense.  It  is  required  of  the  court,  too,  in  those  mat- 
ters, to  examine  into  the  attending  facts  and  circumstances,  without  any 
limit  as  to  persons  or  arm  of  the  service.  If  a partial  examination  were 
intended,  that  intention  would  doubtless  ha\^  been  expressed.  It  is  the* 


590  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 


duty  of  the  court  to  obey  the  order  under  which  it  acts.  It  does  not 
belong  to  it  to  account  for  the  consequences  of  so  doing. 

The  witness  then  answered  as  follows  : 

Answer.  I have  no  personal  knowledge  as  to  the  extent  of  General  Lovell’s  authority 
over  the  defenses  afloat.  The  inefficiency  and  incompetency  of  a majority  of  those 
commanding  the  defenses  afloat  were,  in  my  judgment,  the  causes  of  its  fall^  hut  among 
them  were  some  exceptions.  The  chief  officer  in  command  of  the  Confederate  States 
fiteamer  Louisiana,  and  all  of  those  in  command  of  the  river  fleet,  they  being  unused 
to  heavy  guns  and  ships,  with  no  idea  of  discipline,  are  those  whom  I consider  ineffi- 
cient and  responsible  for  the  fall  of  the  city.  On  the  day  and  evening  of  the  passage 
of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  I sent  three  verbal  communications  to  Capt.  K. 
‘Mitchell,  C.  S.  Navy,  informing  him  that  the  enemy^s  vessels  of  war  were  making  dis- 
position to  unite  with  his  mortar  fleet  in  an  attack  upon  the  forts  or  in  an  attempt  to 
pass  them  that  night,  and  requested  him  to  place  the  steamer  Louisiana  in  position 
before  Saint  Philip  so  that  she  could  enfilade  the  mortar  fleet,  thereby  enabling  the 
men  in  the  forts  to  stand  to  their  guns  to  resist  the  passage  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  of 
war.  The  last  of  these  communications  was  under  these  circumstances  and  to  this 
■effect.  I went  into  General  Duncan’s  quarters,  who  remarked  to  me  that  Commander 
Mitchell  had  sent  him  word  that  he  (Mitchell)  would  move  the  Louisiana  in  twenty- 
four  hours.  The  message  Avas  brought  by  Commander  Mitchell,  and  I immediately 
turned  to  the  latter  officer  and  said  to  him:  “Tell  Commander  Mitchell  that  there 
will  be  no  to-morrow  for  New  Orleans  unless  he  immediately  takes  up  the  position 
assigned  to  him  with  the  Louisiana ; if  he  does  not  do  so  the  city  is  gone,  and  he  will 
be  responsible  to  the  country  for  its  loss.  The  forts  are  powerless  to  prevent  it.”  The 
commanding  officer  afloat  turned  a deaf  ear  to  all  our  Avarnings  and  entreaties,  and  did 
not  coincide  with  us  in  the  belief  that  the  enemy  would  haA"e  the  temerity  to  attempt 
the  passage  of  the  forts,  and  that  they  were  not  prepared  to  resist  it.  It  was  fully 
twenty  minutes  from  the  time  that  the  enemy  rounded  the  point  below  the  forts  before 
the  A^essels  of  our  fleet  could  move  ; most  of  these  were  run  ashore  and  burned  as  the 
enemy  passed. 

I am  of  the  opinion  that  if  the  vessels  sent  down  from  New  Orleans  to  co-operate 
Avith  the  forts  in  the  defense  of  the  city  had  been  properly  officered  and  commanded, 
and  had  been  under  the  control  of  an  efficient  head,  we  would  now  be  in  possession  of 
New  Orleans.  The  Louisiana  Avas  iiiAmlnerable,  as  was  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that 
one  of  the  heaviest  of  the  enemy’s  ships  poured  broadside  after  broadside  into  her  at  a 
distance  of ‘^0  or  30  feet  Avithout  the  least  damaging  effect.  The  fleet  would  render  us 
no  assistance.  We  entreated  Commander  Mitchell  to  draw  the  enemy’s  fire  for  a short 
time,  to  enable  us  to  secure  one  of  our  magazines,  which  was  in  danger,  and  to  repair 
our  damages  and  remount  guns.  He  refused.  One  reason  which  he  assigned  for  not 
taking  up  his  position  Avas  that  he  had  but  two  Aveeks’  provisions.  Another  was  that 
he  was  not  bomb-proof  above,  and  a shell  might  hit  him.  I was  obliged  to  move  the 
powder  from  one  of  the  magazines  under  fire  of  the  enemy  and  when  their  shells  were 
bursting  every  two  or  three  minutes  in  the  fort.  The  river  fleet,  commanded  by  Ste- 
phenson, refused  to  obey  orders  from  Mitchell;  there  was  no  authority  and  no  concert 
of  action  afloat.  There  were  twelve  vessels  in  all,  including  the  Louisiana.  Three  of 
these  Avere  commanded  by  Commander  Mitchell ; six  by  a New  Orleans  merchant  and 
former  steamboat  captain,  named  Stephenson ; one  by  Capt.  Beverly  Kennon,  formerly 
of  the  U.  S.  and  C.  S.  Navies,  and  one  by  Captain  Grant,  a steamboat  captain.  They 
were  all  placed  under  the  command  of  Mitchell,  but  he  failed  in  making  the  river  fleet 
yield  obedience  to  him. 

Question.  Was  anything  done  by  you  in  preparing  launches  for  addi- 
tional defense  of  water  approaches  in  Department  No.  1,  and  under 
whose  orders  ? 

Answer.  I was  ordered  by  General  Lovell  to  seize  twelve  fishing  boats  and  fit  them 
up  as  small  gunboats.  I seized  them,  and  his  orders  for  fitting  them  up  were  being 
carried  into  execution  when  I was  assigned  to  other  duty  in  fitting  up  the  raft.  I 
know  that  some  of  them  were  completed. 

By  the  Court  : 

Question.  State  what  was  done  in  the  forts  after  the  enemy’s  fleet  had 
passed  up  the  river.  Were  any  preparations  made  to  defend  the  forts 
from  an  attack  above ; and  what  co-operation,  if  any,  did  you  receive 
from  the  defenses  afloat  ? 

Answer.  All  damages  were  repaired  as  far  as  possible ; dismounted  guns  were  re- 
mounted ; the  heavy  guns  in  the  lower  front  were  traversed  round  so  as  to  bear  upon 


Chap  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


591 


the  fleet  above  in  case  of  attack  ; a return  of  all  the  provisions  in  the  forts  was  macle  ; 
a demand  for  surrender  by  Commodore  Porter  was  refused,  and  Commander  Mitchell 
was  requested  by  me  to  move  his  vessel  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  above  Fort 
Jackson,  to  assist  in  the  defense  from  an  attack  which  was  expected  from  above,  which 
he  w’ouhl  not  do  or  attempt  to  do. 

Question.  Uuder  whose  command  were  the  lire  rafts  and  guard  boats 
before  and  after  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the  forts,  and  were  they  used 
as  they  should  have  been  ? 

Answer.  Previous  to  the  arrival  of  Commander  Mitchell  (the  second  or  third  day  of 
the  bombardment)  the  river  fleet  was  under  the  order  of  General  Duncan;  when  he 
came  down,  the  fire  rafts,  gunboats,  the  river  fleet,  and  everything  afloat  was  turned 
over  1 o him.  The  fire  rafts  were  not  lighted  up  the  night  of  the  passage  of  the  enemy^s 
fleet,  although  Commander  Mitchell  had  promised  to  have  it  done.  While  General 
Duncan  commanded  the  floating  defenses  fire  rafts  and  guard  boats  were  regularly 
sent  down,  but  not  afterwards,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge. 

Question.  Did  General  Lovell  ever  send  you  to  Baton  Kouge  to  induce 
the  legislature  of  Louisiana  to  make  appropriations  for  the  building  of 
gunboats  for  the  defense  of  'Ne\Y  Orleans'?  If  yea,  state  at  what  time 
this  mission  was  undertaken,  and  was  it  iiracticable  to  have  constructed 
the  gunboats  and  had  them  ready  for  service  before  the  fall  of  the  city  ? 

Answer.  General  Lovell  did  send  me  to  Baton  Rouge  on  such  duty  in  December, 
1861.  There  was  ample  time  and  material  obtainable  to  have  provided  a fleet  suffi- 
cient for  such  purpose.  A bill  making  an  appropriation  of  $2,500,000  passed  the  sen- 
ate and  was  defeated  in  the  house. 

Question.  Were  you  sent  by  General  Lovell,  in  the  early  part  of 
March,  18i>2,  to  endeavor  to  replace  the  obstructions  at  Fort  Jackson  ? 
If  so,  state  what  were  your  instructions,  and  give  a general  idea  of 
what  was  done  by  you. 

Answer.  Yes;  about  that  time.  At  the  time  spoken  of  I was  informed  by  General 
Lovell  that  the  raft  had  broken  from  its  fastenings,  on  the  Fort  Jackson  side  of  the 
river,  and  left  about  one-third  of  the  river  open.  He  instrueted  me  to  go  down 
with  a number  of  barges  and  till  up  the  gap,  by  placing  them  in  the  open  space  and 
using  them  as  buoys  to  stretch  chains  across  from  the  raft  on  the  shore.  Upon  arriv- 
ing at  the  fort  I found  tue  raft  had  also  broken  from  the  Fort  Saint  Philip  side,  and 
had  dragged  several  hundred  yards  below  its  first  position  (it  was  then  hanging  by 
its  heaviest  anchors,  which  held  it  lengthwise  of  the  river).  I commenced  immedi- 
ately to  cut  it  into  sections,  and  telegraphed  to  the  general  to  send  me  tow-boats  to 
assist  in  replacing  it  by  sections.  I found  it  impossible,  however,  on  aceount  of  the 
strength  of  the  current,  to  hold  all  the  sections  in  position  after  replacing  them;  the 
immense  weight  of  the  chains,  together  with  the  pressure  of  the  water,  forced  them 
under  the  surface,  and  slowl}^  dragged  them  down  the  river,  except  three  sections,  of 
about  100  yards  each,  one  on  the  Fort  Jackson  side  and  two  on  the  Fort  Saint  Philip 
side,  which  remained  where  placed.  I then  went  up  to  New  Orleans  and  reported  the 
fact  to  General  Lovell,  who  directed  me  to  seize  a number  of  vessels,  take  them  down 
between  the  forts,  and  anchor  them  in  line  across  the  river,  stretching  chains  across 
over  them.  I accordingly  seized  a number  or  heavily-built  vessels,  and  carried  out 
my  instructions.  They  were  anchored  across  the  river,  as  nearly  as  possible,  in  the 
position  occupied  by  the  raft,  and  dismantled,  their  masts  and  rigging  left  to  trail 
astern  in  order  to  catch  the  propellers  of  any  vessel  which  might  attempt  to  pass. 
Each  vessel  had  two  anchors  down  and  60  fathoms  of  chain  to  each  anchor,  and  three 
1-inch  chains  were  stretched  across  all  of  them,  connecting  them  with  the  raft  sections 
remaining  in  position,  forming  a barrier  which  I am  confident  none  of  the  enemy’s 
ships  could  have  forced  under  fire  from  the  forts. 

Questiou.  What  number  of  fire  rafts  were  sent  to  Fort  Jackson  for 
use  by  General  Lovell '? 

Answer.  I do  not  remember  the  number ; there  were  a great  many. 

Question.  What  was  the  immediate  cause  of  the  surrender  of  the  forts 
on  April  28,  1862? 

Answer.  Mutiny  of  the  garrison. 

Question.  What  amount  of  powder  was  expended  in  the  fight  at  Forts 


592  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  and  what  amount  turned  over  to  the  enemy ; 
what  the  number  of  the  garrisons,  and  the  amount  of  provisions  on 
hand  ? 

Answer.  About  70,000  pounds  of  powder ; I think  about  30,000  remained  in  our 
magazines  when  we  left  the  fort.  There  were  about  1,100  men  in  the  two  forts.  Pro- 
visions for  sixty  days  were  on  hand  at  the  time  of  the  passing  up  of  the  Federal  fleet. 

Question.  Did  you  supply  the  artillerists  to  serve  the  guns  on  the 
steamer  Louisiana  ? If  so,  how  many  ? 

Answer.  Yes ; about  150  picked  men,  under  Captain  Ryan  and  Lieutenant  Dixon. 

Question.  Were  the  defenses  strengthened  by  sand  bags,  &c.,  pre- 
vious to  and  during  the  bombardment,  and  at  what  time  and  under 
what  circumstances  were  the  last  heavy  guns  mounted 

Answer.  Yes ; very  considerably  by  sand  bags  and  cotton  bales.  The  last  heavy 
guns  were  mounted  a few  days  before  the  bombardment  by  the  Northern  fleet  and 
under  fire  from  the  gunboats. 

Question.  Was  it  possible  to  place  sharpshooters  on  the  bank  of  the 
river  near  the  enemy ^s  fleet  to  endeavor  to  dislodge  them  “? 

Answer.  We  placed  sharpshooters  in  the  swamp  below,  but  they  could  not  exist 
there  on  account  of  the  high  stage  of  water.  The  river  at  this  time  was  so  high  that 
the  parade  ground  of  the  fort  was  covered  with  water,  and  we  had  9 inches  of  water 
in  the  casemates.  Traverses  were  built  around  the  magazine  doors,  and  an  engine 
and  a large  detail  of  men  with  buckets  were  kept  constantly  at  work  day  and  night 
during  the  bombardment  to  keep  the  water  out  of  the  magazines. 

Oapt.  Edward  Hobart  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  business  were  you  engaged  in  at  New  Orleans  while 
General  Lovell  was  in  command  of  Department  No.  1 

Answer.  Mercantile  profession.  We  also  furnished  capital  for  the  erection  of  the 
Louisiana  powder-mills. 

Question.  What  assistance,  if  any,  did  you  receive  from  General 
Lovell  in  getting  into  operation  the  powder-mills  near  New  Orleans  % 

Answer.  General  Lovell  rendered  important  aid  in  enlarging  and  hastening  the 
erection  of  the  mills,  ordering  the  founderies  to  give  the  necessary  work  precedence. 
He  also,  through  means  at  his  disposal,  afforded  material  aid  to  complete  the  re-erec- 
tion after  the  mst  explosion.  By  his  direction  the  mills,  originally  located  at  Hands- 
borough,  Miss.,  were  removed  to  New  Orleans,  the  former  location  being  deemed 
insecure.  He  also  rendered  valuable  assistance  in  supplying  the  mills  with  materials. 

Question.  Was  the  machinery  of  these  mills  removed  at  the  time  of 
the  surrender  ? If  so,  how  was  that  effected  and  what  has  become  of 
the  mills  ? 

Answer.  The  machinery  of  the  powder-mills  was  entirely  removed  after  the  passage 
of  the  enemy’s  ships  by  the  fores.  It  was  taken  by  steamer  to  Vicksburg,  and  subse- 
quently located  at  Selma*,  Ala.,  where  it  has  been  since  in  o^jeration  when  material 
could  be  obtained.  The  boat  was  furnished  by  'General  Lovell. 

Question.  What  was  the  daily  capacity  of  your  mills  when  completed  % 

Answer.  Five  thousand  pounds  of  powder  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  mills  were 
never  pushed  to  their  capacity  for  want  of  material. 

Capt.  J.  Brien  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge  Advocate  : 

Question.  What  position  did  you  hold  in  New  Orleans  at  the  time  of 
the  evacuation  in  April,  1862 

Answer.  I held  the  position  of  assistant  ordnance  officer  and  had  charge  of  the  main 
magazine,  and  was  charged  by  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  with  the  proof  of  all  powder  manu- 
factured and  imported  at  New  Orleans. 


CIIAI*.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


593 


Question.  Did  you  bring  away  the  powder,  cartridges,  and  other  juiblic 
property  belonging  either  to  the  State  of  Louisiana  or  the  Confederate 
Government  ? 

Answer.  I brought  away  every  pound  of  amuinnition  and  other  public  property  in 
my  charge.  The  following  is  a list  thereof: 


Barrels  of  cannon  powder,  100  pounds  each 182 

Kegs  of  musket  powder,  25  ])ouu(l8  each 245 

Boxes  of  cannon  powder,  100  pounds  each 02 

Boxes  of  damaged  Spanish  powder,  100  pounds  each 150 

Boxes  of  small-arm  ammunition,  1,000  cartridges  each 1,110 


and  a number  of  wagon  loads  of  implements,  tools,  and  Government  property  of  all 
kinds. 

Question.  What  was  the  quality  of  the  powder  brought  to  New  Or- 
leans by  the  steamers  Vanderbilt,  Merriinac,  and  Victoria  in  the  winter 
of  18G1  ? What  was  done  with  it  ? 

Answer.  The  powder  brought  by  these  steamers  was  damaged  and  totally  unfit  for 
service.  A portion  was  reworked,  and  the  salti)eier  extracted  Rom  the  remainder  and 
made  into  new  powder. 

Capt.  W.  0.  Capers  was  next  sworn  and  Examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  What  command  did  you  have  previous  to  and  at  the  time  of 
the  evacuation  of  New  Orleans  1 

Answer.  I was  in  immediate  command  of  Fort  Macomb,  one  of  the  defenses  of  Lake 
Borgne. 

Question.  What  additions,  if  any,  had  been  made  to  the  strength  of 
Fort  Macomb  after  General  Lovell  assumed  command  of  Department 
N0.-I,  in  guns,  powder,  munitions, 

Answer.  The  additions  to  my  armament  were  one  8-inch  columbiad,  four  42-pounder 
guns,  six  32-pounder  smooth-bore  guns,  one  32-pounder  rified  gun,  and  one  10-inch  sea- 
coast  mortar,  all  in  place  of  24-pouuder  guns.  I also  received,  in  place  of  old  and 
worthless  powder,  an  ample  supply  of  the  best  powder  then  to  be  had,  with  all  the 
munitions  necessary  for  the  complete  equipment  and  defense  of  the  fort.  In  addition 
to  these,  all  the  timber  bordering  the  pass  above  the  fort,  and  which  would  have  com- 
pletely masked  theenemy^s  vessels,  thereby  rendering  my  fire  comparatively  ineffect- 
ive, v/as  felled,  presenting  an  open  field  of  fire,  both  by  land  and  water,  to  the  mouth 
of  the  pass.  General  Lovell  furnished  me  everything  necessary  for  placing  the  fort  on 
a firm  war  footing. 

Question.  Under  what  orders  did  you  evacuate  Fort  Macomb  ! 

Answer.  On  the  morning  of  April  25,  1862,  I received  an  order  from  Colonel  Fuller 
to  hold  myself  in  readiness  to  abandon  the  fort,  which  was  signed  by  order  of  General 
Lovell.  This  order  I did  not  obey,  as  I wished  the  order  to  come  through  General 
Lovell’s  assistant  adjutant-general.  During  that  afternoon  I received  another  order, 
signed  C.  A.  Fuller,  colonel,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  requiring  me  to  destroy  my 
guns  and  report  to  him  at  Madisonville.  This  order  I had  to  obey,  as  my  fort  was  in 
his  district. 

Question.  What  official  conversation,  if  any,  took  place  between  your- 
self and  General  Lovell  relative  to  the  evacuation  of  Forts  Pike  and 
Macomb  immediately  after  3 our  arrival  at  Camp  Moore,  after  that  evac- 
uation 

Answer.  I had  a conversation  with  General  Lovell  at  Camp  Moore  on  the  subject  of 
the  evacuation  of  the  forts,  sought  by  myself,  as  I desired  to  know  whether  Colonel  Ful- 
ler really  had  authority  for  his  act.  During  that  conversation  General  Lovell  informed 
me  that  he  had  not  issued  any  such  order,  and  that  Colonel  Fuller  had  only  been  re- 
quired to  have  the  forts  in  readiness  in  the  event  it  became  necessary  to  abandon  them. 
He  also  said  that,  hearing  the  forts  had  been  evacuated,  he  issued  orders  to  have  them 
reoccupied.  This  is  as  near  as  the  frailties  of  memory  will  allow  me  to  say  concern- 
ing this  particular  point. 

38  R R — VOL  VI 


594  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Lieut.  Col.  Edward  Fry  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  position  did.  you  occupy  in  October,  1S61,  when  Gen- 
eral Lovell  took  command  of  Department  ISTo.  1 ? 

Answer.  I was  assistant  adjutant-general  at  Camp  Moore,  the  camp  of  organization 
and  instruction  in  Louisiana. 

Question.  What  was  the  condition  of  the  troops  at  Camp  Moore  at 
that  time  as  to  numbers,  arms,  equipmeats,  and  ammunition  ? Were 
they  subsequently  put  in  complete  order,  and  what  became  of  them  1 

Answer.  The  Thirteenth,  Sixteenth,  Seventeenth,  Eighteenth,  and  Nineteenth  Regi- 
ments Louisiana  Volunteers,  averaging  900  men  each,  were  organized  at  Camp  Moore, 
rather  poorly  armed  and  equipped,  and  transferred  to  the  Confederate  States  service 
during  October,  November,  and  December,  1801.  They  were  not  supplied  with  am- 
munition when  transferred.  I know  nothing,  of  my  own  knowledge,  in  regard  to 
these  troops  after  they  were  transferred  to  the  Confederate  States  service. 

Question.  Were  you  stationed,  at  the  time  of  the  evacution  of  ISTew 
Orleans,  at  Forts  Berwick  and  Chene?  If  yea,  what  was  the  condition 
of  those  works  when  abandoned  ? 

Answer.  I was  in  command  of  both  forts.  The  works  were  in  fair  condition. 

Question.  What  property  was  brought  away  and  what  disposition 
was  made  of  the  remainder 

Answer.  About  5,000  pounds  of  powder,  over  12,000  rounds  of  musket  cartridges, 
all  of  the  infantry  arms  and  accouterments,  and  fully  two  months’ supply  of  commis- 
sary stores  for  about  160  men.  All  this  property  was  turned  over  to  the  proper  officers 
at  Camp  Moore,  La.  The  remainder — the  heavy  guns,  carriages,  chassis,  &c. — was 
destroyed  or  rendered  unlit  for  service  in  obedience  to  orders  from  General  Duncan. 

Maj.  W.  H.  Devereux  was  then  duly  sworn  and  examined  as  a "wit- 
ness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  position  did  you  hold  at  the  time  General  Lovell  took 
command  of  Department  l!^^o.  1 and  from  that  date  to  the  evacuation  of 
I^^^ew  Orleans  ? 

Answer.  1 held  the  position  of  chief  of  staff  to  Major-General  Twiggs  at  the  time 
General  Lovell  arrived  to  take  command  of  Department  No.  1,  and  continued  in  that 
capacity  under  Major-General  Lovell  until  his  own  staff  was  organized,  when,  being 
ranked  by  Major  Palfrey,  I performed  the  duties  of  acting  assistant  adjutant-general 
in  immediate  and  confidential  connection  with  Major-General  Lovell. 

Question.  What  was  the  general  condition  of  the  department  as  to 
its  defenses,  as  shown  by  the  official  reports,  when  General  Lovell  took 
command  ? 

Answer.  The  general  condition  of  the  defenses  of  the  department  when  General 
LoA^ell  assumed  command  was  not  one  of  strength  commensurate  with  the  interests 
to  be  protected,  nor  yet  hopelessly  inadequate  to  encounter  the  force  of  the  enemy 
then  in  the  Gulf.  The  armament  of  the  forts  on  the  exterior  line  was  light  in  caliber 
and  insufficient  iu  the  number  of  guns  ; some  of  the  gun-carriages  were  reported  weak; 
implements  were  wanting,  and  the  ammunition  was  inferior  and  very  scarce.  The 
interior  liue  of  defense  for  the  immediate  protection  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans  was 
Avell  advanced,  but  not  completed.  For  this  interior  line  a number  of  guns,  perhaps 
125,  were  arriving  from  Richmond,  but  unaccompanied  by  any  equipment ; these 
guns  were  also  of  light  caliber.  They  had  been  secured  by  General  Twiggs,  and  their 
equipment  ordered  to  be  prepared  before  the  arrival  of  Major  General  Lovell. 

Question.  Were  you  present  at  interviews  between  General  Lovell 
and  members  of  the  Safety  Committee?  If  so,  state  substantially  what 
passed  at  these  interviews. 

Answer.  I was  present  at  many  int -rviews  between  General  Lovell  and  members  of 
the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  and  affirm,  as  the  substance  of  their  conversations. 


Chap.  XVL] 


CAPTUEE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


595 


that  the  general  accepted  their  offers  of  material,  anchors  and  chains  for  rafts,  iron 
and  copper  for  castings,  and,  brietly,  those  articles  for  military  purposes  and  construc- 
tion which  at  that  time  could  only  be  obtained  readily  by  private  enteri)rise,  but  de- 
clined a part  of  their  tenders  of  money,  as  he  was  not  embarrassed  for  want  of  funds, 
but  retarded  by  the  deficiency  of  procuring  through  Government  atrents  articles  of 
prime  necessity,  which  had  grown  to  be  scarce.  The  general  also  declined  many  sug- 
gestions of  military  plans. 

Question.  What  was  the  number  and  composition  of  the  troops  in  the 
city  at  the  time  of  the  evacuation  and  how  were  they  armed  1 

Answer.  There  were  two  brigades  of  State  troops,  under  Generals  Tracy  and  Bnis- 
son,  in  New  Orleans  at  the  time  of  its  evacuation.  These  numbered  in  all,  perhaps, 
3,000 men;  were  new  levies,  chiefly  composed  of  the  men  of  the  families  resident  in 
and  about  the  city.  They  were  indifferently  armed,  shot-guns  being  I believe  the 
prevailing  weapon.  Two-thirds  of  them  belonged  to  the  French  class  of  the  popula- 
tion. Included  in  the  above  estimate  was  a battalion  of  some  400  men,  Orleans  Guards, 
which  was  well  armed  and  equipped.  There  were,  besides,  the  Confederate  Regiment 
State  Troops,  about  700  strong,  well  armed  and  equipped,  and  the  Pinkney  Battalion 
(now  Eighth  Louisiana  Battalion),  heavy  artillery,  500  unarmed  men,  newly  enlisted, 
occupying  the  works  on  the  river  above  and  below  the  city ; also  the  Thomas  Bat- 
talion Confederate  Troops,  numbering  about  350  men,  also  unarmed. 

Question.  State  what  was  General  Lovell’s  habitual  routine  of  busi- 
ness while  in  command  of  Department  No.  1.  Was  he  ever  absent  from 
his  office  a single  day  during  his  administration  except  while  engaged 
in  personal  inspections  of  the  troops  or  works  of  his  department 

Answer.  General  LovelFs  hours  of  business  were  habitually  from  9 a.  m.  to  3 p.  m., 
during  which  he  was  always  in  his  office.  Most  frequently  he  returned  at  7 or  8 p.  m. 
and  continued  in  the  transaction  of  public  affairs  until  verj"^  late  hours  of  the  night. 
During  the  interval  between  3 and  ^ p.  m.  General  Lovell  was  ordinarily  occupied  in 
personal  inspections  of  the  troops  and  lines  of  defense,  visits  to  the  foiinderies  and 
work-shops,  examinations  of  proper  means  in  the  construction  of  Montgomery’s  and 
the  State  fleets  and  the  rams  Mississippi  and  Louisiana.  His  tours  of  inspection 
through  his  department  were  frequent,  and  I believe  thorough.  The  restless  activity 
displayed  by  the  department  commander  was  a subject  of  general  remark. 

Question.  What  was  the  general  military  character  of  the  population 
in  New  Orleans  at  the  time  of  its  fall? 

Answer.  It  was  indifferent.  The  better  part  of  the  fighting  material  had  volun- 
teered and  been  ordered  elsewhere.  The  young  men  were  all  gone  from  the  city  with 
a few  glaring  exceptions. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  the  25th  instant. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  April  25,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge- advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

Oapt.  W.  B.  Eobertson  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  Where  were  you  when  the  Federal  fieet  passed  Forts  Saint 
Philip  and  Jackson,  in  April,  1862,  and  what,  if  any,  position  did  you 
hold  in  the  Army  of  the  Confederate  States  ? 

Answer.  I was  in  command  of  the  water  battery  at  Fort  Jackson;  a captain  in  the 
First  Regiment  Louisiana  Artillery. 

Question.  What  orders  did  you  receive  from  Colonel  Higgins  on  the 
afternoon  previous  to  the  passage  of  the  forts  by  the  enemy’s  fieet  on 
the  morning  of  April  24,  1862? 

Answer.  I received  a written  order  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Higgins,  commanding 
Forts  J ackson  and  Saint  Philip,  that  there  was  a movement  among  the  enemy’s  gun- 


59 G OPERATIONS  IN  \V.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Loats  and  ships  of  war  below  his  mortar  boats  and  that  he  was  planting  signals  on 
the  Saint  Philip  shore,  indicating  that  they  would  probably  take  up  posilion  and 
bombard  in  conjunction  with  the  mortar  boats,  and,  if  a favorable  opportunity  pre- 
sented, would  attempt  the  passage  of  the  forts.  He  charged  me  to  prepare  for  such 
events.  He  also  stated  that  the  river  would  be  lit  up.  The  order  from  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Higgins  is  now  in  Louisiana,  near  the  enemy. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  April  27,  1863,  at  10 

a.  m. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Ajyril  27,  1863. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-ad vooate,  and  also 
Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  the  25th  instant  were  read  over. 

The  following  communication  was  then  read  to  the  court  by  the  judge- 
advocate,  to  wit: 

Richmond,  Va.,  April  21,  186.3. 

Maj.  L.  R.  Page: 

The  court  is  required  by  the  order  to  examine  into  the  facts  and  circumstances 
attending  the  capture  of  New  Orleans,  the  defense  of  that  city,  and  the  evacuation  of 
the  same.  The  inquiry  is  broad  and  not  restrictive,  and  will  embrace  every  fact  and 
every  officer,  whether  of  Army  or  Navy,  connected  with  the  object  of  inquiry.  It  is 
fully  competent  for  the  court,  and  it  is  expected  of  it,  to  report  all  the  facts  of  the 
whole  subject  of  the  capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  which  included 
the  defenses  on  the  river  below  the  city,  and  to  report  their  opinion  thereon. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector'  General. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  S.  Lovell  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  duty  were  you  assigned  to  in  Kew  Orleans  by  Gen- 
eral Lovell  in  ]!!^^ovember,  1861?  State  what  was  done  by  you. 

Answer.  I reported  for  duty  to  General  Lovell  at  New  Orleans  on  or  about  Novem- 
ber 8,  1861.  Was  ordered  immediately  to  take  charge  of  the  raft  between  Forts  Jack- 
son  and  Saint  Philip ; to  repair,  replace  it  in  position,  and  anchor  it  properly.  I found 
the  raft  had,  by  either  dragging  its  anchors  or  parting  its  moorings,  drifted  so  far 
down  the  river  that  the  end  towards  the  Fort  Jackson  side  was  about  the  middle  of 
the  river,  leaving  the  river  open  between  them  about  400  yards;  mauy  of  the  gum 
rails,  which  were  joined  on  top  of  the  logs  forming  the  raft,  were  broken,  and  the  end 
towards  the  Saint  Philip  side  very  much  broken  up.  Most  of  the  anchors  which  had 
been  used  in  mooring  the  raft  were  very  small,  and  had  rope  attached  to  them  instead 
of  chain.  Some  of  the  ropes  were  so  short  as  to  lead  almost  up  and  down,  not  having 
sufficient  scope.  A number  of  the  anchors  were  not  recovered,  having  parted  the 
moorings.  Most  of  the  gum  rails,  or  stringers,  were  broken  or  wrenched  out  of  place. 
I pinned  down  new  ones.  I secured  the  end  on  the  Fort  Saint  Philip  sid^  by  planting 
a large  anchor,  about  3,000  pounds,  with  what  are  called  “dead men,”  or  longer  logs 
placed  in  front  of  each  arm.  The  anchor  was  then  backed  by  chains  to  a stump,  and 
the  stuinp  backed  by  a small  anchor  from  the  main  anchor.  Mooring  chains  v ere 
secured  to  the  end  of  the  raft ; there  were  no  other  means  of  securing  the  raft  to  the 
shore.  The  raft  was  then  hauled  back  into  position  on  this  side  by  steamers  and 
anchored.  The  heaviest  anchors,  from  2,500  to  3,000  pounds,  were  placed  in  the 
deepest  w’ater,  with  chains  from  45  to  60  fathoms  each.  To  the  best  of  my  recollec- 
tion there  were  between  twenty-five  and  thirty  anchors  used  in  anchoring  the  raft, 
and  each  with  a sufficient  scope  of  chain.  A number  of  the  anchors  were  between 
2,000  and  3,000  pounds.  The  end  of  the  raft  on  the  Fort  Jackson  side  was  secured  by 
two  heavy  chains  running  to  two  “ crabs,”  also  by  heavy  chains,  made  fast  to  a large 
anchor,  planted  as  the  one  on  the  other  side,  so  that  they  might  be  slacked  up  or 
lengthened  if  necessary.  When  the  drift  got  to  be  heavy  against  the  raft  steamers 
were  employed  to  endeavor  to  haul  it  out,  which  was  found  impossible.  I built,  by 
General  Lovell’s  order,  a raft  or  boom  above  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  about  1,000 
yards  long,  which  was  ready  to  be  thrown  across  should  it  bo  required.  I had  charge, 
for  a time,  of  a raft  to  be  placed  across  the  lake  at  Fort  Pike.  I also  fitted  up  the 
steamers  Oregon  and  Arrow  as  gunboats  for  the  lake.  The  former  vessel  carried  two 
guns,  one  8-inch  gun  and  one  32-pounder  rifled;  the  latter,  one  32-pounder.  I also 
fitted  up  the  yacht  Corypheus  with  one  gun,  to  be  used  in  the  lake. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


597 


Question.  What  duty  was  performed  by  you,  under  orders  of  General 
Lovell,  in  connection  with  the  river-defense  lleetj  also  with  ships  litted 
out  at  the  expense  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  ? 

Answer.  I was  appointed  ordnance  and  disbursing  officer  of  the  river-defense  deet 
by  General  Lovell.  As  ordnance  officer,  I superintended  the  necessary  work  on  ves- 
sels of  the  fleet,  to  receive  and  place  in  i)08ition  their  armauient,  32  or  24  pounders, 
furnished  by  General  Lovell.  I also  furnished  them  ammunition  and  small-arms,  and 
established'a  system  of  signals.  As  disbursing  officer,  I had  to  examine  and  pay  the 
many  bills  incurred  in  titting  out  the  fleet.  When  the  steamers  Charles  Morgan,  Gal- 
veston (afterwards  the  Governor  Moore),  and  General  Quitman  were  taken  by  Gov- 
ernor Moore  to  be  fitted  out  as  gunboats,  they  were  immediately,  by  General  Lovell’s 
consent,  turned  over  to  me,  to  be  altered,  protected,  armed,  officered,  and  manned  as 
I might  deem  proper.  I had  the  whole  charge  of  these  two  steamers.  All  that  was 
done  by  the  State  was  to  pay  the  bills  approved  by  me.  The  captains  appointed  by 
me  (and  confirmed  by  Governor  Moore)  to  the  command  of  these  vessels  were  Capts. 
Beverly  Kennon,  of  the  Governor  Moore,  and  Alexander  Grant,  of  the  General  Quitman. 

Question.  When  the  raft  at  the  lower  forts  was  coiniileted  and  put  in 
position  did  you  consider  it  an  effective  obstacle  to  ships  ascending  the 
river  as  long  as  it  remained  in  place  ^ 

Answer.  When  the  raft  was  in  position,  after  I had  taken  charge  of  it,  I considered 
it  an  eli'ective  obstruction  to  vessels  coming  up  the  river,  and  that  it  would  have  so 
remained  had  it  not  been  for  the  extraordinary  high  water  and  drift.  By  the  water 
ovei-flowing  the  banks  the  ground  was  softened,  which  prevented  the  anchors  from 
holding.  1 did  not  think  it  possible  for  the  enemy  to  remove  the  raft  under  the  guns 
of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip.  If  the  raft  had  not  been  carried  away  I do  not 
believe  it  possible  for  the  enemy  to  have  passed  the  forts. 

Question.  What  measures  were  taken  by  you  under  authority  of  Gen- 
eral Lovell  previous  to  the  passage  of  the  forts,  previous  to  the  evac- 
uation in  case  of  such  passage,  and  what  use  was  made  of  such  means 
at  the  time  of  the  evacuation  f 

Answer.  Some  days  before  the  enemy  passed  the  forts,  by  General  Lovell’s  directions, 
I got  ready,  for  any  move  that  might  be  necessary,  the  three  steamers  Magenta,  Pey- 
tona,  and  Pargoud.  These  vessels  were  in  such  condition  that  they  could  all  be  ready 
to  move  at  four  hours’  notice.  I ordered  these  three  vessels  to  get  ready  to  niove  at  7 
o’clock  the  morning  the  enemy  passed  the  forts — April  24,  1862.  I turned  over  i he 
largest  steamer  (the  Magenta)  to  Major  Lamar,  for  the  purpose  of  removing  Govern- 
ment commissary  stores.  The  next  largest  steamer  (the  Peytoua)  I turned  over  to 
Captain  St.  Clair,  at  his  urgent  request,  to  assist  in  towing  the  Mississipjd.  The  third 
steamer  (the  Pargoud)  was  used  to  remove  commissary  and  ordnance  stores.  Among 
the  latter  stores  she  had  one  32-pounder  and  a number  of  battery  forges ; I think  six. 
The  cabin  of  the  boat  was  filled  with  persons — many  women  and  children — who  wished 
to  leave  the  city. 

Cross-examination  by  the  Judge-Advocate: 

Question.  What  was  your  occupation  before  April,  1861  ? 

Answer.  I was  an  officer  in  the  Navy  of  the  United  States  for  nearly  twelve  years.  I 
resigned  from  that  service  in  1859.  I entered  the  Naval  School  at  Annapolis  as  a mid- 
shipman in  1847  and  graduated  in  1853.  During  the  last  three  years  of  my  service  in 
the  U.  S.  Navy  I was  in  command  of  steamers. 

Question.  Did  you  not  succeed  General  M.  L.  Smith  as  ordnance  offi- 
cer of  Department  No.  If  If  you  were  acting  as  such  at  the  time  of  the 
evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  state  the  amount  of  ordnance  you  then  had 
on  hand  and  what  became  of  it. 

Answer.  I did  succeed  him  as  such.  I cannot  state  the  amount  on  hand  without 
reference  to  my  ordnance  papers ; there  was  a great  deal  of  ordnance  stores  at  the 
various  forts.  Of  that  in  the  city,  under  my  immediate  charge,  the  larger  proportion 
was  saved ; very  little  was  lost.  Many  supplies  of  ordnance  stores  were  furnished  to 
various  works  for  which  I received  no  receipts,  and  had  to  report  them  in  my  return 
as  lost.  To  illustrate  my  meaning,  the  powder  reported  by  me  to  be  lost  was  sent  to 
the  fort  below  the  city  (Chalmette)  and  to  the  upper  batferies,  and  two  or  three  8-inch 
columbiads  reported  as  lost  were  used  at  Chalmette  in  the  fight. 


598  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Ciiai*.  XVI. 

Question.  State  your  knowledge  as  to  tlie  effectiveness  of  the  river- 
defense  fleet.  In  what  respect  and  by  what  means,  if  any,  might  the 
same  have  been  made  more  efiicient  in  the  defense  of  the  city  ! 

Answer.  TLe  boats  were  fitted  up  generally  very  well  for  use  as  rams.  I considered 
most  of  them  as  better  for  that  purpose  than  the  Queen  of  the  West,  a ram  taken  from 
the  enemy,  which  I have  well  examined  since  her  capture.  There  was  no  discij)line, 
no  organization,  but  little  or  no  drill  of  the  crews.  I frequently  requested  the  com- 
manding officers  (Montgomery  and  Townsend)  to  drill  their  men  at  a gun  I placed  on 
one  of  the  vessels  expressly  for  that  purpose.  I ottered  to  employ  a Navy  officer  to 
drill  them.  I also  employed  a person  who  had  been  a gunner  in  the  II.  S.  Navy  to  act 
as  such  to  the  fleet;  to  mount  the  guns;  to  have  a general  superintendence  of  every- 
thing belonging  to  the  gunner’s  deijartment ; also  to  teach  the  officers  and  men  of  the 
fleet  how  to  use  and  manage  the  guns.  I do  not  believe  one  of  the  officers  in  command 
of  any  of  the  vessels  of  the  fleet  knew  how'  to  load  or  mauago  heavy  guns.  Some  of 
the  vessels  had  men  employed  as  gunners.  Some  of  the  captains  told  me  they  knew 
nothing  about  heavy  guns  and  must  have  gunners. 

Question.  Were  there  in  Department  ISTo.  1 any  vessels  not  of  the 
river-defense  fleet  which  might  have  been  fitted  uf)  similarly  for  resist- 
ing the  enemy 

Answer.  In  my  opinion  the  best  steamers  were  taken  and  fitted  out  for  the  river 
defense  ; there  were  a number  of  other  steamers  that  might  have  been  fitted  out  as 
rams  and  gunboats. 

Question.  Were  the  rams  of  the  river-defense  fleet  and  such  other 
vessels  as  were  in  Department  No.  1 capable  ot  being  fitted  out  as  rams 
or  gunboats?  Was  it  practicable,  after  October  1,  1801,  to  have  pre- 
pared a fleet  sufficient  to  cope  with  the  war  vessels  of  the  Federal  fleet 
or  which  passed  the  forts  ? 

Answer.  In  my  opinion  no  fleet  could  have  been  fitted  out  in  New  Orleans  since 
October  1,  1861,  out  of  the  steamers  there,  to  be  able  to  cope  with  that  of  the  enemy. 
One  might  have  been  fitted  out  to  assist  greatly  regular  gunboats  like  the  Mississippi 
had  they  been  properly  officered  and  manned. 

Question.  Were  as  many  shipwrights  employed  upon  the  Mississippi 
as  could  have  been  worked  to  advantage  and  could  they  have  worked 
at  night  ? 

Answer.  I am  unable  to  say  how  many  were  employed.  Work  could  have  been  done 
at  night  on  the  vessel  with  great  advantage.  She  could  have  been  lighted  up  very 
easily  with  gas  or  by  light-wood  torches  trom  a steamboat  anchored  on  the  outside  of 
her  and  by  torches  from  the  shore  or  the  inside.  1 suggested  this  latter  plan  to  Mr. 
Tift  two  or  three  times.  I have  seen  the  workmen  quit  the  vessel  by  sundown,  when 
they  ought  to  have  worked  an  hour  or  two  longer. 

Question.  Could  the  Mississippi  have  been  saved  j if  so,  how  ? 

Answer.  My  opinion  is  that  she  could  and  ought  to  have  been  saved  by  having  ves- 
sels ready  to  tow  her  off,  and  there  was  an  ample  number  of  steamers  at  New  Orleans 
that  could  have  been  used  for  that  purpose.  In  my  opinion,  had  they  begun  to  make 
these  steamers  ready  as  soon  as  the  re^iort  of  the  passage  of  the  forts  had  reached  the 
city,  the  Mississippi  could  have  been  removed.  I received  information  about  .5  o’clock 
on  the  morning  of  the  24th  that  the  enemy’s  fleet  had  passed  the  forts;  it  anchored 
before  the  city  about  12  m.  the  next  day.  About  11  a.  m.  on  the  24th  Captain  St.  Clair 
applied  to  me  for  the  steamers  I had  gotten  ready.  I refused  him  all  but  one — the 
second  largest  of  the  three ; the  largest  was,  I think,  then  being  loaded  with  com- 
missary stores. 

Question.  Was  the  Star  of  the  West  at  New  Orleans  at  that  time;  if 
so,  describe  her,  as  also  the  Peytona  and  St.  Charles. 

Answer.  She  was  there,  a regular  sea-going  side- wheel  steamer,  of  good  power  for 
towing.  The  Peytona  was  a river  steamboat  of  fine  power.  The  St.  Charles  was  an 
old  tow-boat,  one  that  I had  discharged  as  not  strong  enough  to  work  on  the  rafts, 
and  the  two  were,  in  my  opinion,  unable  to  tow  the  Mississippi.  The  Star  of  the 
West,  the  Peytona,  and  another  strong  boat  could  have  done  it. 

Question.  As  the  result  of  your  knowledge,  military  and  nautical, 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


599 


what  is  your  opiuioii  as  to  the  ability  of  land  defenses  to  resist  vessels 
of  war  under  steam  ? 

Answer.  My  opinion  lias  always  been  that  steam  vessels  of  war  can  pass  forts  in  an 
open  channel  free  from  obstruction. 

Question.  Uow  many  guns  of  caliber  of  8-inch  and  above  that  were 
mounted  for  the  defense  of  Pensacola  Harbor? 

Answer.  When  I left  Pensacola,  about  November  5, 18G1,  there  were  at  least  hfteeu 
8 and  10  inch  columbiads  ; also  a number  of  10-inch  and  two  13-inch  mortars.  Three 
of  the  10-inch  guns  were  brought  to  New  Orleans  after  April  1, 18G2. 

Capt.  Beverly  Kennon  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  position  did  you  hold  when  General  Lovell  assumed 
command  of  Department  No.  1,  in  October,  1801  ? 

Answer.  I was  in  charge  of  the  Ordnance  Department  of  the  Navy. 

Question.  Did  you  make  arrangements  with  Bennett  & Surges  to  cast 
heavy  guns  ? If  so,  how  many,  and  when  were  they  to  begin  work  ? 

Answer.  I did  make  arrangements  with  the  lirm  of  Bennett  Surges  to  cast  guns. 
This  was  about  October  1,  IbGl.  They  could  not  make  the  guns  I wanted  then  be- 
cause they  had  not  the  proper  iron.  I ordered  fifty  heavy  8-inch  smooth-bore  guns. 
This  party  was  to  commence  work  when  they  procured  the  proper  material,  but  the 
Secretary  of  the  Navy  broke  all  my  contracts  before  any  one  hrm  was  really  ready  to 
commence  work. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  Why  was  not  tbe  arrangement  spoken  of  in  regard  to  heavy 
guns  executed  by  Bennett  & Surges  ? State  all  the  facts  connected 
with  this  matter. 

Answer.  Because  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  ordered  that  all  work  that  I had  ordered 
should  be  stopped.  He  gave  as  a reason  that  the  expenditures  in  the  Ordnance  De- 
partment were  enormous  and  must  bo  curtailed.  This  note,  or  order,  or  whatever  it 
may  be  termed,  came  from  the  Confederate  States  Naval  Ordnance  Department  I sup- 
j)ose  with  Mr.  Mallory’s  indorsement. 

Question.  State  generally  what  other  contracts  made  by  you,  if  any, 
were  stopped  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

Answer.  All  contracts  were  stopped,  and  in  the  majority  of  cases  all  purchases 
returned.  By  all  contracts,  I mean  the  manufacture  of  guns  and  carriages,  shot,  shell, 
spherical  case,  and  pretty  much  everything  belonging  to  an  ordnance  department. 
Mr.  Mallory  or  his  subordinates  would  not  take  the  lead,  copper,  block  tin,  zinc,  and 
flannel  that  1 had  purchased.  As  an  instance  of  my  purchases,  in  the  line  of  flannel 
I must  have  gotten  $50,000  worth,  yet  Mr.  Mallory  would  not  take  it.  I procured  it 
at  an  average  price  of  45  cents  per  yard.  He  afterwards  bought  the  same  article  at 
four  times  the  price.  All  other  articles  rose  in  price  in  the  same  ratio.  He  found  he 
had  to  have  them,  but  paid  a much  greater  price  for  them.  Had  Mr.  Mallory  allowed 
the  founderies  and  other  establishments  in  New  Orleans  then  working  for  the  Navy 
to  continue  their  work,  I am  sure  the  city  would  not  have  fallen.  There  was  an  abun- 
dance of  guns  and  projectiles  of  all  sorts  making  and  made  when  he  stopped  work. 
Among  the  contracts  or  work  in  progress  I had  300  submarine  batteries,  which  Mr. 
Mallory  would  not  use  or  allow  to  be  completed  for  use.  I furnished  General  Polk 
with  150  of  them.  I know  not  what  became  of  the  rest.  I made  no  contract  for  fuses, 
fire-works,  rockets,  &c.,  as  they  were  made  in  the  Confederate  States  naval  laboratory. 
I started  a powder-mill,  which  was  broken  up  by  order  from  Richmond.  To  bring 
this  answer  to  a close,  every  contract  Avas  more  or  less  broken  in  upon  by  Mr.  Mallory’s 
order  until  just  before  New  Orleans  fell,  when  it  was  too  late  to  repair  damages. 

Question.  Did  you  take  part  in  the  engagement  with  the  Federal  fleet 
before  the  passage  of  the  forts  ? If  so,  in  what  capacity  and  with  what 
result  ? 

Answer.  I did  take  part  in  the  engagement  below  New  Orleans  with  the  Federal 
fleet.  I was  then  commander  of  the  steamer  Governor  Moore,  and  with  her  sunk  the 


600  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

United  States  steam  sloop-of-war  Varuna.  I afterwards  destroyed  my  ship  to  prevent 
her  falling  into  (he  hands  of  the  enemy.  I lost  74  men  out  of  93  ; besides  this,  the  ship 
was  eonix)letely  disabled. 

Questiou.  What  assistance  that  was  not  rendered  might  have  been 
given  by  the  vessels  of  the  0.  S.  Nav^y  or  of  the  river-defense  fleet  or 
by  fitting  out  vessels  then  at  New  Orleans  belonging  to  private  parties 

Answi'r.  There  were  no  Confederate  States  naval  ships  of  Avar  in  our  neighborhood ; 
therefore  no  assistance  eonld  come  from  them,  unless,  of  course,  I except,  those  in  the 
light.  Had  all  our  vessels  been  at  the  forts,  and  had  all  the  vessels  alongside  the 
Av halves  been  fitted  up  xiroperly,  I am  sure  that  the  enemy  would  not  have  i)assed  us. 
All  the  assistance  AA’as  given  by  the  Confederate  States  naval  vessels  iiresent  that  could 
be  given,  but  Mr.  Mallory  ordered  Commander  Mitchell  to  take  command  near  the 
forts  at  an  hour  too  late  to  do  much  service.  As  to  the  river-defense  licet,  they  be- 
haved very  shamefully ; every  single  vessel  ran  away  or  Avas  deserted  by  all  hands 
Avithout  lighting.  The  vessels  belonging  to  private  parties  or  com])anies  at  Ncav 
Orleans  in  the  fall  of  1831  numbered  somewhere  in  the  neighborhood  of  twenty 
tow-boats,  strong  and  comparatively  fast,  which Avould  and  could  have  made  excellent 
rams.  There  Avere  about  as  many  large  ocean  steamers,  which  in  smooth  water  could 
have  carried  on  an  average  twenty  heavy  guns.  There  Avere  also  about  a dozen  8hix)s, 
brigs,  &c.,  Avhich  on  an  average  could  have  carried  six  heavy  guns  each;  yet  Mr. 
Mallory  did  not  take  any  of  these  vessels.  They  Avere  taken  by  the  State,  but  it  was 
then  too  late.  I Avas  making  i>re]>aratious  to  arm  and  equip  all  these  vessels  when  I 
Avas  reliev^ed  of  my  command  in  New  Orleans  and  ordered  to  Richmond.  I then  re- 
signed my  commission  as  a naval  officer.  After  I resigned,  the  State  of  Louisiana  took 
many  of  these  vessels,  but  there  Avas  too  little  time  then  to  lit  them,  man,  and  officer 
them.  Regular  naval  officers,  eAmu  at  that  late  hour,  would  have  done  better  than 
the  river  steamboat  captains  who  were  on  board  of  them. 

Question.  ,JVhat  was  the  character  of  the  vessel  you  commanded,  and 
what  was  the  character  of  the  Federal  vessel  Varuna,  as  to  construction, 
armament,  &c.  ? 

Answer.  My  ship  was  an  ordinary  merchant  mail  steamer— strong,  fast,  and  of  much 
weight.  Her  battery  was  only  two  32-j)ounder  rilles.  The  Varuna  was  a regular  man- 
of-war  built  ship,  Avith  a creAV  of  259  men,  and  eight  8-inch  guns,  four  heavy  32-pound- 
ers, two  20-x>ounder  Parrotts,  and  one  12-pounder  howitzer. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  Charleston,  S.  C.,  at  12  m.  May  15, 
I860,  or  as  soon  thereafter  as  practicable. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  Mmj  18, 1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  ])ursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  Maj.  Gen.  T.  C.  Hindman,  Brig.  Gens.  T.  F.  Drayton  and  W. 
M.  Gardner,  Maj.  L.  B.  Page,  judge-advocate,  and  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield 
Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  the  27th  ultimo  were  read  over. 

Gen.  G.  T.  Beauregiard  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  was  your  rank  in  the  U.  S.  Army,  and  were  you  while 
in  that  service  stationed  at  or  near  New  Orleans,  and  what  were  your 
opportunities  to  form  an  acquaintance  with  the  topography  of  that  sec- 
tion of  country  ? 

AusAver.  1 Avas  a brcA^et  major  of  Engineers  in  the  United  States  service,  and  in  charge 
for  about  fifteen  years  of  the  works  defending  the  ai)proach  to  Noav  Orleans,  Avhich 
made  me  thoroughly  acquainted  Avith  the  topograiffiy  of  that  section  of  Louisiana. 

Question.  From  your  knowledge  of  the  country  and  its  peculiarities 
would  you  think  it  the  proper  iilan  to  concentrate  the  main  strength  in 
artillery  at  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  in  connection  with  obstruc- 
tions at  that  point,  rather  than  to  place  the  guns  at  many  points  along 
the  river  which  the  enemy  would  have  to  pass  in  succession  ? 

Answer.  The  true  plan  for  the  defense  of  a river  from  the  passage  of  steamers,  &c., 
is,  Avheu  ijracticable,  to  obstruct  its  navigation  with  rafts,  x)ile8,  torxiedoes,  &.C.,  at 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


GOl 


tlio  most  favorable  points  for  sucli  obstructions;  tlicn  to  defend  the  latter  by  a concen- 
tration of  the  greatest  nnmber  of  heaviest  guns  at  one’s  command,  separating  them, 
however,  from  eacli  other  by  traverses  when  necessary  to  protect  tliem  from  entilade 
tires.  Such  was  the  system  i)roposed  by  Ocnerals  Bernard  and  Patton,  Majors  Cliase, 
Dclafield,  &c.,  when  they  planned  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  an;l  the  batteries 
contiguous  to  those  works.  Detached  batteries  arevt'.ry  good  when  proi)erly  located 
and  supported  ; otherwise  they  are  apt  to  be  overpowered  successively  by  a naval 
attack  or  to  be  taken  in  rear  by  a land  force.  It  is  evident  that  since  the  enemy’s 
steamers  and  gunboats  passed  the  concentrated  tires  of  Forts  Jackson,  Saint  Philii), 
&c.,  without  much  injury,  they  would  have  done  so  even  more  easily  if  our  guns  had 
been  scattered  over  75  miles  from  those  works  to  New  Orleans.  Moreover,  the  river 
beijig  very  high  and  the  country  between  those  two  points  being  low,  it  could  easily 
have  been  submerged  by  cutting  the  levees  at  night  near  any  batteries  which  might 
have  been  constructed  along  the  river,  thereby  cutting  olF their  garrisons  from  succor 
or  retreat.  I will  remark  that  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  were  placed  that  low 
down  the  river  to  protect  from  the  enemy  s depredations  as  much  of  the  country  liable 
to  cultivation  as  practicable,  and  also  to  increase  the  obstacles  to  a regular  siege  re- 
sulting from  the  lowness  of  their  sites,  which  does  not  admit  of  the  construction  of 
bayous  and  parallels,  especially  when  the  river  is  high. 

Question.  The  battle  having  been  fought  at  the  forts,  and  the  fleet 
having  passed,  do  you  consider  New  Orleans  a tenable  military  position, 
and  did  its  evacuation  by  the  infantry  forces  uecessai*ily  follow  as  a 
matter  of  course  when  the  enemy  was  in  full  possession  of  the  river  ? 

Answer.  The  forts  commanding  the  river  having  been  passed.  New  Orleans  neces- 
sarily lay  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy’s  heavy  guns  atloat,  which,  owing  to  the  high 
stage  of  the  river,  commanded  the  banks  on  both  sides  to  the  swaurps  skirting  the 
river  at  a distance  varying  from  a half  to  one  mile.  An  army  of  50,000  men  or  more 
could  not  then  have  saved  the  city  from  destruction.  Whether  the  latter  w'as  desir- 
able at  the  time  before  New  Orleans  had  experienced  Butler’s  iron  rule  could  only  have 
been  determined  by  the  State  or  Confederate  authorities,  who  should  have  considered 
whether  the  destruction  of  so  large  a city  would  have  done  more  injury  to  the  enemy 
than  to  ourselves.  It  is  evident  that  to  him  Baton  Rouge  is  a better  strategic  jmint 
than  New  Orleans,  and  the  destruction  of  the  latter  would  have  relieved  him  of  the 
necessity  of  keeping  a garrison  of  5,000  or  0,000  men  there  to  guard  it.  This  act 
would  have  been  a mere  empty  bravado,  a wanton  destruction  of  an  immense  amount 
of  x>rivate  and  jmblic  jiroperty,  which  would  have  shaken  at  the  time  the  Confederacy 
to  its  very  foundations  and  thrown  upon  its  Government  a helpless  x)opulation  of  about 
100,000  non-combatants  (men,  women,  and  children)  to  feed  and  j)rovide  for  when 
already  overburdened  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  armies  in  the  field.  When  the  Rus- 
sians burned  Moscow  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  anuihilaliug  Napoleon’s  army  of  500,000 
or  400,000  men,  which  had  invaded  their  country.  When  they  again  couseuted  to 
the  slow  but  certain  destruction  of  Sevastopol  it  was  to  prevent  the  allies  from  taking 
possession  of  its  immense  docks,  arsenals,  military  stores,  and  the  lleet  which  had 
sought  refuge  under  the  guns  of  its  forts.  The  xiossession  of  the  harbor  of  Sevastox^oi 
would  also  have  afforded  them  a magnificent  base  for  their  future  oi^eratious  in  the 
Crimea.  As  I have  already  stated,  the  Mississii)pi  River  being  extremely  high,  the 
streets  of  Now  Orleans  could  have  been  swept  from  one  extremity  to  the  other  by  the 
heavy  guns  of  the  enemy’s  fleet ; or  had  Commodore  Farragut  x)referred  reducing  the 
XJlace  to  submission  without  using  his  guns,  it  would  have  been  only  necessary  to  have 
cut  the  levee  above  and  below  the  city,  and  the  whole  x)opulatiou  would  have  been 
utterly  defenseless  and  in  a starving  condii  ion  in  a few  days.  Without  the  command 
of  the  Mi8sis8ix)i:)i  River  New  Orleans  is  not  worth  holding  as  a military  or  strategic 
position. 

By  a Member  or  the  Court: 

QnestioD.  Was  tbe  land  on  the  sugar  plantations  below  New  Orleans 
high  enough  for  the  construction  of  batteries  upon  them  ? 

Answer.  From  Point  la  Hache,  about  40  miles  below  the  city,  batteries  could  have 
been  constructed  along  both  sides  of  the  river,  provided  there  were  no  crevasses.  Such 
batteries  would  be  liable  to  be  submerged  by  breaks  in  the  levee. 

Question.  What  was  the  width  of  the  levee  in  front  of  New  Orleans  ? 

Answer.  Immediately  in  front  of  the  center  of  the  city  the  levee  will  average  about 
150  feet  in  width.  Ox^posite  the  extremities  of  the  city  the  levee  varied  from  5 feet  in 
width  at  the  crest  to  10  or  12.  The  sloxies  of  the  levee  have  about  an  angle  of  45 
degrees  ; their  height  varies  from  5 to  8 feet. 


602  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Question.  Would  the  water  let  in  from  above  the  city  through  a cre- 
vasse have  submerged  the  whole  city  or  only  that  portion  next  the 
swamp  and  lakes  ? 

Answer.  The  crevasse  at  Carrollton,  about  6 miles  above  the  City,  several  years 
ago,  submerged  the  city  to  about  Bon i bon  street,  the  fifth  street  on  Canal  street  from 
the  river.  A crevasse  nearer  to  the  city  than  Carrollton  would  probably  have  sub- 
merged it  to  a greater  extent.  The  water  would  have  remained  in  the  city  as  long  as 
the  river  remaiued  at  high  stage.  I have  known  the  city  to  be  in  danger  of  submer- 
sion without  any  crevasse  of  the  levee,  owing  to  the  exceeding  high  stage  of  the  river, 
and,  in  the  event  of  a crevasse,  the  depth  of  water  arising  from  the  submersion  would 
be  proportioned  to  the  height  of  the  river  and  the  width  of  the  crevasse. 

Question.  Could  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  have  held  the  river 
against  a hostile  fleet  without  obstructions  in  the  channel?  What 
should  have  been  the  character  of  these  obstructions?  By  what  means 
could  the  accumulation  of  drift  have  been  ijrevented? 

Answer.  I am  decidedly  of  the  opinion  that  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  could 
not  have  prevented  a certain  number  of  steamers  out  of  a fleet  from  passing  up  the 
river  in  a dark  night  or  a foggy  day.  A boom  obstruction  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  only 
kind  that  could  have  answered  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  enemy’s  steamers  from 
passing  those  forts;  but  ihe  problem  of  constructing  those  booms  so  as  to  enable  them 
to  resist  the  pressure  of  the  drift-wood  is  a difficult  one,  which  would  require  very 
thorough  examination  and  study  to  solve  it  satisfactorily.  Knowing  the  importance 
of  a boom  for  the  defense  of  New  Orleans,  when  the  State  seceded  I had  made  the 
drawings  and  estimates  of  a boom  to  bo  put  across  the  river  between  these  two  forts. 
When,  in  February,  1851,  I left  New  Orleans  for  Montgomery,  at  the  call  of  the  Con- 
federate States  Government,  1 placed  the  drawings  and  plans  referred  to  in  the  hands 
of  Col.  Paul  Hubert,  for  the  use  of  the  State  Military  Board,  calling  their  attention 
to  the  urgent  necessity  of  having  the  boom  constructed  and  put  in  position  at  the  ear- 
liest moment  practicable  ; but  I am  informed  that  it  was  never  done,  on  account  of 
its  cost  (less  than  $100,000),  and  the  time  required  for  its  construction,  probably  three 
months.  It  was  designed  to  make  it  in  two  sections,  of  several  layers  of  logs,  strongly 
bolted  together;  each  section  strongly  anchored  at  one  extremity  to  each  bank  of  the 
river ; their  other  extremities  were  then  to  be  brought  together  dowu-stream,  near  the 
Fort  Jackson  side,  about  one-third  the  width  of  the  river,  by  means  of  steam  power, 
chains,  and  anchors ; these  chains  were  to  be  slackened  when  the  drift-wood  accumu- 
lated too  much  above  the  boom,  and  hauled  taut  again  after  its  passage. 

Question.  As  against  a naval  force  of,  say,  twenty  mortar  vessels  and 
thirty  steam  vessels  and  a land  force  of  15,000  men,  what  works,  guns, 
obstructions,  and  troops  would  be  necessary  to  the  successful  defense  of 
Kew  Orleans,  and  what  naval  co  operation  would  be  required  ? 

Answer.  This  question  is  so  important  and  difficult  that  I do  not  feel  competent, 
away  from  the  locality,  to  give  it  a reliable  or  satisfactory  answer.  In  October,  1861, 
when  General  Lovell  was  ordered  to  Louisiana,  ho  called  upon  me  for  my  general 
views  as  to  the  defense  of  that  State,  which  I furnished  him  in  writing.  He  informs 
me  that  he  has  it  now  in  his  possession.  It  was  hastily  written,  but  it,  or  so  much  as 
may  be  deemed  proper  by  the  court,  maj’^  be  annexed  as  a part  of  this  answer. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  19,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Manstield  Lovell. 

Lieut.  A.  F.  Warley,  C.  S.  Navy,  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as 
a witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate: 

Question.  State  your  rank  in  the  Navy,  and  where  you  were  on  duty 
in  Ainil,  1862. 

Answer.  I am  first  lieutenant  in  the  C.  S.  Navy,  and  was  in  command  of  the  Con- 
federate States  ram  Manassas,  between  Forts  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson,  in  April,  1802. 


Chap.  XYI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G03 


Question.  State,  if  you  know,  the  condition  of  the  Confederate  States 
steamer  Louisiana  at  the  time  the  forts  were  passed  by  the  enemy’s 
fleet. 

Answer.  I was*tiot  attacked  to  her,  but  joined  ker  tke  morning  after  tke  figkt,  w'ken 
iny  vessel  bad  been  destroyed.  Tke  Louisiana  was  without  motive  power,  and  w'as 
made  fast  to  tke  bank  and  bad  an  anchor  down.  She  was  to  have  been  propelled  by 
a submerged  wheel  and  two  propellers.  The  submerged  wheel  bad  proved  to  be  use- 
less and  the  propellers  were  untinished.  I know  but  little  of  her  armaimuit.  Tbere 
are  other  persons  who  can  give  you  full  iuloiuiatiou  on  this  subject.  Commander 
Mitchell  and  Lieutenants  Shryock  and  Bowen  were  attached  to  the  vessel. 

Question.  Were  you  one  of  the  officers  of  the  naval  council  convened 
to  consider  and  determine  a location  for  the  Louisiana  in  the  43ttbrt  to 
resist  the  attack  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  upon  and  their  passage  of  roi1:s 
Jackson  and  Saint  Philip'?  If  so,  state  why  she  was  not  placed  in  the 
position  desired  by  Generals  Lovell  and  Duncan. 

Answer.  I was  one  of  that  council.  The  vessel  was  not  put  in  the  position  desired 
by  Generals  Lovell  and  Duncan  because  the  vessel  had  no  propelling  power  of  her  own, 
and  to  have  taken  that  position  she  would  have  been  under  the  lire  of  the  mortar 
boats  of  the  enemy,  while  she  would  not  have  been  able  to  have  reached  them.  Her 
port-holes  were  so  constructed  that  her  guns  could  not  have  had  sufficient  elevation 
to  bring  their  fire  within  range.  In  my  opinion  she  would  have  been  sunk  in  that 
l)osition  ill  half  an  hour  without  efiecting  a particle  of  good.  In  that  ojiiuiou  the 
senior  officers  of  the  council  concurred  without  a dissenting  voice.  I was  the  junior 
member  of  the  council.  The  practice  of  the  enemy’s  mortar  fleet  was  perfect.  As  an 
illustration,  I was  satisfied  before  the  bombardment  commenced  that  they  had  been 
taking  observations  of  the  Manassas.  I had  orders  to  remove  my  vessel  to  the  other 
side  of  the  river  as  soon  as  the  tight  commenced.  At  the  explosion  of  the  first  shell  I 
hauled  out  of  my  position,  but  had  not  removed  a ship’s  length  before  two  mortar 
shells  fell  in  the  position  I had  held,  and  I subsequently  counted  sixty  shots  that 
struck  within  a short  time  the  place  the  Manassas  had  retired  from.  The  Louisiana 
presented  a much  larger  surface  than  the  Manassas,  and  one  shell  falling  perpendicu- 
larly upon  her  upper  deck  would  have  been  sufficient  to  have  sunk  her.  The  upper 
deck  was  flat  and  only  covered  with  very  thin  iron.  She  was  built  to  fight  against 
vessels  throwing  broadsides  at  close  range.  We  hoped  to  bo  able  in  three  or  four  days 
to  propel  her  at  the  rate  of  three  knots  an  hour,  which,  if  done,  would  have  eaabled 
her  to  have  destroyed  everything  in  the  river.  The  port-holes  were  8m:\ll,  so  as  to 
present  as  small  an  aperture  as  possible  to  the  guns  and  musketry  of  the  enemy.  Her 
range  was  not  designed  to  be  greater  than  1,500  or  l,)t00  yards. 

Question.  Could  the  Louisiana  have  been  finished  had  she  not  been 
removed  from  New  Orleans  in  time  to  have  resisted  the  passage  of  the 
forts  or  to  have  protected  the  city  “?  State  also  why  she  was  removed 
to  the  forts  before  her  motive  power  was  effective. 

Answer.  I think  she  could  have  been  completed  sufficiently  to  have  protected  the 
city  had  she  not  been  removed.  The  day  she  was  blown  up  (April  25)  she  was  to 
have  been  finished  at  1*2  m.  I think  the  mechanics  could  have  worked  to  better 
advantage  at  the  city  than  while  the  vessel  was  in  motion  and  at  the  forts.  I had 
telegraphed  Commander  Whittle  that  it  was  necessary  to  make  a naval  demonstra- 
tion in  order  to  save  the  forts.  He,  I presume,  sent  her  down,  hoping  that  she  might 
be  got  ready  on  her  way  down  and  assist  in  such  demonstration.  I also  informed  him  at 
the  same  time  that  the  Montgomery  fleet  was  giving  the  forts  no  assistance  whatever. 

Question.  If  the  ram  Manassas  and  one  or  two  other  war  steamers 
had  been  placed  in  position  at  the  bar  below  the  forts,  do  you  think  the 
enemy  would  have  attempted  to  lighten  over  their  shifis  of  war  while 
thus  exposed  to  our  fire  ? 

Answer.  I do  not  think  they  would ; but  at  that  time  the  Manassas  had  been  sent 
up  the  river  and  had  her  propellers  broken  to  pieces. 

Question.  What  measures,  not  adopted,  might  have  been  taken  that 
would  have  been  eftective  for  holding  the  Mississippi  Eiver  against  the 
Federal  fleet '? 

Answer.  If  the  river-defense  fleet  with  the  Governor  Moore  and  General  Quitman 
had  co-operated  with  the  Manassas  as  rams,  they  might  have  prevented  the  passage 
of  the  forts.  One  of  the  river  fleet  (the  Defiance)  never  left  the  bank,  and  all  the  other 


G04  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

boats,  except  tbe  McRae,  steamed  up  the  river  without  firiug  a gun  or  taking  any  part 
in  the  fight,  The  next  morning  the  Stonewall  Jackson  and  Governor  Moore  came 
down  to  the  quarantine  and  ran  into  a Yankee  gunboat  and  sunk  her.  Had  they 
acted  in  the  same  manner  the  night  before,  making  their  poAver  available,  they  could 
have  kept  the  enemy’s  fieet  under  tbe  fire  of  the  forts,  and  the  city  would  have  been 
saved.  If  the  lleet  could  have  been  held  lifteen  minutes  under  the  fire  of  the  forts  I 
believe  we  might  have  sunk  every  vessel  they  had.  Had  there  been  y)roperuse  of  the 
fire  rafts  it  would  have  conduced  greatly  to  the  safety  of  the  city.  I know  of  but  one 
fire  ratt  carried  down  to  the  fieet,  which  came  near  destroying  ihe  Hai  tford,  the  fiag- 
• shii)  of  the  enemy.  This  was  taken  down  by  the  Mosher,  commanded  by  a Captain 
Sherman,  who  was  Avounded  and  bad  his  vessel  sunk.  There  were  a large  number  of 
these  rafts  (thirty  or  forty  of  them)  wdiich  were  not  used,  and  Avhich,  eA^eu  if  not  set 
on  fire,  Avould  have  been  useful  in  blockading  the  channel  had  they  been  sent  doAvn. 
Stephenson  (generally  called  Commodore  Stephenson),  of  the  Montgomeiy  fieet,  in  at- 
tempting to  carry  down  some  fire  rafts  on  tbe  other  side  of  the  obstructions,  permitted 
them  to  drift  upon  tbe  obstructions,  which  caused  them  to  be  broken  in  the  center,  so 
that  the  middle  of  the  river  Avas  a free  and  oy)en  channel. 

Captains  Grant,  ot  the  General  Quitman,  and  Hooper,  commanding  the  Resolute,  of 
the  river-defense  fieet,  came  aboard  the  Manassas  the  evening  before  the  fight,  and,  in 
the  course  of  couAmrsatiou,  denied  that  they  were  under  the  command  of  Generals 
Lovell  and  Duncan,  or  of  any  one  except  the  Secretary  of  War;  that  they  Avere  there 
to  show’  naAml  officers  how  to  fight. 

Cross-examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  If  the  Montgomery  defense  fleet  bad  been  properly  officered 
and  manned  would  they  not  have  been  of  very  great  eflect  in  resisting 
the  passage  of  the  forts  f 

AnsAver.  It  would  have  been  very  effective  to  that  end. 

Question.  State  in  general  terms  your  opinion  of  the  means  placed  at 
the  disposal  of  the  naval  officers  at  ilew  Orleans  to  enable  them  to  co- 
operate with  the  land  forces  in  preventing  the  passage  of  the  forts  on 
April  24,  1802,  mentioning  each  vessel  and  its  efficiency. 

Answer.  We  had  the  Louisiana,  a formidable  vessel,  with  a powerful  battery,  but 
without  motive  power.  Her  creAv  was;  of  mixed  character,  some  good  men  and  some 
indifferent;  at  least  such  is  my  opinion,  based  upon  the  fact  that  some  of  her  crew 
AAmre  from  the  Army,  others  from  the  lake  fleet,  &.c.  The  McRae  was  a light  vessel, 
with  a fine  creAV ; her  battery  consisted  of  one  heavy  9-inch  gun  and  six  light  32- 
pounders  ; the  9-inch  gun  burst  early  in  the  action ; for  her  size  she  was  a very  efficient 
vessel.  The  Jackson  was  only  a river  boat,  Avith  two  32-pounders ; she  was  not  in 
the  fight ; and  the  Manassas,  a tug-boat  that  had  been  converted  into  a ram,  covered 
Avith  half-inch  iron,  and  had  a 3.2-pounder  carronade ; her  crew  consisted  of  thirty-five 
persons,  officers  and  men.  She  Avas  perforated  in  tbe  fight  by  shot  and  shell  as  if  she 
had  been  made  of  paper.  These  vessels  constituted  the  entire  naval  force. 

By  a Member  of  the  Court: 

Question.  Were  any  torpedoes  placed  in  any  of  the  passes  leading  into 
the  Mississipiii,  and  could  they  have  been  there  used  to  advantage'? 

Answer.  I do  not  know  of  any  being  used  there ; if  they  could  have  been  used  to 
advantage  anywffiere  they  might  have  been  there. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  in.  to-morrow. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  3Iay  20,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Lieut.  C.  B.  Poindexter,  C.  S.  Navy,  was  then  sworn  and  examined 
as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell: 

Question.  State  your  rank  and  position  at  and  before  the  evacuation 
of  New  Orleans,  in  April,  1862. 

Answer.  I was  a lieutenant  in  the  C.  S.  Navy,  and  in  command  of  Confederate 
States  gimboat  Bienville,  on  Lake  Pontchartraiu,  at  that  time. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  605 

Question.  What  assistance,  if  any,  was  furnished  by  General  Lovell 
ill  arming  and  fitting  the  Bienville  for  service? 

Answer.  General  Lovell  furnished  five  of  the  six  guns  that  she  carried  and  the 
powder,  and  was  always  willing  and  anxious  to  assist  me  in  every  way. 

Question.  At  the  time  of  the  evacuation  of  the  city  what  services  were 
you  requested  to  render  in  assisting  General  Lovell? 

Answer.  When  I came  up  to  the  city  from  Fort  Pike  I found  the  naval  commandant 
of  the  station  had  left,  when  I in  company  with  Lieutenant  Gwathmey,  of  the  Car- 
oudelet,  tendered  my  services  to  General  Lovell,  who  requested  me  to  detain  the  guu- 
hoats  at  the  lake  end  of  the  Pontchartrain  Railroad,  and  to  seize  all  the  i)rivate 
steamers  I could  find  in  the  neighborhood,  and  there  to  await  further  directions  from 
him.  That  took  place  on  the  night  of  Apiil  24. 

Question.  From  whom  did  you  receive  the  order  or  request  which 
induced  you  to  go  to  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb  and  bring  away  the  troops, 
and  were  you  ever  requested  by  General  Lovell  to  do  more  than  hold 
yourself  in  readiness  for  that  duty! 

Answer.  From  Colonel  Fuller.  I received  no  order  from  General  Lovell  to  remove 
the  troops  until  after  they  had  been  withdrawn 

Question.  Did  you  observe  any  indecision,  confusion,  or  want  of  cool- 
ness and  energy  on  the  part  of  General  Lovell  in  your  interviews  with 
him  during  the  evacuation  of  the  city! 

Answer.  I did  not.  He  was  so  cool  and  collected  that  I congratulated  him. 

Question.  Were  you  ever  requested  by  General  Lovell  to  re-enter  the 
lake  in  connection  with  a firoposed  reoccupation  of  the  forts  by  our 
troops! 

Answer.  I was,  on  April  27  or  28.  ^ 

Question.  What  disposition,  if  any,  of  the  vessels  under  your  com- 
mand was  suggested  by  General  Lovell  after  the  evacuation  of  the  city! 

Answer.  General  Lovell  advised  me  by  letter  to  go  to  Mobile,  if  I deemed  it  practi- 
cable. 

Question.  What  disposition  did  General  Lovell  request  you  to  make 
of  the  guns  and  ammunition  of  the  gunboat  Bienville,  and  when  were 
they  destroyed,  and  what  was  done  with  them! 

Answer.  On  my  arrival  at  Camp  Moore,  when  I reported  to  General  Lovell,  I had 
the  gnus  (eleven  in  number),  ammunition,  and  projectiles  saved  from  the  gunboats. 
Ho  asked  me  to  take  them  immediately  to  Vicksburg,  which  I did,  and  assisted  in 
putting  them  in  iiosition. 

By  the  Court: 

Question.  Did  you  command  the  Confederate  naval  forces  on  Lake 
Pontchartrain! 

Answer.  I did  not;  I commanded  the  Bienville. 

Question.  How  many  steamers  were  you  able  to  collect  at  the  Pout- 
chartrain  end  of  the  railroad,  and  what  services  did  you  render  in  com- 
pliance with  General  LovelPs  request! 

Answer.  I collected  three  or  four  steamers,  which  were  used  in  withdrawing  the 
troops  from  the  forts,  but  under  the  immediate  orders  of  Colonel  Fuller.  I also  car- 
ried over  two  batteries  of  artillery  and  1,500  or  2,000  troops  from  the  city  to  Covington. 

Question.  Why  did  you  not  carry  out  the  instructions  of  General 
Lovell  to  re-enter  the  lake! 

Answer.  The  withdrawal  of  the  troops,  the  dismantling  of  the  forts,  the  burning  of 
the  gun-carriages,  &c.,  rendered  it  unnecessary;  besides,  I believed  at  the  time  that 
entrance  was  completely  obstructed  by  the  sinking  of  the  Oregon. 


GOG  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Samuel  Wolfe  was  tlien  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Loyell  : 

Question.  Wbat  business  were  you  engaged  in  at  New  Orleans  for 
some  months  prior  to  its  evacuation,  in  April,  1802^ 

Answer.  I was  first  a mercliant  and  then  engaged  in  the  foundery  business. 

Question.  State  what  suggestions  and  aid  you  received  from  General 
Lovell  in  your  operations,  and  what  results,  if  any,  were  achieved. 

Answer.  General  Lovell  suggested  that  the  necessities  of  the  Government  were  such 
as  to  require  the  full  use  of  the  foundery.  We  set  a number  of  men  at  work  to  make 
the  patterns  for  field  pieces  and  10-inch  mortars,  and  at  last  patterns  for  10-inch  coliini- 
hiads ; also  the  requisite  shot  and  shell  for  those  guns.  The  patterns  of  the  10-inch 
mortars  and  field  pieces  were  begun  in  November,  1801.  The  patterns  for  the  colurn- 
biads  were  completed  about  the  time  the  city  fell.  We  cast  quite  a number  of  field 
pieces  (probably  six  were  finished)  and  several  10-inch  mortars,  one  of  which  was 
completed.  We  had  employed  over  100  men.  I was  not  acquainted  with  the  business 
myself,  but  my  cmployds  were.  Among  them  was  an  artillery  officer,  who  was  skilled 
in  the  fabrication  of  arms,  &c.  General  Lovell  called  very  frequently  at  the  foundery 
and  urged  forward  the  completion  of  the  guns  ordered  by  him  and  the  ordnance  offi- 
cer. Our  supply  of  iron  best  suited  for  guns  was  quite  limited,  and  General  Lovell 
gave  us  an  order  for  100  very  large  water-pipes,  a portion  of  which  we  used.  General 
Lovell  also  found  that  we  needed  a verj'  large  lathe  for  the  working  of  heavy  gnus, 
and  provided  us  with  one  from  the  other  side  of  the  river,  by  permission  of  the  Gov- 
ernment. General  Lovell,  early  in  March,  issued  an  order  to  the  effect  that  the 
foundery  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Government  and  the  employes  in  its  service,  for  the 
purpose  of  protecting  them  from  the  militia  officer  and  to  secure  the  entire  services  of 
the  founderj’^ ; but  that  was  unnecessary,  as  it  had  been  purchased  for  Government  use 
alone.  At  the  suggestion  of  General  Lovell  we  were  putting  up  reverberatory  fur- 
naces, which  were  nearly  completed  when  the  city  fell.  General  Lovell  frequently 
tendered  me  money,  which  I declined  to  take. 

Question.  Were  any  attempts  made  to  remove  the  property  at  your 
works  at  the  time  of  the  evacuation  ? State  what  was  removed  and 
your  reasons  for  not  removing  the  whole. 

Answer.  We  were  ordered  on  April  24  or  25,  1862,  to  remove  all  work  at  our  shop, 
finished  or  unfinished.  There  were,  I think,  about  eight  brass  pieces  (part  finished 
and  part  unfinished)  sent  up  the  Jackson  Railroad.  The  mortars  that  were  unfinished 
were  thrown  into  the  basin  of  the  new  canal.  Some  of  the  mortar  beds  were  buried 
in  the  ground  at  the  foundery.  The  reasons  for  these  acts  were  that  we  could  not  get 
men  and  vehicles  to  carry  them  to  the  railroad  depot.  Men  were  afraid  to  be  seen 
working  about  such  an  establishment  upon  the  arrival  of  the  enemy. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Charleston,  S.  0.,  May  21,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  M.  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

The  judge-advocate  then  informed  the  court  that  certain  witnesses 
whom  he  had  summoned  from  Savannah,  Ga.,  had  left  that  city  for 
Kichmond  before  the  arrival  of  the  summons,  and  that  there  were  no 
other  witnesses  to  examine  at  Charleston. 

The  court  was  then  adjourned  to  meet  at  Eichmond,  Va.,  June  1, 
1863,  or  as  soon  thereafter  as  practicable. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  June  2,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  Maj.  Gen.  T.  C.  Hindman,  Brig.  Gens.  T.  P.  Drayton  and 
W.  M.  Gardner,  Maj.  L.  E.  Page,  judge-advocate,  and  Maj.  Gen.  Mans- 
field Lovell. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  GO 7 

Lieut.  W.  H.  Ward,  0.  S.  ^7avy,  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a 
witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  State  your  profession  and  what  duty  you  were  on  in  April, 

1862. 

Answer.  I was  a lieutenant  in  tlie  Navy,  on  duty  at  New  Orleans  ; attached  to  the 
Confederate  States  steamer  Louisiana  at  that  time. 

Question.  Were  you  on  duty  aboard  the  Louisiana  when  the  enemy’s 
fleet  passed  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  ? If  yea,  state  what  part 
she  bore  in  resisting  its  passage  and  her  location  during  the  action. 

Answer.  She  was  fought  to  the  best  advantage  under  the  circumstances  ; her  guns 
w^ere  fired  with  her  bow  down-stream,  the  starl)oard  battery  bearing  upon  the  chan-  * 
nel.  She  had  no  efiective  motive  power,  and  her  location  on  the  east  side  of  the  river 
was  the  best,  in  my  judgment,  that  she  could  have  taken. 

Question.  State  all  you  know  touching  the  request  of  Generals  Lovell 
and  Duncan  to  have  the  vessel  placed  in  a particular  position  before  the 
passage  of  the  foijtsj  and,  if  you  know,  why  their  suggestions  were  not 
heeded.  State,  also,  when  and  why  the  Louisiana  was  destroyed  by  our 
forces. 

Answer.  I know  nothing  of  my  own  knowledge  as  to  such  request  being  preferred  by 
those  gentlemen.  On  the  morning  of  April  28,  about  6 o’clock.  Commander  Mitchell 
sent  for  the  commissioned  officers  of  the  vessel,  and  said  to  them,  when  they  had  assem- 
bled, that  he  had  just  received  a communication  from  Fort  Jackson,  stating  that  Gen- 
eral Duncan  was  about  to  surrender  the  forts  to  the  enemy;  that  he  had  no  previous 
information  that  such  a course  would  be  pursued ; that  a large  Federal  fleet  had 
passed  up  the  river ; that  if  the  forts  surrendered  we  would  be  immediately  under  the 
lire  of  their  guns  ; that  we  would  bo  attacked  from  above  and  below  by  the  enemy’s 
vessels;  that  we  had  no  motive  power  of  our  own,  being  dependent  altogether  upon 
two  high-pressure  river  steamboats,  which  would  have  most  likely  been  disabled  or 
destroyed  by  the  enemy’s  first  fire,  and  could  not,  therefore,  withdraw  from  the  fire 
that  would  be  opened  upon  us  by  the  forts.  He  then  asked  the  officers  what  was  the 
best  course  to  pursue.  The  unanimous  opinion  was  that  the  vessel  should  be  destroyed 
rather  than  that  she  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Federals.  In  pursuance  of  this 
conclusion,  she  was  fired  about  10  o’clock  that  morning  and  in  a short  time  blown  to 
pieces.  The  Louisiana  was  the  only  vessel  of  the  defenses  afloat  that  was  left,  except 
a tow-boat  (the  Defiance),  which  had  been  abandoned  by  her  officers  and  crew. 

Question.  State  tbe  condition  of  the  Louisiana  with  respect  to  her 
fighting  capacity  at  the  time  she  was  destroyed;  and  state  how  long  it 
would  have  required  to  have  completed  her  for  effective  service. 

Answer.  When  we  left  New  Orleans,  by  some  mistake  or  mismanagement  some  of 
the  guns — about  three  or  four — were  mounted  on  carriages  that  did  not  belong  to  them, 
and  could  not  be  worked  efficiently  in  the  forts.  All  the  time  we  had  was  devoted  to 
the  correction  of  the  mistake.  There  was  also  one  gun  lying  in  the  dock  that  was  not 
mounted  at  all.  In  my  division,  owing  to  an  improper  mounting  of  an  8-inch  shell 
gun,  it  was  ineffectual.  The  facilities  for  mounting  the  guns  were  very  indifferent; 
it  had  to  be  done  by  blocking  them  up.  Her  motive  power  was  also  incomplete.  She 
had  to  depend  on  wooden  tugs  to  give  her  motion.  Her  wheels,  which  #ere  designed 
as  her  chief  motive  power,  were  wholly  inadequate,  and  I think  they  could  never 
have  been  made  serviceable.  Her  propellers,  which  were  merely  auxiliary,  it  was 
said  would  have  been  done  that  day,  but  I do  not  think  they  would  have  moved  her ; 
their  chief  value  would  have  been  to  assist  in  steering  the  vessel.  I looked  upon  her 
as  a total  failure,  except  that  she  might  have  been  used  as  a floating  battery ; but  even 
then  her  accommodations  were  so  inferior  that  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  have 
lived  on  her.  It  may  be  well  to  state  that  the  crew  of  the  Louisiana  was  not  full,  and 
of  a mixed  and  indifferent  character.  A company  of  artillery  from  the  Crescent  Regi- 
ment constituted  a larger  part  of  the  crew,  ami.  were  not  skilled  in  the  use  of  heavy 
guns. 

Cross-examinatiou  by  Major-General  Lovell: 

Question.  In  your  opinion  was  the  Louisiana,  or  could  sbe  have  been 


608  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.^  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  LChap.  XYT. 

made  witliiu  a reasonable  time,  an  efficient  war  vessel  for  service  in  the 
Mississippi  Eiver? 

Answer.  I do  not  tLink  she  could  have  been  made  efficient  for  such  purposes  within 
a reasonable  time.  I regarded  her  an  entire  failure. 

Commander  Arthur  Sinclair,  C.  S.  iS'avy,  was  next  sworn  and 
examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge- Advocate: 

Question.  State  your  rank  in  the  C.  S.  I^avy ; your  length  of  service 
as  a naval  officer,  and  the  duty  you  were  on  in  April,  1862. 

Answer.  I am  a commander  in  the  C.  S.  Navy,  and  held  the  same  rank  when  I 
resigned  from  the  Federal  service.  I have  been  forty  years  in  the  Navy,  twenty  of 
which  I spent  at  sea.  In  the  early  part  of  April,  1882,  I was  ordered  by  the  Secretary 
of  the  Navy  to  New  Orleans,  to  superintend  the  fitting  out  of  the  Confederate  States 
stea-mer  Mississippi,  then  on  the  ways,  aud  when  finished  I was  to  take  command  of  her. 

Question.  State  generally  the  condition  of  the  Mississippi  upon  your 
arrival  at  New  Orleans,  your  means  of  knowing  such  condition,  and  the 
length  of  time  you  deemed  requisite  to  complete  her  {or  service. 

Answer.  She  was  on  the  ways  at  that  time,  and  was  not  launched  until  about  April 
20 ; she  Avas  not  near  complete  then  nor  at  the  time  of  her  destruction.  She  had  been 
ironed  as  high  as  her  knuckle,  but  had  no  irou  upon  her  flush  deck,  either  forward  or 
aft,  at  the  time  she  was  destroyed.  I was  daily  aboard  superintending  her  coustruc- 
f ion — often  three  or  four  times  a day.  A small  part  of  the  iron  for  her  roof  or  shield 
had  been  laid  down,  but  not  bolted  ; one  of  three  propellers  was  in  position,  the  others 
lying  upon  the  wharf ; her  rudder  was  just  commenced;  a box  had  been  just  beguu  to 
fit  around  the  vessel  (a  sort  of  dry-dock  aud  a very  tedious  aud  heavy  piece  of  work), 
which  had  to  be  constructed  to  enable  the  remaining  propellers  to  be  shipped.  A 
portion  of  her  machinery  was  on  board ; her  armament  had  not  arrived ; shot  and  shell 
were  in  process  of  manufacture,  but  only  a small  (xuautity  cast ; not  a grain  of  powder 
wtis  on  board;  her  port  frames  had  not  arrived,  which  had  to  be  put  in  before  the 
plating  was  bolted  down.  The  day  the  vessel  was  launched  I borrowed  from  Com- 
mander Whittle,  commanding  the  station,  four  old-fashioned  smooth-bore  32-pounders 
and  mounted  them,  and  from  General  Lovell  I borrowed  1,000  pounds  of  powder,  and 
endeavored  to  get  them  ready,  so  that  if  the  enemy  came  up  I might,  if  iiossiblc,  make 
some  resistance  with  the  workmen  aboard,  she  having  no  cvew,  not  a man  having  been 
shipped  for  her,  no  complement  of  men  had  been  assigned ; but  I 1 bought  500  men 
requisite  for  her  crew.  In  attempting  to  mount  these  guns  I found  there  was  not  a 
ring-bolt,  or  eye-bolt,  nor  any  iron  work  on  the  ship  by  which  a gun  could  have  been 
secured.  To  be  within  boiiuds  I have  said  that  six  or  seven  weeks  were  required  to 
finish  the  vessel,  but  I believe  it  would  have  taken  three  months.  In  support  of  this 
opinion  I may  mention  that  I left  a ship  at  Savannah  recently  which  I had  observed 
for  three  months;  when  I was  ordered  there  the  work  upon  her  was  much  more 
advanced  than  that  of  the  Mississippi,  and,  although  she  is  scarcely  one  fourth  the 
size  of  the  Mississippi,  she  is  not  yet  done,  though  the  work  upon  her  has  been  prose- 
cuted wiih  energy. 

Question.  Was  the  work  upon  the  Mississippi  prosecuted  with  dili- 
gence and  effect  by  those  charged  with  her  construction  during  the  time 
that  you  superintended  her*? 

Answer.  The  work  during  that  time  was  pushed  forward  Avith  great  zeal,  energy, 
and  skill ; all  AAns  done  that  could  bo  done  to  finish  her. 

Question.  As  the  officer  supervising  her  construction  and  to  command 
her  when  completed,  what,  if  any,  authority  or  control  had  you  over  the 
constructors  and  builders  of  the  Mississippi? 

Answer.  I had  no  authority  over  them,  but  could  and  did  make  suggestions,  which 
were  followed.  I could  also  "have  reported  them  to  the  commander  of  the  station  or 
the  Navy  Department  for  any  dereliction  of  duty. 

Question.  Did  General  Lovell  ever  say  to  you  that  there  was  a proba- 
bility of  the  enemy^s  fleet  passing  the  forts,  and  did  he  ever  recommend 


Chap.  XVI. J CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  609 

to  you  precautionary  measures  for  the  removal  of  the  Mississippi  in  such 
event  ? 

Answer.  Ho  never  did,  that  I remember. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  10  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  June  3,  18G3 — 10  a.  m. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  M.  Lovell.  > J » 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  Commander  Arthur  Sinclair  continued. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  State  what  measures  were  taken  to  remove  the  Mississippi, 
and  whether  or  not  she  could  have  been  saved. 

Answer.  The  Mississippi  might  doubtless  have  been  launched  and  towed  np  the 
river  many  days  previous  to  the  enemy's  passing  the  forts,  and  there  finally  completed, 
but  her  completion  would  have  been  greatly  retarded,  as  all  the  workshops,  material, 
workmen,  in  fact  the  whole  naval  establishment,  would  have  had  to  be  transferred 
from  New  Orleans  to  the  place  of  transfer,  and  there  was  no  place  of  safety  above, 
that  I know  of,  short  of  Fort  Pillow,  and  all  above  on  the  river  was  then  menaced  by 
the  enemy.  Her  completion  was  a momentous  affair,  and  therefore  the  work  was 
prosecuted  up  to  the  last  moment  with  all  the  energy  within  our  power.  I received 
no  orders  from  the  commander  of  the  station.  Commander  Whittle,  under  whose  orders 
I was,  or  from  the  Navy  Department,  to  remove  her  until  the  morning  of  April  24,  the 
day  upon  which  the  enemy  passed  the  forts.  On  that  day  Commander  Whittle  sent 
for  and  informed  me  that  the  enemy  bad  passed  the  batteries  and  were  coming  np,  at 
the  same  time  directing  me  to  take  the  ship  up  the  river,  if  possible,  to  some  place  of 
safety,  but  not  to  let  her  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  I immediately  sent  orders 
to  the  steamers  engaged  by  the  Messrs.  Tift  to  proceed  at  once  up  to  the  ship-yard  for 
the  puri)ose  of  taking  the  ship  in  tow.  The  officers  sent  by  me  upon  this  duty  returned 
and  informed  me  that  the  steamers  referred  to  had  been  detained  by  order  of  General 
Lovell.  I called  myself  upon  Colonel  Lovell,  the  general  being  out  of  his  office  upon 
business,  and  obtained  from  him  the  release  of  two  of  the  three,  which  were  engaged 
for  this  purpose,  the  Peytona  and  the  St.  Charles.  Although  directed  to  proceed  at 
once,  they  did  not  reach  the  ship-yard  until  late  in  the  evening.  The  captains  of 
these  boats  showed  every  disposition,  in  fact,  determination,  to  thwart  me  in  my 
wishes,  and  to  accomplish  my  ends  I had,  with  my  own  officers,  to  lash  and  secure 
them  alongside,  and  furnishe<l  one  of  them,  the  steamer  St.  Charles,  with  an  engineer, 
as  the  captain  said  he  had  only  one.  I finally  succeeded  in  getting  off,  but  found, 
after  many  hours  of  hard  tugging  against  a jiowerful  current,  that  I could  not  succeed. 
Assistance  was  iiromised  me  by  Colonel  Baggs  (or  Biggs)  of  the  Safety  Committee,  but 
none  was  received.  Still  unwilling  to  give  up  the  ship,  I went  myself  back  to  the 
city  in  the  Peytona,  and  urged  the  aid  of  the  steamers,  but  in  vain.  Every  variety 
of  excuse  was  offered  by  their  captains,  and  no  disposition  manifested  to  help  me"; 
in  fact,  a fixed  determination  not  to  move  in  the  matter.  While  thus  negotiating 
the  enemy  hove  in  sight,  and  I at  once  started  back  for  the  ship,  4 miles  above, 
intending  to  fire  her,  but  the  officer  in  charge.  Lieutenant  Waddell,  anticiiiated  me  and 
applied  the  torch.  After  remaining  in  the  stream  until  the  ship  was  nearly  consumed 
I held  a council  of  war  with  my  officers,  and  it  was  determinea  to  return  to  the  city 
and  offer  our  services  to  General  Lovell.  I was  on  my  way  back  when  I met  Lieuten- 
ant McCorkle,  of  the  Navy,  who  informed  me  that  the  enemy  were  off  Canal  street, 
and  that  General  Lovell  had  marched  his  troops  ont.  1 then  proceeded  up  the  river 
with  my  officers  to  Vicksburg.  I will  also  state  that  the  assistance  of  several  steam- 
ers, which  passed  up  the  river,  while  engaged  in  towing  the  Mississippi,  was  asked 
and  refused.  I also  engaged  the  services  of  Navy  workmen  to  accompany  me  up  in 
the  ship  to  try  and  finish  her,  and  put  on  board,  While  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the 
steamers,  much  of  the  material  for  her  completion.  Some  was  afterwards  put  aboard 
the  steamer  St.  Charles,  before  firing  the  ship,  and  taken  up  to  Vicksburg  and  saved. 

The  Mississixjpi  was  launched  on  Saturday,  April  19,  and  burned  the  Friday  follow- 
ing. In  this  connection  I would  state  that  on  my  arrival  at  New  Orleans  there  was  a 
great  desire  upon  the  part  of  many  persons  expressed  that  the  ship  should  be  launched. 
The  Tifts  objected,  and  I agreed  with  them  that  to  launch  her  in  her  then  condition 
would  cause  much  delay  in  shipping  her  j)ropellers  and  involve  the  exi^ense  of  build- 

39  R R — VOL  VI 


610  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 


ing  tLe  box  or  dry-dock  for  that  purpose  of  which  I have  already  spoken;  but  fiudiufr 
the  attack  about  to  be  commeuced  I recommended  her  being  launched  to  her  builders’ 
the  Lifts,  in  which  Commander  Mitchell  joined  me;  the  suggestion  was  heeded  but 
not  until  many  days  after,  for  reasons  which  they  assigned.  ’ 

Question.  If  the  Mississippi  had  been  completed,  and  with  her  arma- 
ment and  men  on  board,  could  she  alone  have  held  the  river  against  the 
entire  Federal  fleet  coming  up  from  below  ? 

Answer.  I think  she  could.  She  would  have  been  the  most  formidable  ship  that  I 
ever  knew  or  heard  of — very  creditable  to  her  iirojectors,  builders,  anti  country. 

Cross-examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell: 

Question.  You  have  been  asked  whether  General  Lovell  recommended 
to  you  precautionary  measures  for  the  removal  of  the  Mississippi.  Did 
you  consider  that  he  was  tlie  proper  person  to  give  you  advice  or  in- 
structions as  to  your  oflicial  acts  and  duties  and  did  you  look  to  him 
for  such  % 

Answer.  I did  not.  Although  I would  have  respected  very  highly  his  suggestions, 
I should  have  felt  it  my  duty  to  lay  them  before  Commauder  Whittle,'  my  immediate 
commander,  before  acting  upon  them.  My  orders  were  to  report  to  Commander  Whit- 
tle for  the  command  of  the  shi];). 

Cafit.  GeorGtE  K.  Hollins  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a wit- 
ness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  fiosition  did  you  hold  at  Yew  Orleans  and  in  the 
WYst  in  the  latter  part  of  1801  and  the  first  part  of  1802 

Answer.  At  New  Orleans  I commanded  all  the  vessels  afloat  and  the  naval  station, 
lu  the  West,  near  New  Madrid  aud  Island  No.  10,  I only  commanded  the  vessels  afloat. 
I left  New  Orleans  in  January  or  February,  1862,  Commander  Whittle  then  assuming 
command  of  the  station,  but  not  the  vessels  afloat. 

Question.  State  the  force  you  took  with  you  from  Yew  Orleans  above 
and  what  force  you  left  there. 

Answer.  I took  with  me  from  New  Orleans  eight  vessels,  averaging  six  guns  each, 
except  the  Manassas;  that  had  but  one  guu,  I left  no  naval  force  at  New  Orleans. 
General  Lovell  urged  me  to  leave  some  of  the  vessels  there,  but  this  I could  not  do,  as 
my  orders  from  the  Navy  Department  were  to  take  them  all  above. 

Question.  What  conversation,  if  any,  passed  between  General  Lovell 
and  yourself  shortly  before  the  fall  of  Yew  Orleans  relative  to  a pro- 
l)osed  CO  operation  of  your  fleet  with  his  forces  for  the  jiurpose  of  driv- 
ing the  enemy  from  the  Lower  Mississippi  Eiver  ? 

Answer.  General  Lovell,  Commander  Whittle,  and  myself  had  a conversation  at 
that  time,  in  which  we  agreed  that  such  an  expedition  should  be  made.  I had  often 
passed  the  Yankee  batteries  and  knew  that  they  could  pass  ours,  and  I was  anxious 
that  my  squadron,  which  was  up  the  river,  should  be  ordered  down  to  resist  Farragut, 
feeling  satisfied  that  I could  have  cut  him  up.  I should  have  fought  him  to  the  great- 
est advantage.  FarraguFs  ships  would  have  been  exposed  bow  foremost  to  my  broad- 
sides aud  the  sides  of  his  vessels  to  the  fire  of  the  forts.  Had  he  exposed  the  sterns  of 
his  vessels  to  the  fire  of  the  forts  they  would  have  been  sunk  in  a short  time.  I had 
previously  presented  this  plan  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  but  it  was  rejected,  he 
replying  that  the  main  attack  on  New  Orleans  was  to  bo  from  above  aud  not  below. 
The  enemy  had  never  passed  our  fortifications  until  they  had  been  reduced,  and  I 
know  there  would  have  been  time  enough  to  have  gone  below  and  returned  to  assist 
the  land  forces  at  Fort  Pillow. 

Question.  State,  if  you  know,  what  steps  were  taken  by  General  Lov- 
ell, in  connection  with  Commander  Whittle,  to  have  your  fleet  ordered 
below  for  such  fmrpose. 

Answer.  Being  detached  from  the  command  of  the  squadron.  General  Lovell  and 
Commander  Whittle  prevailed  upon  me  to  remain  a day  longer  in  New  Orleans  while 


Chap.  XVI.  1 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


Gil 

they  could  communicate  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  and  urge  his  consent  to  sncli 
an  expedition.  1 did  remain  twenty-four  hours,  but  no  rei)]y  was  received. 

Cross-examined  by  the  JudGtE-Advocate: 

Question.  While  you  were  in  command  of  the  naval  station  at  New 
Orleans  had  you  opportunity  of  observing  C-eneral  Lovell’s  ollicial  con- 
duct? If  so,  state  his  habits  as  an  officer  in  command. 

Answer.  I had  good  opportunities  of  observing  him.  living  in  the  same  house  with 
him  and  seeing  him  day  and  night.  I thought  him  active,  zealous,  and  most  attentive 
to  his  duties. 

Question.  While  in  command  of  the  defenses  afloat  at  New  Orleans 
were  your  requisitions  i^romptly  filled,  and  were  zeal  and  energy  mani- 
fested by  the  Navy  Department  in  lierfecting  the  naval  defenses  at  that 
point  ? 

Answer.  All  the  powder  I used  was  obtained  from  General  Lovell.  I could  scarcely 
ever  get  money.  I borrowed  from  the  merchants  of  the  city  $45,000  in  bankable  funds, 
which  the  Departments,  after  a delay  of  four  months,  Avanted  to  refund  in  Confederate 
bonds,  Avhich^were  then  at  a heavy  discount,  and  I believe  the  debt  was  so  setded. 
I was  all  the  time  cramped  to  pay  even  the  smallest  debts  due  to  the  wives  of  soldiers 
who  were  making  cartridge-bags.  I had  no  control  whatever  of  the  Louisiana  or  Mis- 
sissippi. The  work  generally  seemed  to  progress  well,  although  I think  at  one  time 
it  was  delayed  for  want  of  iron.  There  was  but  little  energy  or  promptitude  displayed 
by  the  Navy  Department  in  the  conduct  of  naval  affairs  at  that  station.  My  ordnance 
otlicer  (Lieut.  Beverly  Kennon)  made  contracts  for  naval  supplies  of  all  sorts  at  low 
rates,  but  many  of  these  contracts  were  annulled  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  Such 
articles  would  now  bring  seven  or  eight  times  the  price  that  they  were  contracted  for 
then.  I rather  avoided  any  close  inspection  of  the  working  upon  the  Louisiana  and 
Mississipxji ; special  agents,  not  naval  officers,  were  assigned  to  that  duty.  The  gen- 
eral custom  is  that  bills  for  construction  of  ships  are  always  to  be  axiiiroved  by  the 
officer  commanding  the  station,  who  has  a general  supervision  of  ships  building  within 
the  limits  of  his  command ; but  such  was  not  the  case  with  regard  to  these  steamers. 

Question.  From  wbat  failure,  if  any,  to  take  necessary  and  possible 
measures  of  defense  did  the  cafjture  of  New  Orleans  result  ? 

Answer.  Had  my  squadron  been  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  I could  have  kept  the 
enemy  from  crossing  the  bar;  their  heavier  ships  had  to  be  lightened  very  greatly; 
their  armament,  &c.,  taken  out  before  they  could  have  been  put  over;  I could  then 
have  whipped  their  smaller  craft  with  my  squadron,  and  have  prevented  their  larger 
vessels  from  getting  over  if  it  had  not  been  in  my  j)ower  to  have  destroyed  them.  Sub- 
sequently, when  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  in  the  river,  if  I had  been  x^ermitted,  I could 
have  taken  my  squadron  and  have  driven  him  back  at  the  time  he  passed  the  forts. 
The  refusal  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  allow  these  measures  to  be  carried  out  is 
the  cause,  in  my  judgment,  of  the  fall  of  New  Orleans. 

Commander  J.  K.  AIitohell  was  then  duly  sworn  and  examined  as 
a witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  State  when  and  by  whose  order  you  were  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  defenses  afloat  at  or  near  Forts  Saint  Philip  and  Jack- 
son. 

Answer.  On  April  10  I received  my  orders  from  Commander  Whittle. 

Question.  State  the  number  of  vessels,  their  armament,  condition,  &c., 
constituting  your  command. 

Answer.  The  principal  vessel  of  my  command  was  the  steamer  Louisiana,  iron  clad, 
mounting  sixteen  guns;  was  without  suflicient  motive  power  even  to  stem  the  current 
of  the  Mississipxii  without  the  aid  of  her  two  tenders,  the  Landis  and  W.  Burton.  Her 
two  ]Aropellers  were  not  ready  for  use,  and  were  designed  more  to  assist  in  steering 
than  in  the  expectation  of  adding  to  her  sx^eed,  and  her  rudders  had  little,  if  any,  x>ower 
to  control  her  movements.  Most  of  her  guns  had  to  be  dismantled  after  arriving  at 
FoU  Saint  Philip  and  shifted  to  points  where  they  could  be  worked,  and  one  of  them 
was  not  in  x^osition  in  the  action  of  April  *24,  being  dismounted.  The  crew  of  the 
Louisiana,  aided  by  men  from  the  McRae,  was  emx)loyed  constantly,  night  and  day,  in 


612  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


arranging  tlie  Ibattery  for  action.  The  decks  were  thus,  from  this  cause  and  the  pres- 
ence of  numerous  mechanics  employed  iu  comi)leting  machinery  for  the  propellers, 
the  ironing  of  the  decks,  and  calking  wheel-houses,  much  incumbered,  and  being  very 
craini)ed  at  best  for  room,  prevented  the  t)rox)er  exercise  of  the  men  at  their  guns. 
This  coudi^tion  of  her  motive  jDower  and  battery  rendered  her  not  only  unfit  for  ofieu- 
sive  operations  against  the  enemy,  but  also  for  defense,  as,  being  immovable,  her  guns 
all  around  could  only  command  about  40  degrees  of  the  horizon,  leaving  320  degrees  of 
a circle  on  which  she  could  have  been  approached  by  an  enemy  without  being  able  to 
bring  a gun  to  bear  ux)on  him.  Her  guns,  from  the  small  size  of  her  ports,  could  not 
be  elevated  more  than  4 to  5 degrees,  which  with  our  best  guns  would  not  have  given 
a range  probably  of  more  than  2,000  yards.  The  means  for  x)urchasing  her  anchors 
were  inadequate,  and  it  was  utterly  impossible  to  weigh  them,  when  once  they  were 
let  go,  either  from  the  bow  or  stern,  and,  indeed,  her  steering  apparatus  prevented 
her  being  anchored  by  the  stern  iu  the  middle  of  the  river,  a position,  under  all  the 
circumstances,  I should  have  preferred  to  being  tied  to  the  river  bank,  by  which  more 
guns  might  have  been  used  against  the  enemy,  and  the  vessel  might  have  been  warped 
or  sprung,  so  as  to  bring  some  of  her  guns  to  bear  upon  any  given  point.  The  quar- 
ters for  the  crew  of  the  Louisiana  were  wholly  insufficient,  and  for  her  officers  there 
were  none  at  all,  except  on  the  shield  deck  or  roof,  under  a tented  awning.  Most  of 
the  officers  and  crew  had  to  live  on  board  two  tenders,  which  were  also  required  as 
tugs,  without  which  the  vessel  could  not  be  moved  at  all.  The  shield  of  the  Louisiana 
was  effective,  for  none  of  the  enemy’s  projectiles  passed  through  it ; but  as  it  only 
extended  ro  the  water  line,  a shot  between  wind  and  water  must  have  penetrated  the 
perpendicular  pine  sides.  In  addition  to  the  Louisiana,  the  following  vessels  of  the 
C.  S.  Navy  Av ere  under  my  command  at  the  forts,  viz:  The  steamer  McRae,  Lieut. 
Commanding  Thomas  B.  Huger,  wifh  six  light  32-pounder  smooth-bore  broadside  guns, 
and  one  9-inch  shell  gun  pivoted  amidships — total,  se^mn;  the  steamer  Jackson, 
Lieut.  Commanding  F.  B.  Renshaw,  two  pivoted  smooth-bore  32-pounders,  one  forward 
and  one  aft ; the  iron-x)lated  ram  Manassas,  Lieut. -Commanding  A.  F.  Warley,  one 
32-pounder  in  bow;  launch  No.  3,  Acting  Master  Telford,  and  one  hoAAutzer,  20  men; 
launch  No.  6,  Acting  Master  Fairbanks,  one  howitzer,  and  20  men.  Also  the  following 
converted  sea  steamers  into  Louisiana  State  gunboats,  with  pine  and  cotton  barricades 
to  j)rotect  the  machinery  and  boilers,  auz  : The  Governor  Moore,  Commander  BeA^erly 
Keunou,  two  32-x)ounder  rilled  guns ; the  General  Quitman,  Captain  Grant,  two  32- 
X)ounder  guns.  All  the  above  steamers,  being  converted  vessels,  were  too  slightly 
built  for  war  purposes.  The  following  unarmed  steamers  belonged  to  my  command, 

viz : The  Phoenix,  Captain , tender  to  the  Manassas ; the  W.  Burton,  Captain 

Hammond,  tender  to  the  Louisiana,  and  the  Landis,  Captain  Davis,  tender  to  the 
Louisiana.  The  following-named  steamers,  chartered  by  the  Army,  were  placed  under 
my  orders,  viz : The  Mosher,  Captain  Sherman,  a very  small  tug  ; the  Belle  Algerine, 

Captain  , a small  tug ; the  Star,  Captain  La  Place,  used  as  telegraph  station, 

and  the  Music,  Captain  McClellan,  tender  to  the  forts.  The  tAvo  former  were  in  bad 
condition,  and  were  undergoing  such  repairs  as  could  be  made  below  previous  to  the 
24th.  On  arriving  below  I delivered  to  Captain  Stephenson  written  orders  from  Maj. 
Gen.  M.  Lovell,  requiring  him  to  x>lace  all  the  river-defense  gunboats  under  my  orders, 
which  consisted  of  the  following  converted  tow-boats,  viz : 1st,  the  Warrior,  under 
the  immediate  command  of  Cajitain  Ste^jbenson;  2d,  the  Stonewall  Jackson,  Captain 
Philips ; 3d,  the  Resolute,  Captain  Hooper  ; 4th,  the  Defiance,  Captain  McCoy  ; and,  fdh, 

the  General  Lovell, . The  R.  J.  Breckinridge, , joined  the 

evening  before  the  action.  All  of  the  above  vessels  mounted  from  one  to  two  x»ivot 
32-x)Ounders  each,  some  of  them  rifled.  Their  boilers  and  machinery  were  all  more  or 
less  protected  by  thick  double  pine  barricades,  filled  in  with  compressed  cotton,  which, 
though  not  regarded  as  xjroof  against  heavy  solid  shot,  shell,  and  incendiary  j)rojec- 
tiles,  would  have  been  a protection  against  grape  and  canister,  and  ought  to  have  in- 
spired those  on  board  with  sufficient  confidence  to  use  their  boats  boldly  as  rams,  for 
which  they  Avere  in  a good  measure  i)i’epared  with  flat  bar-iron  casing  around  their 
boAvs.  Ill  thus  using  them  their  own  safety  would  be  best  consulted,  as  well  as  the 
best  way  of  damaging  the  vessels  of  the  enemy. 

Question.  Did  you  have  any  control  or  authority  over  the  Montgomery 
or  river-defense  fleet  ? 

Answer.  None.  Captain  Stephenson,  who  commanded  them,  on  receiving  General 
Lovell’s  orders,  addressed  me  a communication  to  the  effect  that  all  the  officers  and 
creAvs  of  the  Amssels  under  his  command  had  entered  the  service  Avith  the  distinct 
understanding  or  condition  that  they  were  not  to  beyilaced  under  the  orders  of  naAml 
officers ; and,  therefore,  while  willing  to  co-operate  Avith  my  forces,  he  could  receiA'e 
no  orders  from  me  himself,  nor  allow  any  A'essel  of  his  command  to  do  so ; that  he 
resei’A^ed  to  himself  the  right  of  obeying  or  not  any  orders  I might  issue.  His  attitude 
with  res^iect  to  my  authority  Avas  one  of  absolute  independence  of  action  and  com- 


Chap.  XVI.  ] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G13 


maud,  and  very  embarrassing  in  the  face  of  the  enemy.  A copj’  of  his  communication 
was  sent  by  me  to  General  Duncan,  and  one,  througli  Coininunder  W.  C.  Wliittle,  to 
General  Lovell,  informing  them  at  the  same  1 ime  that  the  i)osition  assumed  l>y  Captain 
Stephenson  relieved  me  from  all  responsibility  for  the  conduct  of  the  vessels  under 
his  command.  Not  knowing  what  moment  an  attack  might  be  made  by  the  enemy,  I 
endeavored  to  agree  upon  a plan  of  co-operation  with  his  forces  by  the  arrangement 
of  signals  and  concert  of  action,  and  the  particular  service  to  be  i)erformed  l)y  him — 
an  endeavor  which  ho  himself  seemed  disposed  zealously  to  second  in  many  resi)ects. 

Question.  If  the  fire  rafts  and  guard  boats  were  under  j^ourcoiuinaiid, 
state  why  they  were  not  used  to  wtitch  the  enemy’s  movements  the 
morning  the  enemy’s  fleet  passed  the  forts. 

Answer.  The  fire  boats  were  under  my  control,  and  Captain  Stephenson  reported 
to  me  the  evening  of  the  23d  that  each  one  of  his  vessels  and  the  two  tugs  lia(l  a tire 
boat  secured  to  her,  ready  for  firing,  and  to  be  towed  against  the  enemy’s  vessels  in 
the  event  of  an  attack.  I was  getting,  however,  most  of  the  fire  boats  into  position 
to  be  chained  or  strung  together,  and  so  made  to  form  a cordon,  if  possible,  entirely 
across  the  river  on  the  enemy’s  attempting  to  pass  the  forts,  for  which  purpose  they 
had  been  specially  prepared,  chiefly  under  my  direction,  and  with  some  aid  from  Gen- 
eral Smith,  before  they  were  sent  down  from  New  Orleans,  the  chains  for  which  had, 
however,  been  scattered  about  so  that  the  fire  boats  could  not  be  made  tbady  in  this 
manner  before  the  attack  of  the  enem5^  The  little  unarmed  tug  Mosher,  it  is  thought, 
was  the  only  one  that  succeeded  in  towing  one  of  the  fire  boats  against  a vessel  of  the 
enemy  by  which  she  was  set  on  fire,  but  it  rvas  soon  extinguished,  and  the  Mosher 
sunk  by  the  enemy’s  shot.  I am  not  aware  of  more  than  one  or  two  of  the  fire  boats 
having  been  fired  during  the  passage  of  the  enemy.  The  night  of  April  20,  on  my 
way  down  in  the  Louisiana,  the  enemy’s  boats  arc  said  to  have  visited  the  raft  obstruc- 
tions and  cut  the  chain.  To  prevent  further  injury  to  it,  and  to  break  up  the  night 
reconnaissances  of  the  enemy,  and  to  watch  and  report  all  his  movements,  I was 
unsuccessful  in  my  efforts  to  get  Captain  Stephenson  to  emj)loy  one  or  two  of  his  gun- 
boats below  the  obstructions  at  night.  Although  favoring  the  idea,  he  seemed  to 
have  no  confidence  in  the  fitness  of  his  commanders  for  the  service,  and  I could  not 
induce  him  to  give  the  necessary  orders  to  them.  I had  no  suitable  vessels  for  this 
duty  under  my  command — the  only  one  that  would  have  answered  (the  Jackson) 
having  been  sent  with  launch  No.  3 5 miles  above  to  the  quarantine  station,  at  the 
request  of  General  Duncan,  to  watch  the  enemy  in  that  neighborhood  and  prevent 
his  approach  through  any  of  the  adjacent  bayous  and  canals.  The  vessels  under 
Captain  Stephenson  having  guns  aft,  and  being  converted  tow-boats,  were  well  cal- 
culated for  the  duty  of  making  reconnaissances  or  keeping  guard  below  from  their 
light  draught,  easy  management  in  the  river,  and  being  comparatively  low  in  the 
water.  The  McRae,  Manassas,  Governor  Moore,  and  the  General  Quitman  were  all 
converted  sea  steamers  of  a deep  draught,  great  length,  high  out  of  the  water,  except 
the  Manassas,  and  very  difficult  to  handle,  and  none  of  them,  I think,  h id  after  guns. 
One  of  the  two  launches  (No.  6)  was  kept  near  me,  for  the  si^ecial  purpose  of  acting  as 
a guard  boat  for  the  two  nights  preceding  the  action,  and  was  well  provided  with  the 
means  for  signaling  the  approach  of  any  unusual  movement  of  the  enemy  by  firing 
its  howitzer  and  setting  off  rockets.  She  was  stationed  below  Saint  Philip,"  but  on 
the  appearance  of  the  enemy,  or  sooner,  her  commander  deserted  his  station,  returned 
clandestinely  to  the  Louisiana,  made  no  report  of  it,  and,  consequently,  no  alarm  was 
given,  at  least  by  him. 

Question.  Was  the  river- defense  fleet  of  any  service  in  resisting  the 
enemy’s  fleet  in  passing  the  forts'? 

Answer.  I am  not  aware  that  the  river-defense  fleet  did  any  service  in  resisting  the 
enemy ; if  they  did,  it  did  not  come  under  my  observation,  nor  has  it  in  any  way  been 
brought  to  my  notice.  I understand  that  four  were  destroyed  by  the  enemy  or  set 
on  fire  and  abandoned  by  their  own  crew;  also  the  Louisiana  State  gunboat  General 
Quitman.  The  Resolute  was  run  ashore  and  abandoned,  and  finally  burned  by  my 
order,  to  prevent  her  falling  into  the  enemy’s  hands,  as  it  was  impossible  to  float  her 
off,  on  account  of  shot-holes  through  her  bows.  The  Defiance  was  discovered  ii  our 
immediate  vicinity  after  the  action,  having  escaped  without  any  material  damage. 

Question.  State  why  you  did  not  comply  with  the  request  of  Gen- 
erals Lovell  and  Duncan  to  place  the  Louisiana  in  the  position  they 
desired  her  to  take  prior  to  the  passage  of  the  forts. 

Answer.  The  chief  reasons  for  not  placing  the  Louisiana  in  the  position  desired  by 
Generals  Lovell  and  Duncan  below  Fort  Saint  Philip  were  that  she  would  at  once  be 


614  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND' LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

under  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  mortar  fieet,  the  position  proposed  being  about  the  same 
distance  from  his  fieet  as  Fort  Jackson,  and  he  would  only  have  to  change  slightly 
the  direction  of  his  fire  to  throw  his  shells  with  si>eedy  and  fatal  eflect  on  the  deck 
of  the  vessel,  while  her  guns,  as  stated  in  my  auswer  to  the  first  question,  would  not 
have  a range  probablv  greater  than  2,000  yards,  which  was  of  course  too  short  to 
reach  his  mortar  fieet ; for  the  7-inch  navy  rifle  in  Fort  Jackson,  mounted  on  high 
parapets,  and  with  an  elevation  of  about  13  degrees,  could  not  reach  them,  as  I ^as 
credibly  informed.  For  these  reasons  alone  the  position  proposed  would  have  been 
an  improper  one  for  the  Louisiana  ; but  her  battery  was  not  ready  for  use,  and  jiarties 
of  mechanics  were  busy  day  and  night  preparing  the  propellers  for  service,  and,  besides, 
the  strong  current,  deep  water,  and  coming  immediately  under  fire  of  the  enemy,  she 
could  not  have  been  secured  properly.  I made  a reconnaissance  the  afternoon  of  the 
23d,  and  determined  that  the  proper  position  for  the  ship  was  below  Fort  Jackson, 
where  the  current  and  anchorage  would  admit  of  her  being  secured  before  the  enemy 
could  open  his  fire  with  eflect,  and  from  whence  he  could  be  in  efiective  enfilading 
range  of  the  Louisiana’s  guns.  This  position  I purposed  taking  with  the  Louisiana 
as  soon  as  she  was  in  condition  to  bo  placed  under  fire  of  the  enemy,  whioh  I hoped 
would  have  been  the  next  day. 

Question.  Who  was  iu  immediate  command  of  the  Louisiana  in  the 
conllict  with  the  enemy’s  fleet,  and  was  the  ship,  in  your  opinion,  fought 
to  advantage  ? 

Answer.  Commander  Charles  F.  McIntosh  was  in  immediate  command  of  the  Lou- 
isiana, and  the  ship,  iu  my  opinion,  was  fought  to  the  best  advantage,  under  the  very 
disadvantageous  circumstances  which  have  been  detailed  in  mj'^  previous  answers. 

Question.  Why  was  the  Louisiana  destroyed?  Could  she  not  have 
been  saved  ? 

Answer.  The  Louisiana  was  destroyed  by  my  order  on  the  unanimous  advice  of  all 
the  commissioned  sea  officers  within  my  reach,  because  the  forts  were  about  being  sur- 
rendered to  the  enemy,  under  the  close  fire  of  which  she  lay,  with  a heavy  naval  force 
both  above  and  below  her,  from  which  it  would  have  been  imjiossible  to  escape  or  to 
attack,  for  want  of  motive  power,  and,  if  not  destroyed,  she  must  inevitably  have 
fallen  into  his  hands,  as  she  could  have  been  approa(  bed  from  many  points  by  his  ves- 
sels without  being  able  to  return  his  fire  with  eflect  from  a single  gun. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a,  m.  to-morrow. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  4,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  rend  over. 

Examination  of  Commander  J.  K.  Mitchell  continued. 

Cross-examination  by  the  Jud&e- Advocate  : 

Question.  Y^hile  you  were  in  charge  of  the  naval  station  in  New  Or- 
leans was  not  there  a cordial  co-operation  between  the  military  com- 
manders and  the  naval  officers  at  that  point  so  far  as  was  practicable  ? 

Answer.  There  was,  so  far  as  I know.  Applications  were  often  made  for  powder, 
which  were  not  always  promptly  satisfied,  I suppose,  for  good  rvasousou  the  part  of 
General  Lovell.  At  all  events  the  delays  occasioned  no  unpleasant  feeling.  Nearly 
all  the  powder  received  came  from  the  Army  ; all  that  was  used  on  the  Louisiana  Avas 
supxfiied  by  General  Lovell. 

(Jiiestion.  In  your  judgment  were  the  Confederate  States  naval  forces, 
])laced  at  your  disposal  for  co-operation  with  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint 
Pliilip,  at  all  adequate  to  the  requirements  of  the  occasion  ? 

Answer.  Not  at  all  adequate.  The  enemy  had  five  fir.stlclass  slooj^s  of  war,  inde- 
pendent of  seven  or  eight  gunboats  ; evmry  one  of  which  sloops  was  a match  for  my 
entire  force  in  the  condition  of  the  Louisiana  at  that  time. 

Question.  AYere  you  acquainted  with  the  vessels  of  Commodore  Hol- 
lins’ squadron  ? In  your  opinion  could  these  vessels,  together  with  such 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G15 


others  as  could  have  been  added,  have  prevented  the  enemy’s  i)assage 
over  the  bars  at  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi,  or  could  these  vessels  at 
any  time  afterward  have  driven  the  enemy’s  fleet  out  of  the  river? 

Answer.  I was  acquainted  witli  the  squadron.  I do  not  think  it,  with  other  vessels 
that  might  have  been  added,  could  have  prevented  the  crossing  of  the  bar,  nor  after- 
wards have  driven  the  enemy’s  lleet  out  of  the  river. 

Question.  In  the  defense  of  Orleans  was  anything  omitted  to  be 
done  by  which  the  city  might  have  been  saved  ? 

(This  question  was  objected  to  by  Major-General  Lovell,  because  the 
witness  is  an  officer  of  the  ^lavy,  and  cannot  be  considered  an  expert  as 
to  army  affairs,  there  being  no  i)roof  to  show  him  possessed  of  skill  in 
military  aflairs,  which  alone  would  authorize  an  answer  to  the  question. 

The  court  was  then  cleared  for  deliberation,  and,  when  reopened,  it 
was  announced  that  the  court  overruled  the  objection.) 

Answer.  On  the  part  of  the  Navy  there  was  nothing  omitted  by  which  the  city  might 
have  been  saved ; on  the  part  of  the  Army  I am  unable  to  say  that  any  step  was  omitted 
that  should  have  been  taken  for  its  defense. 

Lieut.  W.  Gwathmey,  G.  S.  l!^^avy,  was  next  swwu  and  e:samined  as 
a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  Where  and  on  what  duty  were  you  immediately  before  the 
fall  of  ^lew  Orleans  ? 

Answer.  I was  the  lieutenant  commanding  the  C.  S.  gunboat  Carondelet,  in  Lake 
Pontchartrain,  at  that  time. 

Question.  What,  if  any,  assistance  did  you  receive  from  General 
Lovell  in  fittiug  out  the  Carondelet  for  service  ? 

Answer.  Her  armament  was  furnished  chiefly  by  the  Army  ; five  out  of  seven  guns 
came  from  that  source : also  30  men,  as  a part  of  her  crew,  were  su'.^plicd  from  Fort 
Pike. 


Cross-examioation  by  the  Judoe-Adyodate  : 

Question.  Did  you  see  General  Lovell  after  the  passage  of  the  forts 
and  during  the  evacuation  of  Kew  Orleans ; if  so,  did  he  seem  cool  and 
collected,  and  competent  for  the  duties  devolved  upon  him  by  the  disaster 
to  the  city  ? 

Answer.  I saw  him  in  the  evening  after  the  enemy’s  fleet  had  passed  the  forts;  he 
seemed  to  me  very  cool  and  jcollected,  decidedly  competent  for  the  work  on  hand. 


Maj.  C.  S.  Yenable,  C.  S.  Army,  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a 
witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell: 

Question.  What  duty  were  you  on  at  the  time  of  the  evacuation  of 
New  Orleans,  in  A pril,  18G2  ? iState  what  was  done  by  you,  under  orders 
of  General  Lovell,  in  the  removal  of  public  property,  army  stores,  &c. 

Answer.  On  engineer  duty.  On  Sunday  morning,  April  — , after  the  evacuation,  I 
was  sent  back,  by  order  of  Major-General  Lovell,  to  act  in  conjunction  with  Major 
James  and  others  in  the  removal  of  public  property.  After  reaching  the  city  I con- 
sidered myself  as  acting  under  Major  James,  by  General  Lovell’s  orders.  These 
orders  were,  as  I understood,  to  remove  all  public  property  belonging  to  the  Confeder- 
ate States  or  State  of  Louisiana,  which  could  be  transported  and  be  of  any  use  to  the 
Army;  also  the  guns  on  the  fortifications  in  the  rear  of  the  city,  for  use  on  works  to 
be  re-erected  at  Vicksburg;  papers  and  other  property  of  the  engineer’s  department, 
&c.  We  arrived  in  New  Cleans  on  Sunday  aft.ernoon  in  the  train  from  Camp  Moore. 
Arrangements  were  made  that  night  by  Major  James  and  agents  set  to  work.  On 
Monday  I took  charge  of  the  shix>ment  of  stores,  hire  of  laborers,  drays,  &c.  A large 


616  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

amount  of  public  stores  were  sliippecl — light  artillery,  shot  and  shell  from  the  arsenal; 
a great  quantity  of  clothing,  shoes,  and  blankets  belonging  to  the  State  of  Lonisioua  ; 
medical  stores,  commissary  stores,  some  machinery;  leather  and  harness  belonging  to 
a Government  contract;  many  new  wagons  and  other  articles  of  camp  equipage ; in 
fact,  everything  that  could  be  found  by  the  indefatigable  search  of  MajoivJaines,  wlio 
seemed  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  city  and  citizens.  Lieutenant  McDonald,  of 
the  Engineers,  whom  we  found  in  the  city,  was  engaged  on  the  same  duty.  I sent 
drays  down  to  Chalmette  to  bring  away  camp  equipage,  said  to  be  left  there  by  the 
troops,  but  found  none.  I made  elforts  to  have  the  ammunition  removed  from  Pi  octors- 
ville,  but  failed,  on  account  of  the  short  time  and  some  misunderstanding  of  orders  by 
the  sergeant  in  charge.  We  met  with  much  difficulty  in  procuring  labor,  on  account 
of  the  confusion  and  excitement  of  the  people.  This  will  account  for  the  want  of 
success  in  the  removal  of  the  guns  on  the  fortifications  (as  this  required  a peculiar 
kind  of  transportation)  and  guns  for  shipping.  Several  guns  and  two  mortars  were 
carried  to  the  depot,  but  I do  not  think  they  were  shipped. 

On  Wednesday,  the  30th  instant.  General  Lovell,  who  was  in  the  city  at  the  time, 
ordered  Lieutenant  McDonald  and  myself  to  remain  still  longer,  and  urged  especially 
the  removal  of  the  guns.  We  found  it  impossible  to  procure  the  necessary  transporta- 
tion and  labor  for  this  purpose,  but  found  other  stores  of  the  Commissary  Department, 
which  had  been  overlooked,  and  succeeded  in  shipping  some  by  the  railroad  and  the 
rest  by  a schooner  to  Mauchac.  Many  citizens  aided  us  in  our  efforts,  among  them 
Mr.  Bell,  civil  engineer,  especially  in  bringing  guns  to  the  depot. 

On  Thursday  or  Friday  I returned  to  Camp  Moore,  the  trausiiorts  of  the  enemy 
having  reached  the  city.  The  confnsion  was  great  and  there  was  an  increasing  timidity 
on  the  part  of  the  citizens  to  act  with  us.  I signed  many  receipts  for  goods  delivered 
at  the  depot,  made  contracts,  and  offered  rewards  for  the  delivery  of  guns  at  Mauchac, 
by  order  of  Major-General  Lovell,  as  the  necessity  of  the  occasion  demanded.  The 
stores  saved  were  large  in  amount  and  value,  and,  so  far  as  my  information  went, 
constituted  by  far  the  greater  proportion  of  those  which  were  in  the  cil  y. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  ; 

Question.  What  was  General  Lovell’s  demeanor  during  the  evacuation 
when  you  were  with  him  ? Did  he  seem  confused  and  overwhelmed  with 
the  work  before  him  or  was  he  cool  and  collected? 

Answer.  I saw  him  with  his  staff  riding  to  and  fro  in  the  streets  at  that  time  giving 
orders;  he  seemed  on  the  occasions  that  I met  him  cool  and  collected.  He  gave  me 
orders  upon  my  api)licatiou,  and  they  were  given  in  a clear  and  satisfactory  manner. 

(The  judge  advocate  here  stated  to  the  court  that  he  had  been  sum- 
moned to  appear  to-day  as  a witness  before  a court  martial,  and  that 
the  only  witnesses,  as  far  as  was  then  advised,  remaining  to  be  examined 
were  not  likely  to  arrive  in  the  city  for  several  days , thereupon  the 
court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  the  8th  instant.) 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  8,  1803 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansheld  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  the  4th  instant  W(:*re  read  over. 

Peter  W.  Woodlief,  a citizen,  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as 
a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  business  were  you  engaged  in  jnlor  to  and  at  the  time 
of  the  evacuation  of  JS^ew  Orleans,  in  April,  18G^? 

Answer.  I was  a contractor  with  the  Government  for  the  furnishing  of  all  sorts  of 
military  supplies. 

Question.  What  amount  of  the  property  in  your  possession,  available 
for  military  purposes,  was  brought  out  of  the  city  and  turned  over  to 
the  Government  agents  ? 

Answer.  I delivered  to  Hie  Government  agents  for  removal  and  removed  myself 
from  New  Orleans  at  that  time  about  $100,000  worth  of  such  property,  consisting  of 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


617 


harness,  saddles,  valises,  saddle-hags,  horseshoes,  clothing,  hlanhets,  &c.  These  steps 
were  taken  of  niy  own  motion,  and  not  by  order  of  General  Lovell,  though  ho  knew  I 
was  engaged  in  the  removal. 

Commander  William  C.  Whittle,  0.  S.  Navy,  was  next  sworn  and 
examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  When  and  by  whose  order  did  you  assume  command  of  the 
naval  station  at  New  Orleans 

Answer.  About  March  28,  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  tbe  Navy. 

Question.  Did  you  approve  of  the  conduct  of  Commander  Mitchell 
with  reference  to  the  disposition  of  the  Louisiana  during  the  lights  at 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  in  April,  1862  f 

Answer.  I neither  approved  nor  disapproved  his  couducr  touching  the  management 
of  the  Louisiana  at  that  time,  not  knowing  the  circumstances  Avhich  surrounded  his 
command. 

Question.  If  you  know,  state  whether  the  work  upon  the  steamers 
Louisiana  and  Mississippi  was  pressed  forward  v,ith  energy  and  skill 
by  the  builders  while  you  were  in  command  of  th^  naval  station  at  New 
Orleans. 

Answer.  I cannot  say  that  I had  any  personal  knowledge  as  to  the  work  upon  those 
vessels ; but,  from  all  I could  learn  from  the  builders  and  officers  connected  with  the 
Mississippi  the  work  must  have  progressed  well.  If  I had  not  thought  the  work  wuis 
getting  on  well  I should  have  reported  the  fact  to  the  Department,  notwithstanding  I 
had  no  authority  over  the  builders  of  the  Mississippi. 

Question.  If  you  had  opportunities  of  observing,  be  pleased  to  state 
the  demeanor  of  General  Lovell  during  the  evacuation  of  New  Orleans. 

Answer.  We  sat  together  at  breakfast  the  morning  after  the  enemy  x^assed  up.  I 
saw  nothing  in  his  demeanor  derogatory  to  him  as  an  officer. 

Cross-examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  AYas  there  cordial  co-operation  between  yourself  and  Gen- 
eral Lovell  as  far  as  the  circumstances  of  the  respective  arms  of  service 
would  allow  and  always  good  feeling  between  youf 

Answer.  There  was.  I believe  the  very  best  feeling  existed  between  us. 

Question.  Were  the  naval  means  at  your  disposal  for  co-operation  in 
the  defense  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver  at  till  adequate  for  that  purpose 

Answer.  They  were  not,  in  my  judgment.  I only  had  command  of  the  station  on 
laud.  Commander  Mitchell  was  jilaced  by  me  temporarily  in  command  of  such  de- 
fenses as  we  could  muster  for  the  tight  at  the  forts. 

Question.  What  steps  were  taken  by  you  to  have  Commodore  Hollins 
assist  in  the  defense  of  the  lower  river  ? 

Answer.  I telegraphed  Commodore  Hollins  that  his  presence  with  his  fleet  might  be 
important  at  New  Orleans  if  he  could  bo  spared  for  a few  days  from  above.  After 
Commodore  Hollins  had  received  a dispatch  withdrawing  him  from  the  command 
afloat  at  New  Orleans,  General  Lovell  and  myself  had  a conversation  on  the  subject  of 
his  removal,  and  General  Lovell  was  authorized  by  me  to  use  my  name  in  connect’on 
with  his  own  in  a communication  to  the  Government  requesting  that  Commodore  Hol- 
lins might  be  permitted  to  remain  there  longer.  There  was  time  enough,  in  my  opin- 
ion, for  the  fleet  to  have  come  down. 

By  the  Court  : 

Question.  Did  you  make  or  cause  to  be  made  any  inspection  of  the 
Louisiana If  so,  when  and  what  defects,  if  any,  presented  themselves 
AYhat  steps  were  taken  to  remedy  those  defects  ^ AV^as  there  sufficient 
time  to  remedy  them  before  the  vessel  was  destroyed 

Answer.  I had  daily  reports  of  the  condition  of  the  Louisiana.  She  was  deficient  in 
motive  power.  All  the  workmen  considered  necessary  and  all  requisites  were  placed 


618  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


upon  her  and  used  before  she  left  New  Orleans.  There  was  not  time  enough  to  remedy 
this  defect  in  view  of  the  circumstances. 

Questiou.  What  length  of  time  would  reasonably  be  required,  under 
the  circumstances  existing  since  secession,  to  build  and  equip  for  serv- 
ice such  a vessel  as  the  Louisiana  ? Answer  same  question  as  to  the 
Mississippi. 

Answer.  I have  no  idea  of  the  time  to  build  such  vessels,  not  being  acquainted  with 
the  building  of  such  vessels,  they  being  entirely  new,  and  not  being  a naval  constructor. 

Question.  Could  Commodore  HolliiivS’  squadron,  with  such  other  ves- 
sels as  might  have  been  added,  have  prevented  the  enemy’s  vessels  from 
crossing  the  bar  at  the  mouths  of  the  river,  or  when  in  the  river  have 
fjrevented  the  passage  of  the  forts  ^ 

Answer.  My  impression  is  that  if  Commodore  Hollins  had  been  present  with  his 
fleet  near  Fort  Jackson  when  they  attempted  to  pass  there,  that,  in  connection  with 
the  naval  force  already  there  and  the  co-oi)eration  of  the  forts,  they  would  have 
greatly  embarrassed,  if  they  had  not  succeeded  in  stopping,  the  passage  of  the  enemy’s 
tleet. 

Question.  In  your  opinion,  was  it  practicable  to  save  the  Mississippi 
from  the  time  the  attack  was  commenced  upon  the  forts  and  their  pas- 
sage with  the  means  on  hand  ? 

Answer.  I do  not  think  she  could  have  been  saved. 

The  following  communications  were  then  read  to  the  court  by  the 
judge-advocate : 

Richmond,  Va.,  June  4,  1863. 

Maj.  L.  R.  Page, 

Judge- Advocate,  <^c. : 

Sir:  I respectfully  request  that  the  findings  and  opinion  of  the  naval  court  of 
inquiry  that  has  already  examined  into  my  conduct  as  a participant  in  the  defense  of 
New  Orleans  may  bo  spread  upon  the  record  of  the  military  court  now  investigating 
the  same  subject  in  this  city.  This  request  is  made  because  I understand  this  latter 
tribunal  is  authorized  to  x)ronouuce  an  opinion  upon  the  conduct  of  naval  officers  on 
duty  at  New  Orleans. 

Very  respectfully,  J.  K.  MITCHELL, 

Commander,  C.  S.  JS^avy. 

Richmond,  Va.,  June  8,  1863. 

Maj.  L.  R.  Page, 

Judge- Advocate,  Court  of  Inquiry,  ^c.,  BicJimond,  Va.: 

Sir:  I respectfully  request  that  the  findings  and  opinion  of  the  naval  court  of 
inquiry  in  the  case  of  the  destruction  by  tire  of  the  C.  S.  steamer  Mississippi  may  be 
placed  upon  the  record  of  the  military  court  now  in  session  in  this  city,  as  I learn  that 
the  conduct  of  naval  officers  is  authorized  to  be  pronounced  upon  by  said  tribunal. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  SINCLAIR, 
Commander,  C.  S.  Navy. 

It  was  thereupon  ordered  by  the  court  that  the  foregoing  communi- 
cations be  made  a part  of  the  record,  and  that  the  judge-advocate  reply 
to  Commanders  Mitchell  and  Sinclair  that  this  court  will  recommend 
that  the  same  publicity  be  given  to  the  findings  and  opinion  of  the 
naval  court  of  inquiry  referred  to  in  their  communications  as  to  the  find- 
ings and  opinion  of  this  court. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  June  9,  1803 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  M.  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 


Chap.  XVI.l  CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  619 

Lieut.  Col.  E.  F.  Palfrey,  C.  S.  Army,  was  next  sworu  and  examined 
as  a witness. 

By  the  Judoe-Advocate  : 

Question.  Where  were  you  on  duty  in  iVpril,  18G2,  and  for  several 
months  prior  thereto?  What  was  your  rank  and  position  at  that  time? 

Ausvver.  I was  on  duty  as  major,  adjutaiit-geucrars  dej^artmeut,  ou  the  staff  of 
Major-General  Lovell,  in  the  eity  of  New  Orleans,  from  November  7,  1832,  to  the  fall 
of  the  city. 

Question.  What  were  the  business  habits  of  Major-General  Lovell 
during’  that  time? 

Answer.  The  office  opened  at  9.30  a.  m.,  the  general  remaining  in  the  office  about 
three  hours  in  the  morniug;  from  that  time  until  8 p.  m.  (excepting  tlie  interval  for 
dinner)  he  was  generally  mounted,  making  an  inspection  of  the  camps  aud  batteries. 
At  8 X).  m.  he  returned  to  the  office,  where  he  met  his  staff.  His  duties  generally  de- 
tained him  until  10  or  11  o’clock,  aud  sometimes  later.  As  well  as  1 remember,  the 
routine  of  duty  that  should  obtain  at  headcpiarters  was  observed,  business  being  dis- 
X)atched  with  regularity  aud  promx)titiulc.  I do  not  know  that  the  general  was  ever 
absent  a day  from  his  office  except  on  duty. 

Question.  Had  you  couversations  with  General  Lovell  touching  the 
condition  of  the  defenses  of  Orleans  and  his  ability  to  resist  the 
attack  of  the  enemy  ? If  so,  state  the  substance  of  those  conversations. 

Answer.  He  expressed  confidence  in  his  ability  to  resist  the  enemy  so  long  as  the 
obstructions  at  the  forts  might  continue. 

Question.  Did  General  Lovell  ever  express  to  you  any  distrust  as  to 
the  continuance  of  the  obstructions  ? 

Answer.  About  March  1,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  he  expressed  some  appre- 
hension lest  the  accumulation  of  drift  might  destroy  the  raft. 

Question.  After  the  raft  had  been  broken  did  he  ever  say  to  you 
that  he  considered  the  passage  of  the  forts  was  practicable? 

Answer.  I do  not  think  he  ever  did ; but  in  a letter  of  March  10,  to  the  Secretary  of 
War,  which  came  under  my  inspection,  I think  he  said  as  much. 

Question.  Did  General  Lovell  ever  make  known  to  you  by  word  of 
mouth  that  the  city  of  New  Orleans  could  be  taken  by  the  enemy  after 
the  destruction  of  the  raft  between  the  forts,  or  from  your  conversa- 
tions with  him  were  you  imiiressed  with  the  belief  that  the  city  of  New 
Orleans  was  likely  to  be  captured? 

Answer.  I was  not,  that  I remember. 

Question.  When  was  the  piling  begun  at  the  Eigolets,  when  was  it 
completed,  and  when  washed  away  or  destroyed  ? 

Answer.  It  must  have  been  begun  and  completed  after  February  18,  aud  it  was 
destroyed  before  the  city  fell. 

Question.  Do  you  know  whether  any  preparations  were  made  for  an 
evacuation  before  the  forts  were  passed  or  while  the  tight  was  there 
progressing  ? 

Answer.  As  near  as  I remember,  commissary  stores  were  sent  from  the  city  to  various 
points  on  the  railroad  aud  to  Covington  some  ten  or  fifteen  days  before  the  x^assage  of 
the  forts.  That  is  all  that  I can  recollect,  aud  I regarded  it  rather  as  a x>i’ecaution  in 
the  event  of  disaster  than  a x^reparation  for  an  evacuation. 

Question.  Was  the  evacuation  conducted  with  as  much  order  aud  effect 
as  the  circumstances  would  allow  ? 

Answer.  I saw  but  little  of  the  evacuation ; the  little  I did  see  was  conducted  in  an 
orderly  manner. 


620  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

Question.  Did  you  see  General  Lovell  often  during  the  evacuation? 
If  so,  state  bis  demeanor  on  such  occasions. 

Answer.  I saw  General  Lovell  upon  liis  arrival  from  tlie  forts,  immediately  after 
their  passage  by  the  enemj^  He  placed  me  in  charge  of  the  office,  and  went  out,  I pre- 
sume, to  make  ready  to  receive  the  enemy.  I saw  him  late  that  night  at  the  camp  of 
the  Confederate  Guard  Regiment ; saw  him  again  the  next  morning,  between  and 
10  o’clock,  when  he  ordered  me  to  pack  up  the  records  and  proceed  Avith  them  to  the 
Jackson  Railroad  Depot.  I saw  him  again  at  the  depot  just  before  the  last  train 
started,  after  all  the  troops  had  left  the  city  or  were  leaving  on  that  train,  he  being 
among  the  very  last  to  Ibave.  At  no  time  did  he  exhibit  anything  like  flurry  or  a want 
of  presence  of  mind. 

Question.  Were  the  troops  that  left  the  city  demoralized  in  their 
hearing  or  did  they  conduct  themselves  like  disciplined  soldiers  ? 

Answer.  I saw  no  further  evidence  of  demoralization  or  want  of  discipline  than  is 
usual  among  raw,  fresh  levies. 

Question.  What  forces  were  in  the  city  and  removed  at  the  time  of 
the  fall? 

Answer.  There  was  but  one  company  of  Conf  derate  artillery,  disciplined,  Semmes’ 
battery,  and  about  4,000  militia,  turned  over  for  local  defense  by  the  governor  a short 
time  before  the  city  fell,  armed  chiefly  with  old  altered  muskets  and  double-barreled 
shot-guns — the  shot-guns  predominant.  The  majority  of  the  militia  and  local  defense 
troops  remained  in  the  city,  and  a large  portion  of  the  local  defense  force  that  went  to 
Camp  Moore  returned  to  the  city,  being  over  age,  and  merely  enlisted  for  duty  in  New 
Orleans. 

Question.  What  was  the  character  of  the  population  in  Kew  Orleans, 
in  a military  point  of  view,  when  it  was  captured  ? 

Answer.  The  best  fighting  material  was  off  in  the  armies  of  the  Confederate  States  ; 
that  left  consisted  of  old  men  and  foreigners.  A largo  portion  of  the  German  popula- 
tion was  disloyal.  There  were  a good  many  others  capable  of  bearing  arms,  but  there 
were  no  arms  for  them. 

Cross-examination  by  Major-General  Lovell  : 

Question.  Was  General  Lovell  in  the  habit  of  expressing  his  hopes, 
fears,  plans,  and  views  to  those  about  him  on  duty  ? 

Answer.  He  was  not. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  June  10,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  inirsuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Major- 
General  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Archibald  Mitchell  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge- Advocate  : 

Question.  Where  did  you  reside  and  what  was  your  occupation  during 
the  year  1861  and  until  May,  1862  ? 

Answer.  I resided  in  New  Orleans,  and  was  the  principal  foreman  of  the  iron  foand- 
ery  of  Leeds  & Co.  during  that  time. 

Question.  How  long  have  you  been  in  the  iron-foundery  business,  and 
what  was  the  character  of  the  work  made  by  Leeds  & Co.  in  their  estab- 
lishment ? 

Answer.  Since  the  year  1836.  Sugar-mill  machinery,  steam-engines,  boilers,  saw- 
mills, and  all  sorts  of  machinery  were  made  in  their  establishment.  The  works  were 
the  largest  in  the  city,  and  had  been  in  operation  continuously  since  1824  or  1825,  and 
employed  some  300  hands. 


Chap.  XVL] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G21 


Question.  Do  you  know  who  were  the  contractors  for  the  engines, 
&e.,  which  Avere  to  be  placed  upon  the  Mississippi,  a gunboat  or  a ship 
of  war,  being  completed  in  New  Orleans  at  the  time  of  its  ca])ture  ? If 
so,  state  their  resources  for  a prompt  compliance,  with  your  opinion  of 
their  ability  to  fulfill  such  contract. 

Answer.  Mr.  Kirk  was  the  contractor,  hnt  he  used  the  name  of  Jackson  &,  Co.  Ilis 
estahlishment  was  next  to  that  of  Leeds  & Co.  in  capacity,  working  75  hands,  lie 
was  generally  reputed  to  ho  a man  of  limited  pecuniary  resources  and  of  inferior  me- 
chanical capacity,  hut  I have  no  personal  knowledge  on  these  points.  It  was  a mechan- 
ical imi)ossibility  for  him  to  have  finished  such  a contract  in  the  time  agreed  upon,  to 
wit,  three  months.  No  establishment  in  the  city  could  have  performed  the  contract 
within  that  time.  From  my  knowledge  of  the  machinery  of  that  vessel,  and  the  fact 
that  Leeds  & Co.  could  not,  with  greater  facilities  for  the  dispatch  of  such  work,  have 
completed  the  contract  in  less  than  four  months,  I am  of  opinion  that  Kirk,  with  far 
inferior  force,  could  not  have  complied  with  the  terms  of  contract  as  to  time.  The 
contract  was  made  about  the  latter  part  of  Sei)tember,  and  when  the  city  fell  the  ma- 
chinery was  not  then  completed.  When  the  enemy  were  assembling  at  Ship  Island 
in  force,  some  weeks  previous  to  the  lall  of  the  city,  much  of  the  work  of  the  Missis- 
sippi was  distributed  among  other  establishments.  Leeds  & Co.  had  about  f 6,000 
worth  of  it  to  do. 

Question.  Did  Leeds  & Co.  make  a bid  for  the  construction  of  the 
machinery  for  the  Mississijipi  ? If  so,  state  their  proposals  with  refer- 
ence to  the  amount  for  which  they  would  do  the  work  and  the  time  at 
which  they  would  complete  it. 

Answer.  They  did  make  such  a bid,  and,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  they  agreed  to 
njake  the  entire  machinery  of  the  vessel  for  ^65,000.  I do  Jiot  think  the^'^  proj)osed  any 
definite  time  as  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  but  expressed  the  opinion  confidently  that 
it  could  be  done  in  four  mouths.  We  could  have  made  closer  estimates,  but  we  had  no 
drawings  or  specifications.  I believe  we  would  have  bound  ourselves  to  have  finished 
the  work  within  five  months.  The  capacity  of  an  establishment  like  that  of  Kirk  and 
Leeds  & Co.  was  limited  by  the  quantity  of  machinery  they  had.  Leeds  & Co.  could 
not  have  made  available  a greater  force  than  they  had. 

Question.  Do  you  know  who  were  the  builders  of  the  machinery  of 
the  Louisiana? 

Answer.  I do  not  know  of  my  own  knowledge,  though  I am  well  satisfied  that  Kirk 
and  a machinist  named  John  McLean  did  the  work.  I do  not  know  where  they  are. 

Question.  How  long  had  Kirk  been  established  in  the  city,  and  what, 
if  you  know,  was  his  general  reputation  as  a business  man  ? • 

Answer.  He  had  not  been  long  in  the  city  before  the  war  began.  His  reputation 
was  that  ho  was  a man  destitute  of  principle,  though  it  was  not  generally  so  reputed 
at  the  time  he  took  the  contract  for  the  machinery  of  the  Mississippi. 

Question.  Did  General  Lovell  ever  visit  the  works  of  Leeds  & Co.  and 
ntanifest  an  interest  in  the  progress  of  the  Government  works  ? 

Answer.  He  visited  there  frequently  and  urged  the  progress  of  the  work. 

Question.  Were  any  heavy  guns  made  at  Leeds  & Co.^s  establishment 
or  were  any  rilled  or  banded? 

Answer.  We  made  a few  heavy  guns  for  the  Navy  and  one  for  the  Army.  We  rifled 
quite  a number  of  old  32  and  42  pounders  for  the  Army,  and  we  banded  one  7-inch  gun. 
I do  not  recollect  whether  any  more  were  banded. 

Question.  Were  Leeds  & Co.  ewer  applied  to  by  General  Lovell  to 
make  heaA^y  guns  on  an  extensive  scale  or  could  they  haA^e  done  it? 

Answer,  I do  not  know  that  he  did.  He  did  business  with  Mr.  Thomas  Leeds,  who 
is  now  dead. 

Question.  Was  the  establishment  of  Leeds  & Co.  in  constant  employ- 
ment for  the  Government  ? 

Answer.  It  was  steadily  employed  for  the  Confederate  States  and  the  State  of  Louisi- 
ana li'om  within  a short  time  after  the  war  began.  The  proprietors  refused  to  under- 
take work  for  planters,  &c. 


622  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 


Question.  Were  you  in  ]S’ew  Orleans  wlien  it  was  evacuated  *?  If  so, 
state,  if  you  know,  whether  Leeds  & Co.  removed  their  machinery  and 
such  material  of  war  as  might  have  been  then  in  their  establishment. 

Answer.  None  of  the  machinery  was  removed,  but  all  the  Government  work  was 
sent  off  that  conld  be.  Much  the  larger  portion  was  removed  under  the  order  of  Col- 
onel Lovell,  received  on  the  morning  of  Ajiril  24, 1862.  About  200  i ons  of  shot  and  shell 
were  all  that  was  lelt,  and  that  could  have  been  got  off,  but  the  railroad  became  gorged 
lip,  and  its  agents  refused  to  receive  more.  From  exiierimeuts  and  authorities  on  the 
subject  we  found  that  heavy  guns  could  not  be  well  made  with  the  machinery  we  had. 
The  iron  was  much  injured  by  being  fused  in  a cupola  furnace,  but  we  went  to  work 
and  had  nearly  completed  a reverberatory  furnace  when  the  city  fell. 

Question.  Did  you  ever  inspect  the  machinery  being  erected  on  board 
of  the  Mississippi?  If  so,  when,  under  what  circumstances,  and  what 
time,  in  your  opinion,  would  have  been  required  for  its  completion  ? 

Answer.  I did,  about  April  15,  1862,  in  company  with  Mr.  Cook,  a well-known 
machinist  of  New  Orleans,  who  had  been  requested  to  make  the  inspection  by  a com- 
mittee in  the  city.  We  were  of  the  opinion  that,  with  the  best  assistance  of  other 
establishments  in  the  city,  aside  from  Kirk’s,  it  might  have  been  done  in  six  weeks. 

Hon.  C.  M.  Conrad  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge- Ad voc ate  ; 

Question.  Have  yon  not  been  a member  of  Congress  from  the  city  of 
New  Orleans  since  the  organization  of  the  Confederate  States  Govern- 
ment and  for  the  same  time  have  you  not  been  chairman  of  the  House 
Committee  on  Naval  Affairs?  If  so,  state  ail  you  may  know  touching 
the  defenses  of  New  Orleans,  particularly  its  naval  defenses,  its  capture 
by  the  enemy,  and  its  evacuation. 

Answer.  I know  very  little  about  the  defenses  of  New  Orleans  generally,  being, 
absent  most  of  the  time  from  the  commencement  of  the  war  until  it  was  taken,  first  at 
Montgomery  and  afterwards  in  this  city.  I will  state,  however,  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  war  a great  deal  of  anxiety  was  felt  by  the  citizens  for  its  safety,  as  there 
was  no  defense  whatever  from  an  attack  from  above,  either  by  land  or  iiaval  force, 
and  the  only  defenses  below  were  the  two  forts  (Jackson  and  Saint  Philip),  which 
were  known  to  have  a very  insufficient  armament,  and  which  it  was  known  the  highest 
military  or  naval  officers  regarded,  even  with  a complete  armament,  inadequate  to 
prevent  the  passage  of  steamers.  At  that  time  no  preparations  whatever  had  been 
begun  to  resist  an  attack  by  land.  Under  these  circumstances  the  city  authorities 
determined  to  provide,  as  far  as  possible,  for  the  defense  of  the  city,  aided  also  by 
the  governor  of  the  State.  They  made  a large  appropriation  in  money,  and,  I think, 
also  the  governor  assumed  the  responsibility  of  advancing  some  on  behalf  of  the  State 
for  the  i)urpose  of  erecting  fort ili cations  around  the  city.  Engineers  were  enqiloyed 
for  this  purpose.  These  works  were  commenced,  buttheyseemed  to  advance  very  slowly, 
and  I was  requested  to  see  the  President,  to  have  one  or  more  engineers  assigned  to 
duty  there.  A committee  of  the  council  came  or  sent  to  procure  guus  for  the  Avorks, 
and  some  guns  w^ere  obtained,  but  not  as  many  as  were  demanded  for  these  works 
were  supi>lied.  Still,  however,  great  comnlaints  were  made  as  to  a want  of  energy  in 
the  construction  of  the  works,  and  great  anxiety  manifested  lest  they  would  not  be 
done  in  time.  Under  these  circumstances  the  Government  determined  to  send  General 
Lovell  to  take  command.  I returned  to  New 'Orleans  about  the  time  the  general  did. 
I had  myself  but  little  opportunity  of  judging  of  the  manner  in  wrhich  he  discharged 
his  duties,  as  I only  remained  four  or  liAm  weeks  and  returned  to  Richmond ; but  I 
must  say  that  it  was  a subject  at  the  time  of  general  congratulation  among  the  citizens 
that  more  energy  seemed  to  bo  infused  into  the  wmrk  of  defense  than  had  previously 
prevailed.  He  immediately  visited  all  the  forts  (which  General  T^viggs’  intirmities 
prevented  him  from  doing),  and  it  was  understood  that  ho  had  made  im])ortant  changes 
in  the  land  defenses.  I left  there  favorably  impressed  with  his  administration,  although 
without  accurate  knowJedge  on  the  subject,  and  so  stated  on  my  arrival  here.  I 
observed,  however,  that  the  iron-plated  gunboats  Avere  progressing  sloAvly.  I w^ent 
up  to  look  at  them.  The  Avoi-k  on  one  of  them  (I  think  it  Av^as  the  Mississii)pi)  had 
been  suspended  for  ten  or  twelve  days.  While  I Avas  there  this  was  a subject  of  remark 
among  the  citizens  generally.  During  the  course  of  that  winter  I receiA^ed  frequent 
letters  from  my  constituents  complaining  of  the  slowness  with  which  the  Avork  ad- 
A^auced,  and  requested  that  I should  urge  the  adoption  of  measures  to  expedite  the 
woik.  Either  before  I left  New  Orleans  or  after  arriving,  some  one  suggested  that 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G23 


arrangemeuts  slioiikl  bo  made  to  have  tbe  vessels  worked  upon  at  night  and  on  Sundays, 
as  there  were  many  mechanics  idle  in  the  city  that  could  relieve  each  other.  1 saw 
the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  frequently  upon  the  subject  of  these  vessels;  told  him  that 
I considered  that  the  safety  of  New  Orleans  depended  mainly,  if  not  entirely,  upon  them, 
so  far  as  a naval  attack  was  concerned,  which  was  the  only  one  I apprehended,  and 
I informed  him  of  the  anxiety  that  was  felt  by  the  peojilo  of  New  Orleans  on  the  sub- 
. ject.  The  Secretary  did  not,  however,  seem  to  be  alive  to  the  magnitude  of  the  danger, 
although  I read  him  an  extract  from  a New  York  newspaxier  containing  a description 
of  iron-plated  vessels  that  were  being  built  at  Saint  Louis  and  Cincinnati  expressly  to 
descend  the  Mississippi,  and  spoke  of  similar  gunboats  being  built  at  New  York.  I inen- 
tioned  the  suggestion,  which  I thought  a good  one,  that  the  work  upon  these  vessels 
should  be  continued  at  night  and  on  Sundays.  I do  not  remember  what  he  said  about 
night  work,  but  in  regard  to  working  on  Sundays  he  said  it  would  shock  the  religious 
seusibilities  of  the  jieoide.  1 told  him,  in  rejily,  that  so  far  as  my  constituents  were  con- 
cerned there  were  none  of  them  that  would  be  at  all  shocked ; that  the  enemy  would 
not  hesitatet  to  attack  us  on  Sunday,  and  I did  not  see  why  we  should  not  prepare  to 
defend  ourselves  on  Sunday.  The  letters  to  me  also  mentioned,  on  several  occasions, 
that  the  mechanics  employed  on  the  naval  works  were  not  x>i^iictually  i)aid,  and,  in 
consequence,  they  were  greatly  dissatisfied  and  much  indisposed  to  work  for  that  arm 
of  the  service.  I think  they  stated  that  numbers  had  left  on  that  account,  refusing 
to  work.  I invariably  informed  the  Secretarj^  of  the  Navy  oPthese  comidaints  or  read 
him  that  portion  of  the  letter.  He  did  not  seem  at  all  surx)rised  at  this  information, 
but  stated  that  the  Treasury  Department  failed  to  sux)ply  him  the  funds  as  fast  as  they 
were  needed.  On  one  occasion  I was  somewhat  excited,  because  I thought  he  treated 
such  information  too  lightly,  and  I told  him  I did  not  know  anything  more  important 
to  which  money  could  bo  ai)X)lied  than  the  completion  of  the  two  vessels  upon  which 
the  safety  of  New  Orleans  dex^ended,  and  that  as  he  was  responsible  for  the  proper 
prosecution  of  the  work  I thought  it  was  his  duty  to  insist  that  the  money  should  be 
so  applied.  Finally  a committee  of  several  prominent  citizens  of  New  Orleans  was 
deputized  to  come  on  here  to  urge  the  Government  to  more  energetic  measures  in 
regard  to  the  two  gunboats.  They  came  to  me,  and  I introduced  the  chairman  (Mr. 
William  Henderson,  a respectable  merchant  of  the  cikY,  a very  zealous  and  energetic 
man)  to  the  President  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  he  represented  to  them  the 
delay  attending  the  building  of  these  vessels,  and  made  some  suggestions  on  the  subject, 
the  nature  of  which  I do  not  now  recollect.  He  spoke  particularly  of  the  backwardness 
of  paying  the  workmen  as  one  cause  of  the  delay.  After  the  interview  he  said  orders 
had  been  given  to  remedy  the  financial  troubles,  and  also  for  the  shixmient  of  the  shaft, 
that  had  been  here  for  some  time.  This  was  in  January  or  February,  1862.  After 
this,  however,  the  comxdaiuts  about  the  slow  progress  of  the  work  still  continued,  and 
I frequently  saw  the  Secretary  and  informed  him  of  the  uneasiness  felt  by  the  citizens 
for  the  safety  of  New  Orleans,  in  which  I fully  participated.  I at  last ‘came  to  the 
conclusion  that  New  Orleans  would  be  taken,  the  only  question  in  my  mind  being 
whether  by  the  gunboats  from  above  or  the  tleet  from  the  sea.  So  strong  was  my 
belief  that  I mentioned  it  confidentially  to  several  of  my  friends,  though  I did  not 
publicly  declare  it,  not  deeming  it  x^indent.  Mr.  Mallory  having  addressed  a letter  to 
the  chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Naval  Affairs,  .recommending  the  construction  of  a 
foundery  and  naval  dexiot  at  New  Orleans,  I mentioned  to  the  committee  my  opinion 
on  this  subject  as  a reason  why  the  suggestion  should  not  be  adopted,  as  i thought 
New  Orleans  would  xirobably  be  taken  that  spring,  and,  accordingly,  I wrote  a letter 
to  the  Secretary  in  reply  to  his  note,  in  which  1 mentioned,  as  our  reason  why  his  sug- 
gestion was  disapproved  by  the  committee,  the  belief  or  the  ax3prehension  felt  by  them 
that  New  Orleans  would  be  captured  owing  to  the  backwardness  of  the  naval  prepara- 
tions at  that  place.  This  was  some  five  or  six  weeks  before  the  attack  on  the  forts. 
I also  felt  it  n^y  duty,  both  as  the  Rex^resentative  from  New  Orleans  and  as  chairman  of 
the  Committee  on  Naval  Affairs,  publicly  to  proclaim  in  Congress  my  conviction  of  the 
incapacity  or  inefficiency  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  June  11,  1<S63. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Miijor- 
General  Lovell. 

The  luoceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  Hon.  C.  M.  Conrad  continued. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  Did  not  the  President  grant  the  request  preferred  by  you 


G24  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

on  behalf  of  the  citizens  of  I^Tew  Orleans  for  engineers  to  take  charge  of 
the  fortifications  there  in  process  of  construction  ? 

Answer.  There  was  already  a Confederate  States  engineer  officer  there,  a Maj.  M. 
L.  Smith,  hilt  General  Twiggs  had  expressed  to  me  doubts  of  his  activity  and  energy, 
although  he  spoke  highly  of  him  in  other  respects,  and  expressed  a wish  that  some 
officer  of  more  distinction  should  be  given  the  superintendence  of  the  works  at  New 
Orleans.  On  my  arrival  here  I conferred  with  the  President  upon  the  subject,  and  he 
expressed  very  great  willingness  to  comply  with  the  request  as  far  as  practicable,  but 
stated  that  very  few  eugineers  had  resigned  and  come  over  to  us  from  the  old  service, 
aud  that  there  was  a great  deficiency  in  our  Army  as  to  that  corps.  He  looked  over 
the  list,  aud  found  that  some  had  already  been  assigned  to  important  duty,  and  of 
those  that  remained  he  said  he  would  send  any  of  them  that  General  Twiggs  would 
prefer,  but  expressed  the  opinion,  from  what  he  had  heard  of  Major  Smith,  that  he 
was  as  competent  as  either  of  those  that  were  mentioned  as  disposable.  I informed 
General  Twiggs  of  the  result  of  my  interview,  but  am  unable  to  say  whether  or  not 
anj^  change  was  made. 

Question.  Do  you  know  any  particular  facts  touching  the  defenses  of 
New  Orleans  not  before  stated  which  you  deem  important  ? If  so,  state 
them.  • 

Answer.  I know  nothing  further  on  the  subject  than  I have  stated,  except  the  con- 
dition of  Fort  Jackson  before  or  shortly  after  General  LovelPs  arrival,  and  that  shortly 
after  the  commeu cement  of  the  first  session  of  the  Provisional  Congress,  at  Montgom- 
ery, ill  February,  1801,  before  the  President  was  inaugurated,  either  Major  (now  Gen- 
eral) Beauregard  or  some  one  else  sent  me  a slip  from  a paper  containing  a letter  from 
General  Beauregard  in  regard  to  the  delenses  of  New  Orleans.  In  this  letter  he  ex- 
pressed the  opinion  that  the  forts  below  the  city  would  not  be  sufficient  to  prevent  the 
passage  of  steam  vessels  of  war,  even  if  their  armament  was  complete  and  the  guns  of 
the  heaviest  caliber,  but  ad<led  that  the  armament  was  not  complete  nor  the  guns  of 
the  heaviest  caliber.  He  recommended,  therefore,  that  some  measures  should  be 
ado]3ted  retarding  the  progress  of  such  vessels — keeping  them  under  the  fire  of  the 
forts.  He  suggested  two  modes  that  might  be  adopted  to  accomplish  this  end : the 
one  was  the  strotchiiig  of  heavy  chain  cables  across  the  river ; the  other,  which  he  con- 
sidered most  efiective,  the  construction  of  a raft  in  the  channel,  and  stated  that  he 
had  prepared  a x>lan  of  such  a raft,  aud  gave  an  estimate  of  its  cost.  Considering  this 
communication  a very  important  one,  I summoned  the  Committee  on  Naval  Afiairs 
and  laid  it  before  them.  They  agreed  with  me,  and  it  was  determined  that  we  should 
summon  naval  officers  of  the  highest  rank  in  order  to  lay  this  subject  before  them,  and 
I ajiplied  for  and  obtained  authority  from  Congress  to  summon  them.  The  summons 
was  issued  to  Captains  Ingraham,  Rosseau,  Tatnall,  Randolph,  and  Commander 
Semmes.  They  all  obeyed  the  summons,  and  at  the  time  appointed  came  to  Mont- 
gomery and  appeared  before  the  committee,  when  I laid  before  them  the  communica- 
tion of  General  Beauregard,  aud  requested  them  carefully  to  consider  it  and  furnish 
the  committee  with  thoh-  views  in  writing  at  the  next  meeting.  They  did  so,  and  sent 
me  a report,  expressing  their  entire  concurrence  in  the  view  of  General  Beauregard  as 
to  the  ability  of  steam  Vessels  of  war  to  pass  the  forts  even  with  a complete  armament 
of  heavy  guns.  A day  or  so  after  the  inauguration  I laid  this  communication  of  Gen- 
eral Beauregard  and  the  report  of  the  naval  officers  before  the  President.  My  belief 
that  New  Orleans  would  be  taken  was  based  mainly  upon  this  paper  of  General  Beau- 
regard’s and  the  reiiort  of  the  naval  officers. 

Question.  AVere  you  at  Camp  Moore  shortly  after  the  evacuation  of 
New  Orleans  ? If  so,  state  the  condition  of  military  affairs  there  at  that 
time. 

Answer.  I arrived  at  Camp  Moore  a day  or  two  after  the  evacuation.  I found  Gen 
eral  Lovell  there  with  such  force  as  he  had  brought  out  of  the  city,  very  small  in 
number ; I should  not  think  it  exceeded  over  2,500  men  ; the  troops  seemed  to  be  very 
much  disorganized.  The  general’s  main  attention  seemed  to  be  directed  to  getting 
the  military  supplies  from  the  city,  large  quantities  of  which  were  constantly  arriv- 
ing. With  the  exception  of  Colonel  De  Clouet’s  regiment,  which  had  been  raised  but 
a few  days,  and  a battalion  of  Zouaves,  the  force  was  mainly  composed  of  militia  and 
troops  raised  for  local  defense.  General  Lovell,  while  I was  there,  was  making  arrange- 
ments for  the  destruction  ol'  cotton  up  the  river,  and  informed  me  that  he  had  given 
instructions  for  the  fortification  of  Vicksburg.  There  was  no  greater  confusion  than 
was  natural  aud  to  be  expected;  there  was  no  military  confusion.  General  Lovell 
gave  no  evidence  of  embarrassment ; was  jierfectly  cool,  aud  told  me  he  was  willing 
to  go  back  to  New  Orleans  if  the  authorities  desired  it. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


625 


Cross-examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  : 

Question.  Was  not  General  M.  L.  Smith  in  immediate  command  of  the 
troops  at  Camp  Moore,  General  Lovell  merely  having  his  department 
headquarters  in  the  vicinity  of  those  troops  ? 

Answer.  He  was  in  the  immediate  command,  General  Lovell  merely  having  hia 
headquarters  there.  ' 

Kelson  Tift  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  What  were  your  relation^  to  the  Government  with  reference 
to  the  Confederate  States  steamer  Mississippi? 

Answer.  I was  the  inventor  of  the  plan  of  that  vessel,  and  with  my  brother,  Mr. 
A.  F.  Tift,  brought  a model  to  Richmond,  submitted  it  to  the  Navy  Department,  and 
tendered  our  services  without  compensation  to  construct  such  a vessel.  As  a means 
of  showing  to  the  country  our  true  relations  to  the  Government  I here  submit  our 
proposition  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  and  his  acceptance  and  instructions. 

Question.  Had  you  or  your  brother  any  experience  as  constructors  oi 
' vessels  ? 

Answer.  Neither  of  us  are  practical  mechanics;  both  of  ns  are  familiar  with  the 
character  and  qualities  of  vessels  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  constructed. 
My  brother  has,  as  proprietor  and  superintendent,  during  the  past  twenty-five  years, 
had  many  vessels  built  and  repaired.  In  the  case  of  the  Mississippi  I furnished  the 
plan.  My  brother  and  myself  superintended  the  entire  work  as  agents  of  the  Govern- 
ment, and  Mr.  Joseph  Prim,  a practical  naval  constructor,  had  the  charge  of  her  con- 
struction. 

Question.  Did  you  make  the  contracts  for  the  construction  of  the 
Mississippi?  If  so,  state  with  whom  the  more  important  contracts  were 
made. 

Answer.  As  the  agents  of  the  Government  we  made  all  the  contracts  that  were 
made.  We  contracted  with  Jackson  & Co.,  represented  by  Robert  Kirk,  for  the 
machinery;  with  Schofield  & Markham,  at  Atlanta,  Ga.,  for  the  iron  plating,  &c. ; 
with  Winship  & Co.,  of  Atlanta,  Ga.,  for  bolts  for  plating  and  for  making  port  doors ; 
with  Wells,  Poitevant,  Cary,  Hammond  & Co.,  Garland,  and  others,  for  timber;  with 
SlocoD\b,  Bean  & Sons,  Slark,  Staufier  & Co.,  Folger  & Co.,  and  others,  for  iron  fasten- 
ings, tools,  &c. ; with  Leeds  & Co.,  John  Clarke,  Barringer,  Cosgrove,  McCan  & Har- 
I’old,  Beanmiller,  D.  H.  Fowler,  Purseglove,  Wheeler  & Forestall,  and  others,  for  iron 
work  of  various  kinds  and  machinery.  Besides  these,  we  purchased  elsewhere,  where 
we  could  get  them,  such  articles  as  could  not  be  obtained  in  New  Orleans ; bolt-iron, 
spikes,  oarlocks,  <fcc.,  in  Mobile ; bolt-iron  in  Macon,  Atlanta,  and  Etowah,  Ga.,  and  in 
Chattanooga,  Tenn.,  &c. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow,  the  12th  instant 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  Jnne  12,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Examination  of  Kelson  Tift  continued. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate: 

Question.  What  obstacles  had  you  to  encounter  in  the  progress  of 
the  work,  and  what  delays  were  you  subjected  to,  and  what  means  were 
used  to  overcome  such  obstacles? 

Answer.  We  arrived  at  New  Orleans  on  September  18,  1861.  There  was  no  ship- 
yard suitable  for  the  building  of  the  Mississippi ; they  were  all  on  the  west  bank  of 
the  river ; were  too  small  and  inconvenient,  the  bank  high,  and  the  water  deep  along- 
side of  it.  W e selected  a suitable  place  on  the  east  side  of  the  river,  at  Jefferson  City, 

40  R R — VOL  VI 


626 


OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  (Chai-.  xvl 


•where  we  prepared  a yard  with  suitable  buildings,  sheds,  blacksmith  shops,  a saw- 
mill, &c.  We  found  no  timber  in  New  Orleans  suitable  for  building  the  vessel.  We 
contracted  as  soon  as  possible  with  all  the  responsible  parties  we  could  for  the  neces- 
sary timber,  and,  though  it  was  brought  to  us  by  the  contractors  as  fast  as  they  could 
prepare  it,  we  were  sometimes  delayed  in  the  early  part  of  the  work  for  want  of  tim- 
ber. Our  contracts  covered  a space  of  more  than  100  miles  from  the  city.  We  some- 
times had  obstacles  in  the  carpenter’s  department.  There  was  a strike  of  all  the  ship 
carpenters  in  New  Orleans  for  a few  days.  We  first  appealed  to  the  authorities,  and 
finding  no  remedy  we  raised  the  wages  from  $3  to  $4  per  day.  All  tbe  workmen  were 
called  out  by  Governor  Moore  one  or  more  days  for  military  parade,  and  at  other 
times  some  of  our  men  were  taken  from  their  work  by  military  officers  for  duty. 
This  was  remedied  as  far  as  possible  by  appeals  to  the  authorities.  Sometimes  we 
had  more  men  than  we  could  continue  to  work  and  discharged  them,  and  at  other 
times  we  lacked  men  for  a short  time.  When  the  Louisiana  was  being  prepared  for 
service  we  let  them  have  50  carpenters  when  we  did  not  need  them.  Subsequently, 
when  we  did  need  them  we  could  neither  get  them  nor  hire  others.  We  then  procured 
the  necessary  men  from  other  ship-yards.  When  we  commenced  putting  on  the  iron 
casting  and  could  use  laboring  force  at  night  we  procured,  through  the  aid  of  Captain 
Elmore,  from  neighboring  plantations,  between  200^nd  300  negroes,  who  wore  worked 
as  a night  gang.  We  had  obstacles  in  the  procurement  of  bolt-iron,  spikes,  and  other 
materials  which  could  not  be  obtained  in  New  Orleans ; these  were  procured  with 
some  difficulty  from  distant  points  in  Alabama,  Georgia,  and  Tennessee.  We  had 
difficulty  in  procuring  the  iron  plating.  The  Tredegar  Works  in  Richmond  was  the 
only  establishment  doing  that  kind  of  work  in  the  Confederacy,  and  this  was  fully 
occupied  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  Government  here.  We  tried  to  induce  other 
establishments  to  prepare  for  and  execute  this  work  without  effect,  and  were  prepar- 
ing to  use  railroad  iron,  when  Schofield  & Markham,  of  Atlanta,  Ga.,  one  of  the 
parties  to  whom  we  had  applied,  concluded  to  consider  our  proposition.  I went  to 
Atlanta,  and,  on  November  15,  1861,  concluded  a contract  with  them  to  roll  and  pre- 
pare the  plating  for  the  vessel,  and  through  them  a contract  with  Winship  & Co. 
for  the  bolts  for  the  plating.  This  being  a new  character  of  work,  Schofield  & Mark- 
ham had  to  change  the  rolls  of  their  establishment,  erect  new  drills,  and  otherwise 
prepare  for  it.  These  arrangements  were  completed,  I think,  early  in  December,  and 
they  went  on  rapidly  with  the  work.  They  encountered  difficulties  for  want  of  hands 
and  sometimes  for  want  of  coal,  in  both  of  which  cases  we  aided  them  by  appeals  to 
the  Government  and  the  railroad  agents. 

We  had  obstacles  in  the  transportation  of  plating  and  other  materials.  Our  first 
shipments  from  Atlanta  were  by  the  way  of  Memphis  and  the  river;  finding  delay 
by  this  route,  we  arranged  to  send  through  by  railroad  to  Grand  Junction  and  New 
Orleans.  Subsequently  a part  of  this  line  was  occupied  by  the  army  of  General  John- 
ston, and  transportation  by  that  route  rendered  impossible.  We  then  arranged  to 
send  by  way  of  Montgomery  and  Mobile  and  thence  by  railroad  to  New  Orleans.  On 
this  route  delays  were  encountered  at  Mobile  and  Montgomery,  which  were  as  soon 
as  possible  removed  by  personal  effort,  by  appeal  to  the  Government,  and  by  aid  of 
friends.  The  cars  containing  the  best  of  our  iron  plating  arrived  at  New  Orleans,  I 
think,  on  April  23.  We  encountered  many  obstacles  in  the  machinery  department. 
Our  final  contract  with  Jackson  & Co.  was  that  they  should  complete  the  machinery 
on  board  the  vessel  by  January  30. 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  it  might  be  impossible  to  procure  wrought-iron  shafting, 
we  could  make  no  positive  contract  for  it.  The  contract,  therefore,  was  for  cast-iron 
shafting,  with  a provision  that  if  the  contractors  could  obtain  wrought-iron  shafting 
we  were  to  pay  the  difference  in  cost.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  our  duties  and 
responsibilities  in  this  department  ended  here  and  were  assumed  by  the  contractors ; 
but  finding  extraordinary  difficulties  in  the  way  of  procuring  shafting  and  other  mate- 
rials and  suitable  mechanics,  and  looking  only  to  the  final  success  of  our  labors,  we 
made  every  effort  in  our  power  to  aid  the  confractors  to  fulfill  their  contract.  We 
aided  as  far  as  possible  in  furnishing  men.  They  could  get  no  skilled  propeller  molder. 
We  procured  one  in  Norfolk.  We  appealed  to  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  to  aid 
them  in  men.  They  could  get  no  wrought-iron  shafting.  We  made  diligent  search  in 
New  Orleans  and  throughout  the  Confederacy.  There  was  no  establishment  which 
could  forge  the  shafting,  and  we  could  find  but  one  shaft  which  could  be  adapted  to 
our  purpose.  That  was  the  shaft  of  a burned  steamer  at  Richmond.  It  was  procured 
for  us  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  fitted,  with  great  trouble  and  expense,  at 
the  Tredegar  Works,  and  transported  to  New  Orleans,  where  it  arrived  on  April  — . 
It  was  immediately  put  into  the  shop  of  Jackson  & Co.,  turned  and  fitted  with  coup- 
lings, and  was  placed  in  its  position,  with  its  propeller,  on  board  the  ship  before  she 
was  launched. 

We  continued  our  efforts  to  find  material  which  would  make  the  two  long  pieces  of 
our  side  and  quarter  shafts  (which  were  32^  feet  long  each  and  9 inches  in  diameter  at 
the  journals),  or  to  engage  parties  to  prepare  the  proper  furnaces  and  hammer,  and 


ClIAF.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


627 


forge  them.  We  applied  several  times  to  Leeds  & Co.,  who  as  often  answered  us  that 
they  could  neither  procure  the  shafting  nor  forge  it.  We  supposed  it  could  be  made  in 
Richmond  or  at  the  Norfolk  navy-yard,  but  ascertained  that  it  could  not.  At  one  time 
we  supposed  that  we  had  secured  the  making  of  these  shafts  by  Ward  & Co.,  of  Nash- 
ville, but  were  disappointed.  In  the  latter  part  of  December  we  learned  that  Mr. 
John  Clarke  had  taken  a contract  from  the  Government  for  making  the  Armstrong  gun, 
and  was  about  to  erect  a building,  furnaces,  and  hammer  for  that  purpose.  We  saw 
him,  induced  him  to  make  some  necessary  changes  in  the  plan  of  his  works,  and  to 
agree  to  make  our  side  shafting.  On  January  10  we  wrote  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Navy : 

“We  have  been  much  troubled  about  the  side  shafts.  Mr.  Clarke,  of  this  place,  has 
agreed  to  make  them,  and  we  hope  will  have  them  done  in  February.” 

This  hope  was  derived  from  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Clarke,  expressed  to  us ; but  he  was 
unavoidably  delayed  in  the  erection  of  the  building  and  works  by  much  raiuy  weather 
and  a scarcity  of  suitable  mechanics.  I think  that  his  works  were  completed  about 
the  middle  of  March.  He  could  get  no  person  who  had  experience  with  such  work; 
but  with  perseverance  he  succeeded  in  forging  them — the  first  in  about  fifteen  days  and 
the  second  in  about  eight  days.  By  our  previous  arrangement  with  Leeds  & Co.  these 
shafts,  as  soon  as  they  were  forged,  were  taken  to  their  shop,  and  worked  upon  day 
and  night  until  they  were  finished.  The  last  of  these  shafts  were  put  on  board  the 
vessel,  I think,  April  23.  We  frequently  visited  the  foundery  and  workshop  of  Jack- 
son  & Co.  to  urge  forward  the  work  and  to  render  all  the  assistance  in  our  power. 
When  we  were  convinced  that  the  machinery  would  be  the  cause  of  delay,  we  urged 
the  distribution  of  such  parts  as  could  be  removed,  and  thus  finished  earlier,  to  other 
shops,  and  promised  to  pay  any  extra  cost.  We  also,  on  April  3,  promised  Jackson  & 
Co.  to  pay  them  $5,000  extra  if  they  would  have  the  machinery  completed  according 
to  the  specifications  of  their  contract  by  the  25th  of  that  month.  Parts  of  the  ma- 
chinery were  distributed  to  Leeds  & Co.,  Clarke,  Barringer,  and  other  shops.  We 
purchased  two  small  auxiliary  engines  and  a steam  pump,  which  were  a part  of  the 
machinery  contract,  and  charged  them  to  the  contractor.  We  procured  hands  to 
aid  in  putting  the  machinery  up  in  the  ship,  and  did  all  we  could  in  every  way  to 
remove  every  obstacle  and  forward  the  work.  I have  mentioned  only  the  more  impor- 
tant obstacles  and  our  efforts  to  remove  them.  The  Committee  of  Public  Safety 
attempted  to  make  us  launch  the  vessel  before  she  was  ready.  We  convinced  them 
that  they  were  wrong,  and  they  desisted.^  Mr.  V.  Sheldon,  a member  of  the  commit- 
tee, refused  to  let  us  have  his  sub-marine  armor  to  examine  the  ways  of  the  ship,  which 
was  necessary  to  her  safety  in  launching.  We  sent  a steamer  25  miles  to  procure  an- 
other, which  was  cheerfully  furnished  by  Captain  Whiting.  We  found  it  impracti- 
cable, m the  early  part  of  the  work,  to  get  from  the  authorities  an  armed  guard  for  the 
protection  of  The  vessel.  These  are  samples  of  the  minor  difficulties. 

Question.  Was  not  Leeds  & Co.  a larger  and  better  establishment 
than  that  of  Jackson  & Co.  ? If  so,  why  did  you  not  give  the  contract 
to  Leeds  & Co.  Did  you  know  the  character  of  Kirk  as  a business 
man  ? State  also  the  reason  that  influenced  you  in  giving  the  contract. 

Answer.  Leeds  & Co.  had  a larger,  and  I think  a better,  establishment,  all  things 
considered ; but  I think  the  establishment  of  Jackson  & Co.,  known  as  the  Patterson 
foundery,  was,  for  the  purpose  of  building  the  machinery  of  the  Mississippi,  the  equal 
of  Leeds  & Co.  in  point  of  capacity,  tools,  lathes,  steam-hammers,  foundery,  &c.  Jack- 
son  & Co.,  or  Kirk,  as  their  representative,  had,  I think,  recently  removed  from  Mo- 
bile to  New  Orleans,  where  they  purchased  the  Patterson  foundery,  and  were  doing 
work  for  the  Government  when  we  arrived  there.  I know  nothing  of  his  character  as 
a business  man.  He  occupied  a position  as  the  head  and  proprietor  of  a machine  shop 
and  foundery  second  only  to  that  of  Leeds  & Co.  in  New  Orleans,  which  was  calcu- 
lated to  recommend  him,  and  I heard  nothing  objectionable  to  his  character  or  cajia- 
city  as  a mechanic. 

Our  reasons  for  making  the  contract  with  Jackson  & Co.  and  not  with  Leeds  & Co. 
were : 

1st.  The  lowest  price  of  Leeds  & Co.  was  $65,000  and  the  shortest  time  four  months. 
The  bid  of  Jackson  & Co.  for  the  same  work  was  $45,000  and  the  time  three  months. 

2d.  Leeds  & Co.  were  pressed  with  work,  and  they  did  not  seem  at  all  confident  that 
they  could  do  our  work  in  the  time  mentioned.  Jackson  & Co.  had  but  little  work  on 
hand,  and  this  they  promised  to  dispose  of  in  a few  days,  and  to  devote  the  whole 
capacity  of  the  establishment  exclusively  to  our  work. 

Under  these  circumstances,  with  a saving  of  $20,000  to  the  Government  and  one  month 
in  time  and  with  an  apparent  superior  capacity  for  doing  the  work,  we  did  not  hesi- 
tate to  make  the  contract  with  Jackson  & Co.  With  continued,  earnest,  and  zealous 
efforts  I believe  that  Jackson  & Co.  could  have  completed  the  machinery  earlier  than 


628  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

they  did,  and  yet  I doubt  whether  any  other  establishment  in  New  Orleans,  with  their 
other  engagements,  could  have  completed  it  earlier  than  they  did.  I have  mentioned 
the  case  of  Mr.  Clarke,  a first-rate  business  man,  who  was  delayed  in  making  our  side 
shafts  some  two  months  beyond  the  time  he  calculated.  Leeds  & Co.,  on  February 
18,  agreed  to  make  the  iron  rudder  for  the  Mississippi ; it  was  not  completed  on  April 
25.  1 doubt  whether  they  or  any  other  similar  establishment  in  New  Orleans  per- 
formed any  important  contract  within  the  time  contemplated  when  they  undertook  it. 
I mention  these  facts  to  show  that  the  difficulties  encountered  by  these  establishments 
were  common  to  all. 

Question.  How  many  working  days  were  lost  from  the  commencement 
of  the  Mississippi  to  the  passage  of  the  forts,  including  Sundays  as  lost 
days? 

Answer.  Not  one  working  day  was  ^lost  except  that  already  referred  to,  when  the 
men  were  called  out  to  military  parade  by  the  governor,  and  this  was  done  against  my 
personal  request  that  they  should  be  allowed  to  go  on  with  the  work.  There  were 
some  rainy  days,  when  the  men  could  not  work  outside,  but  work  was  continued  in 
the  shops  and  under  the  sheds.  I do  not  remember  how  many  Sundays  we  worked, 
but,  as  a general  rule,  we  worked  every  Sunday  when  we  thought  it  necessary  to  for- 
ward the  work.  We  also  worked  nights  in  the  shops  when  necessary  and  we  could 
get  hands  for  the  purpose. 

Question.  In  how  many  days  would  the  Mississippi  have  been  com- 
pleted, beyond  all  doubt,  had  not  the  city  fallen  ? 

Answer.  In  my  opinion  two  weeks  as  the  extreme.  I know  that  some  other  men 
entertain  a very  different  opinion,  but  it  will  be  found  on  examination  that  they  have 
formed  their  opinion  without  a sufficient  knowledge  of  the  particulars  necessary  to  her 
completion.  All  the  iron  below  the  deck  line  was  on ; the  iron  for  the  upper  works 
had  all  been  cut,  fitted,  and  assorted  to  its  place.  About  one-third  of  it  had  been  put 
on  within  two  days,  and  the  opinion  of  the  workman  in  charge  was  that  the  remainder 
could  be  put  on  and  bolted  in  six  days.  In  less  than  that  tirne  the  machinery  could 
have  been  connected  ready  for  steam,  and  the  port  doors,  which  were  completed  and 
hinged,  put  in  place,  and  the  rudder  hung.  The  dock  for  putting  in  the  side  propeller 
shafts  was  completed  and  launched.  The  shafts  had  been  completed  and  the  proj^eUers 
fitted  to  them,  and  the  side  bearings  were  completed  ready  to  be  bolted  up.  I sup- 
pose that  ten  days  would  be  a full  allowance  for  this  work.  We  had  men  enough, 
including  a large  force  of  negroes,  which  we  worked  as  a night  gang,  to  handle  iron 
plating  and  other  labor,  to  carry  on  all  the  departments  of  the  work  together,  and  it 
could  have  been  done  without  interference  with  each  other.  It  will  be  seen,  there- 
fore, that  in  fixing  the  time  of  completion  at  two  weeks  1 have  allowed  four  days  to 
cover  contingencies. 

I know  that  the  public  mind  has  been  prejudiced  against  my  brother  and  myself  by 
unfounded  rumors  and  mistaken  reports,  but  I state,  without  fear  of  contradictiou  by 
those  who  know  the  facts,  that  our  best  energies  of  mind  and  body  were  devoted  to 
this  work  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  and  that  we  accomplished  all  that  it  was 
possible  for  us  or  for  any  other  persons,  with  the  means  at  our  command,  to  do ; and 
in  this  connection  it  is  proper  to  state  that  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  .under  whose 
orders  we  were  acting,  furnished  us  with  all  the  means  and  facilities  in  his  power,  with 
repeated  instructions  to  spare  neither  money  nor  men  to  forward  the  work,  and  that 
we  obeyed  the  order  in  letter  and  spirit. 

The  court  adjourued  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  13,  1863. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  M.  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  then  read  over. 

The  judge-advocate  then  read  to  the  court,  prepared  according  to  its 
directions,  the  following  letter : 

Richmond,  Va.,  June  13,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Bichniond,  Fa.: 

General  : I have  advised  the  court  that  it  has  in  law  the  right  to  summon  before  it 
any  member  of  the  Cabinet  whose  testimony  may  be  deemed  important ; but  it  is  to  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  court  exercises  its  functions  for  the  information  of  the  President, 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


629 


and  it  may  be  considered  a work  of  supererof^ation  on  its  part  to  ascertain  from  mem- 
bers of  the  Cabinet,  who  are  but  parts  of  the  Executive,  facts  which  in  law  the  Presi- 
dent is  presumed  already  to  kilovv.  I am  instructed  by  the  court  to  ask  your  opinion 
as  to  the  propriety  of  issuing  a summons  as  above  indicated,  and  whether  such  a step 
is  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  the  service. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  R.  PAGE, 

Major,  Adjutant-General’s  Department,  and  Judge- Advocate. 

It  was  tlieu  ordered  by  the  court  that  the  judge-advocate  forward  the 
said  letter  to  General  Cooper. 

The  judge-advocate  then  informed  the  court  that  the  Adjutant  and 
Inspector  General  had  advised  him  that  orders  were  in  preparation, 
affecting  the  investigations  of  the  court,  which  would  render  it  expe- 
dient for  the  court  to  suspend  its  proceedings  until  said  orders  were 
issued. 

The  court  thereupon  adjourned  to  meet  on  Monday,  the  15th  instant, 
at  11  a.  m. 


Kichmond,  Va.,  June  15,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 
The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  M.  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  the  13th  instant  were  read  over. 

The  following  communication  to  Maj.  Gen.  T.  0.  Hindman,  president, 
was  then  read  to  the  court  by  the  judge-advocate: 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Eichmond,  Va.,  June  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  C.  Hindman, 

President  of  Court  of  Inquiry,  Eichmond,  Va. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  refer  to  you  the  inclosed  copy  of  a letter  of  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  Navy,  with  the  President’s  indorsement  thereon,  on  the  subject  of  the 
examination  of  navy  operations  by  the  court  over  which  you  preside.  Recurring  to 
my  answer  of  April  21  last  to  the  telegram  of  the  judge-advocate  on  this  subject,  I find 
that  my  language  was  not  as  precise  as  could  be  wished,  and  in  order  that  there  may 
be  no  misunderstanding  I desire  now  to  state  my  views : 

The  court  of  inquiry,  being  an  army  court,  is,  of  course,  without  authority  to  ex- 
press any  opinion  upon  the  conduct  of  any  officers  of  the  Navy  Department ; but  where 
the  general  whose  conduct  is  under  investigation  alleges  that  the  fall  of  the  city  was 
attributable  to  the  misconduct  or  failure  of  any  person  not  under  his  control,  it  is  per- 
fectly proper  to  examine  as  witnesses  all  that  are  cognizant  of  the  facts,  even  if  they 
be  officers  of  the  Navy.  The  inquiry  is  to  be  directed  solely  to  the  purpose  of  ascer- 
taining whether  the  defense  of  the  general  is  true  j if  it  be  so,  the  court  will  pronounce, 
of  course,  that  the  failure  to  defend  the  city  arose  from  causes  not  within  his  control, 
but  will  not  express  any  opinion  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  officers  of  another  depart- 
ment of  the  service.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  defense  of  the  general  is  rebutted  by  the 
evidence,  the  court  will  give  its  oiiinion  that  his  defense  is  not  sustained.  In  this 
way  the  truth  may  be  reached  without  the  court  touching  at  all  on  the  province  of  a 
naval  court.  It  is  plain  that  no  opinion  of  the  conduct  of  an  officer  connected  with 
the  Navy  can  be  expressed  by  the  court,  because,  if  the  court  desires  to  examine  into 
the  conduct  of  any  other  officer  than  General  Lovell,  the  court  would  be  compelled 
to  cite  the  officer  before  it,  and  it  has  no  power  to  do  so  with  a Navy  officer,  whose  con- 
duct can  only  be  inquired  into  by  a naval  court. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  COOPER, 

, Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


To  the  President  : 


Navy  Department, 
Eichmond,  Va.,  June  8,  1863. 


Sir  : I learn  to-day,  from  an  authentic  source,  that  the  court  of  inquiry,  convoked 
by  the  War  Department,  at  the  request  of  General  Lovell,  and  now  in  session  in  Rich- 
mond, for  the  ostensible  purpose  of  investigating  his  conduct  as  connected  with  tho 


630  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


defense  and  fall  of  New  Orleans,  is  engaged  in  taking  testimony,  formally,  as  to  the 
official  conduct  of  the  Navy  Department  and  that  of  all  its  officers,  civil  and  military, 
in  any  way  connected  with  its  operations  in  New  Orleans  and  on  the  Mississippi  River, 
embracing  within  the  field  of  its  inquiry  the  manner  in  which  this  Department  trans- 
mitted funds  from  Richmond,  how  it  met  its  expenditures,  its  correspondence  with  its 
subordinates,  the  construction  and  equipment  of  vessels,  &c. 

A court  of  inquiry  is  a tribunal  whose  results  necessarily  shape  public  opinion,  and 
obvious  justice  demands  that  if  this  court  could  properly  enter  upon  such  investiga- 
tion at  ail,  the  parties  whose  conduct  is  to  be  inquired  of,  and  whose  fame  may  be  dis- 
paraged by  its  results,  should  have  notice  of  its  purpose  and  opportunity  for  explana- 
tion and  defense.  I will  not  dwell  upon  the  evils  which  may  follow  a precedent  thus 
established  of  subjecting  the  conduct  of  one  Department  of  the  Government  and  its 
officers  to  the  formal  inquiry  of  the  officers  of  a different  Department,  and  this,  too, 
without  notice  ; but  I cannot  refrain  from  saying  that,  in  my  judgment,  the  proceed- 
ing is  illegal  and  is  fraught  with  mischief  to  both  branches  of  the  military  service. 
The  naval  officer  in  command  afloat  at  New  Orleans  has  been  subjected  to  a court  of 
inquiry  formed  of  his  peers,  and  the  entire  operations  of  the  Department  connected 
with  the  defense  of  New  Orleans  have  been  investigated  by  a committee  of  Congress, 
and  the  testimony  in  both  cases  is  of  record.  I respectfully  submit  these  facts  to  your 
attention  as  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  and  Navy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

S.  R.  MALLORY, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


June  9,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  that  proper  notice 
may  be  given  to  the  court. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 

Examination  of  Nelson  Tift  resumed. 

Cross-examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell: 

Question.  Did  you  suppose  when  you  laid  the  keel  of  the  Mississippi, 
in  October,  1861,  that  it  would  take  so  long  a time  to  get  her  ready  ? 

Answer.  We  did  not  suppose  that  it  would  take  so  long  a time  to  get  her  ready. 
We  could  not  anticipate  the  many  difficulties  we  had  to  encounter.  We  thought  then 
that  we  could  get  her  ready  in  about  four  months. 

Question.  If  the  machinery  had  been  finished  in  proper  time  would 
the  other  work  on  the  vessel  have  been  ready  for  it? 

Answer.  The  wood  work  would  have  been  ready,  but  the  iron  plating  would  not 
have  been. 

By  the  Court  : 

Question.  Have  you  or  your  brother  ever  received  any  compensation 
from  the  Government  for  your  services  as  agents  for  the  construction  of 
the  Mississippi  ? 

Answer.  None  whatever;  nor  would  we  have  received  any  had  it  been  tendered. 

Question.  When  you  made  the  contract  for  machinery  with  J ackson 
& Co.,  how  did  the  number  of  workmen  they  could  usefully  employ  in 
their  shops  compare  with  the  number  in  Leeds  & Co.’s  establishment  ? 

Answer.  I do  not  know  the  relative  capacity  of  the  two  establishments  as  to  the 
number  of  workmen  they  could  employ  on  other  work.  Leeds  & Co.’s  was  certainly 
much  the  larger,  but  as  to  their  capacity  for  work  on  the  machinery  of  the  Mississippi, 
I think  they  were  equal. 

Upon  application  of  Messrs.  A.  F.  & N?  Tift  to  inspect  the  testimony  of 
Surg.  D.  W.  Brickell,  who  appeared  before  the  court  as  a witness,  no 
member  of  the  court  objecting  thereto,  it  was  ordered  that  the  applica- 
tion be  granted. 

It  was  then  ordered  that  H.  L.  Coll  be  employed  as  a clerk  to  aid  the 
judge-advocate,  his  compensation  to  begin  from  the  12th  instant. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow,  the  16th  instant. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  - 


631 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  16,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

It  was  ordered  by  the  court  that  the  following  communication,  ad- 
dressed to  the  president  of  the  court,  should  be  read  .to  the  court  and 
made  a part  of  the  record  : 

, , 1863. 

General  T.  C.  Hindman,  C.  S.  A., 

President  Court  of  Inquiry : 

Sir  : Having  perused,  by  the  courteous  permission  of  the  court,  the  testimony  given 
before  it  by  Dr.  D.  W.  Brickell,  and  found  that  his  testimony  is  calculated  to  create 
an  erroneous  judgment  as  to  our  conduct  in  the  construction  of  the  Mississippi  and  a 
judgment  adverse  to  our  skill,  energy,  good  faith,,  and  loyalty  as  agents  of  the  Govern- 
ment ; and  that  in  his  testimony  he  refers  particularly  to  the  Committee  of  Public 
Safety  of  New  Orleans,  whereof  he  was  a member,  and  to  Mr.  Pearce,  the  naval  con- 
structor, we  respectfully  ask  the  court,  in  justice  to  ourselves  thus  assailed : Ist,  to 
take  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Pearce,  the  naval  constructor  of  the  Mississippi,  as  to  build- 
ing and  launching  her  ; 2d,  the  testimony  of  Naval  Constructor  Murray,  the  builder 
of  the  Louisiana,  as  to  the  work  upon  and  the  launching  of  the  Mississippi ; and,  3d, 
to  receive  and  place  on  record  the  correspondence  between  ourselves  and  the  Com- 
mittee of  Public  Safety  of  New  Orleans,  referred  to  by  Dr.  Brickell,  touching  the  com- 
pletion and  launching  of  the  ship,  and  our  correspondence  with  Commanders  Mitchell 
and  Sinclair,  of  the  Navy,  Constructor  Pearce,  and  others,  relative  to  the  launching  of 
the  Mississippi,  together  with  our  correspondence  upon  the  same  subject  with  the  Navy- 
Department.  By  this  testimony  we  expect  to  show,  beyond  all  rational  question  or 
doubt,  not  only  that  Dr.  BrickelPs  testimony  as  to  our  action  is  erroneous,  and  that 
he  is  mistaken  both  in  his  facts  and  his  conclusions  in  relation  to  ourselves,  but  that 
the  course  we  adopted  and  pursued  had  the  sanction  and  approval  of  the  men  to  whom 
he  refers,  and  that  any  other  course  than  the  one  we  did  pursue  would  have  been 
wrong. 

NELSON  TIFT. 

A.  F.  TIFT. 

The  request  of  the  Messrs.  Tift  to  introduce  testimony,  as  indicated  in 
the  foregoing  letter,  being  considered  by  the  court,  it  was  ordered  that 
the  same  be  refused : 1st,  because  the  admission  of  such  testimony  would 
be  contrary  to  the  instructions  of  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 
set  forth  in  the  record  of  yesterday  j and,  2d,  because  the  proposed  testi- 
mony has  already  been  taken  before  a committee  of  Congress,  and  is 
likely  thereby  to  have  the  same  or  a greater  publicity  than  the  proceed- 
ings of  this  court. 

Lieut.  D.  P.  McOorkle,  C.  S.  Navy,  was  then  sworn  and  examined 
as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge- Advocate  : 

Question.  State  all  you  may  know  touching  the  defense,  capture,  and 
evacuation  of  Kew  Orleans  in  April,  1862. 

Answer.  I know  nothing  of  the  fight  at  the  forts,  except  that  I sent  a good  deal  of 
ordnance  to  them.  I was  the  ordnance  officer  of  the  naval  station.  I witnessed  the 
fight  at  Chalmette  from  the  city.  Two  vessels  were  at  first  turned  back.  I know 
nothing  of  the  evacuation  under  General  Lovell.  Between  3 and  4 p.  m.  of  April  24, 
being  anxious  to  mount  and  fight  some  guns  on  a floating  battery,  I applied  to  Gen- 
eral Lovell  for  powder ; he  gave  me  an  order  for  1,000  pounds.  The  order  was  re- 
turned with  the  indorsement  that  all  the  powder  had  been  sent  up  the  river.  I forget 
the  name  of  the  person  who  made  the  indorsement.  This  is  all  I kno-w  of  my  own 
knowledge  upon  the  subject. 

Cross-examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell: 

Question.  From  what  source  was  all  the  powder  procured  for  the  use 
of  the  Navy  while  you  were  the  naval  ordnance  officer  at  New  Orleans  t 

Answer.  From  General  Lovell. 


632  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

Question.  State  in  general  terms  your  opinion,  as  ordnance  officer,  of 
the  adequacy  of  the  means  at  your  disposal  for  x)urposes  of  co-operation 
with  the  land  forces  in  the  defense  of  New  Orleans. 

Answer.  We  had  everything  we  needed  except  powder.  The  guns  were  at  Jackson, 
Miss.,  on  their  way  to  New  Orleans.  The  carriages  had  been  made  in  the  city,  under 
my  direction,  and  were  ready  for  use.  We  had  to  get  our  powder  from  General  Lovell, 
as  we  would  not  compete  in  the  market  with  the  Army. 

It  was  ordered  by  the  court  that  the  judge-advocate  prepare  interro- 
gations to  be  propounded  to  A.  D.  Kelley, ‘summoned  as  a witness  before 
this  court,  but  unable  to  appear  on  account  of  his  health,  and  that  he 
give  notice  of  the  taking  of  such  deposition  to  Major-General  Lovell. 

The  court  then  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow,  the  17th 
instant. 

Eighmond,  Va.,  June  17,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Joseph  Stinson,  a citizen,  was  next  sworn  and  examined  as  a wit- 
ness. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  Were  you  in  New  Orleans  from  October,  1861,  to  May,  1862 1 
If  so,  state  your  occupation  during  that  time. 

Answer.  I was  there  during  that  time  keeping  a hotel. 

Question.  State  all  you  may  know,  of  your  own  knowledge,  concern- 
ing the  evacuation  of  New  Orleans.  Was  there  much  property  of  the 
Government  lost  that  might  have  been  saved  with  ordinary  efforts? 
And,  if  you  know,  state  what  sort  of  property  it  was. 

Answer.  A few  tents  were  left  on  Lafayette  Square  ; the  hells  sent  by  the  planters 
to  make  cannon  were  also  left,  and  some  heavy  cannon  with  gun-carriages  were  left, 
which  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

Question.  Do  you  know,  of  your  own  knowledge,  that  any  property 
of  the  Government  was  left  at  Gamp  Lewis  when  our  troops  evacuated 
the  city  ? 

Answer.  Only  from  hearsay. 

Question.  Did  you  see  General  Lovell  during  the  evacuation  ? If  so, 
state  whether  or  not  he  was  cool  and  self-possessed. 

Answer.  I saw  him  the  day  after  the  fleet  passed  the  forts.  I did  not  see  him  again. 
I went  to  see  him  about  removing  Government  property,  which  I understood  was  left 
at  Camp  Lewis.  Some  one  had  told  him  that  I had  reported  he  had  run  away.  He 
told  me  that  he  would  cut  the  throat  of  any  man  who  said  so.  His  mailner  was  excited 
then,  and  he  passed  right  on.  I do  not  know  where  he  went  to.  This  is  all  I know 
of  my  own  knowledge.  I have  spoken  of  other  things  on  various  occasions,  hut  spoken 
from  rumor. 

Question.  State,  if  you  know,  the  feeling  of  the  citizens  of  New  Or- 
leans when  the  forts  were  passed.  Was  it  for  resistance  or  for  a sur- 
render ? 

Answer.  I am  under  the  impression  that  a majority  were  for  resistance.  The  best  of 
the  French  held  out  very  well.  The  Germans  took  no  active  part  either  way. 

Question.  What  were  your  opportunities  for  forming  an  opinion  as  to 
the  feeling  of  the  citizens  ? Did  you  know  of  any  meetings  that  were 
held  counseling  resistance  ? If  so,  were  you  present  ? 

Answer.  My  opinion  was  formed  from  mixing  with  the  people.  I heard  of  such  a 
meeting,  but  it  fell  through.  I was  not  at  it. 


Chai».  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G33 


Question.  Do  you  know  of  any  persons  volunteering  with  the  Army 
to  defend  the  city  after  the  passage  of  the  forts  ? If  yea,  state  their 
number,  and  whether  or  not  they  were  able-bodied  men. 

Answer.  It  was  calculated  that  we  could  get  25,000  or  30,000  men,  including  those 
under  arms,  for  the  purpose  at  that  time.  Some  400  or  500  of  us  wore  ready  to  join 
the  Army  for  that  purpose,  and  applied  to  Governor  Moore  for  arms.  He  said  that  he 
had  none,  and  referred  us  to  General  Lovell ; but  we  could  not  see  General  Lovell,  and 
abandoned  our  effort.  A majority  of  the  men  refelred  to  by  me  were  too  old  to  go 
into  camp,  but  could  have  done  good  fighting.  I do  not  know  the  number  of  men 
under  arms. 

Question.  Was  there  much  private  property  destroyed  or  left  in  the 
city  that  would  have  been  valuable  for  military  uses  ? 

Answer.  I saw  a pile  of  corn  burned  and  some  sugar  and  molasses.  This  property 
might  have  been  saved  if  the  steamboats  that  were  at  the  levee  could  have  been  used 
to  transport  it;  but  the  boats  were  made  ready  to  leave  by  their  owners  as  soon  as 
they  knew  the  forts  had  been  passed. 

Cross-examination  by  Maj.  G-en.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Question.  Did  the  heavy  guns  that  you  saw  lying  at  the  custom-house 
belong  to  the  Army  or  the  Navy 

Answer.  I do  not  know. 

Question.  Did  not  General  Lovell  stop  on  the  city  hall  steps  directly 
after  his  conversation  with  you  and  address  the  people  for  some  time, 
attempting  to  aUay  their  excitement  ? 

Answer.  My  impression  is  that  he  did,  though  I cannot  say  whether  it  was  before  or 
after  our  conversation.  I was  too  far  off”  to  hear  or  see  well.  The  crowd  was  very 
great. 

Question.  On  the  morning  after  the  day  in  which  you  say  400  or  500 
of  your  crowd  were  willing  to  fight,  did  not  General  Loveil  publish  an 
order  and  appeal  in  all  the  papers  of  the  city  calling  for  1,000  men  to 
board  the  enemy^s  vessels  Did  any  of  that  crowd  volunteer  for  that 
service  that  you  are  aware  of? 

Answer.  I did  not,  nor  did  any  of  our  crowd  that  I know  of. 

Question.  You  say  that  you  think  25,000  or  30,000  men  could  have  been 
obtained  in  New  Orleans  to  defend  it ; did  not  General  Lovell,  through 
Governor  Moore,  caU  for  10,000  men  from  the  city  at  least  six  weeks 
before  the  fall  of  New  Orleans  ? 

Answer.  I do  not  recollect. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  18,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge-advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell. 

F.  W.  C.  Cooke,  a citizen,  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  the  Judge -Advocate  : 

Question.  Were  you  a resident  of  New  Orleans  from  October,  1861,  to 
May,  1862  ? If  so,  what  was  your  occupation  ? 

Answer.  I was,  and,  with  my  brother,  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  small-arms.  I 
have  lived  in  New  Orleans  for  seventeen  years. 

Question.  Was  your  machinery  removed  from  the  city  at  the  time  of 
its  capture,  in  April,  1862  ? If  so,  was  it  done  in  pursuance  of  orders 
from  or  with  the  assistance  of  General  Lovell  1 

Answer.  I saved  all  the  machinery  connected  with  the  armory,  except  the  motive 
power.  I did  not  sav.e  all  the  work.  I left  130  tons  of  wrought  iron,  which  I could 


634  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

not  bring  away.  We  lost  the  tools  and  machinery  of  the  machine  shop.  Afterwards, 
on  or  about  April  29,  I received  a schooner  laden  with  steel  and  iron.  At  Madison- 
ville  the  Yankee  sentinel  permitted  her  to  pass  through  the  canal  for  $20.  On  Thurs- 
day morning,  April  24,  1862,  at  11  o’clock.  Major  Smith  sent  for  me,  and  told  me  the 
fleet  had  passed  the  forts,  and  to  save  what  I could.  I asked  him  to  put  it  down  in 
writing,  which  he  did ; the  paper  I have  not  here  with  me.  It  was  to  the  effect  that, 
by  the  wish  and  consent  of  the  general  commanding,  Cooke  & Brother  were  requested 
to  remove  their  machinery  from  New  Orleans.  After  setting  the  men  to  work  I sought 
for  General  or  Colonel  Lovell  to  get  an  order  for  a steamboat ; the  order  was  received 
from  Colonel  Lovell  the  same  day.  In  obedience  to  it  I took  and  used  the  steamer  News  - 
boy,  but  had  to  pay  $2,600  for  freightage.  On  the  morning  of  the  25th,  not  finding 
the  enemy  at  the  city,  and  not  being  able  to  find  anyone  to  give  me  an  order  for  another 
steamer,  I wrote  one  myself  and  signed  General  Lovell’s  name  to  it,  per  my  own  name, 
which  I subsequently  reported  to  General  Lovell  at  Camp  Moore.  That  boat  left  the 
wharf  about  12  o’clock  that  day.  While  at  Camp  Moore  General  Lovell  gave  me  an- 
other order  to  the  effect  that  steamboat  men  and  railroad  agents  should  give  every 
facility  for  removing  the  machinery  throughout  the  country  after  we  had  brought  it 
from  New  Orleans.  This  order  was  given  on  April  28. 

Question.  When  you  applied  to  Colonel  Lovell  for  an  order  for  the 
steamboat  had  you  any  difficulty  in  obtaining  it,  and  did  you  then  con- 
sider one  steamboat  sufficient  for  the  removal  of  your  machinery? 

Answer.  I only  asked  for  one  steamer.  At  first  Colonel  Lovell  told  me  he  could  not 
give  me  an  order,  but  upon  my  telling  him  that  I had  taken  down  my  machinery  in 
obedience  to  orders,  he  gave  me  an  order. 

Question.  After  getting  the  order  did  you  have  difficulties  in  obtaining 
and  using  the  steamboat?  If  yea,  state  what  those  difficulties  were. 

Answer.  I got  the  steamboat  without  trouble,  but  there  was  no  one  on  board  but  the 
captain.  I had  to  furnish  the  crew,  engineers,  and  pilot.  There  was  a general  stam- 
pede among  aU  the  steamboat-men,  as  far  as  came  under  my  observation. 

Question.  After  the  bombardment  commenced  why  did  you  not  take 
earlier  measures  for  the  removal  of  your  stock  and  machinery  from  the 
eity? 

Answer.  Because  Major  Smith  had  promised  me  forty-eight  hours’  notice  of  the  time 
when  the  removal  should  be  made.  Messrs.  Leeds  & Co.  had  applied  with  me  for 
permission  to  remove  our  shops  some  six  weeks  before  the  city  fell.  Major  Smith, 
whom  we  saw,  said  he  would  see  General  Lovell.  After  leaving  me  in  his  office  a short 
time,  he  returned  and  said  that  the  removal  of  our  establishment  would  create  too 
much  excitement,  but  said  he  would  give  us  forty  eight  hours’  notice,  the  time  in  which 
I told  him  I could  remove  my  works,  &c. 

Question.  State  all  you  may  know  touching  the  testing  of  a heavy 
gun  made  by  Leeds  & Oo. 

Answer.  The  gun  was  an  8-inch  columbiad,  and  when  tested  it  was  placed  on  the 
levee  at  the  end  of  the  shell  road,  at  an  elevation  of  from  15  to  20  degrees,  the  breach 
placed  against  heavy  piling  fastened  by  strong  horizontal  timber,  thus  depriving  it 

of * ; it  burst,  I think,  about  the  seventy-sixth  charge.  I do  not  remember  the 

name  of  the -officer  who  was  superintending  the  test ; he  was  a Frenchman,  belonging 
to  an  artillery  company  from  the  city.  I was  present  at  intervals  during  the  day  when 
the  gun  was  tested. 

Question.  State  all  you  know  concerning  the  evacuation  of  Kew 
Orleans. 

Answer.  There  seemed  to  be  a decided  panic  in  the  city.  I was  only  enabled  to 
obtain  wagons  and  teams  to  remove  my  machinery  by  seizure  made  by  Deputy  Pro- 
vost-Marshal McCann,  who  with  such  force  as  I could  furnish  was  engaged  all  of 
Thursday  in  seizing  teams.  While  removing  the  machinery,  I delivered  to  Major 
Smith,  on  his  order,  200  rifles,  retaining  200  for  the  use  of  my  hands.  There  were 
several  steamboats  at  the  levee  when  I went  to  procure  one,  but  they  had  been  deserted 
by  the  crew  and  all  the  officers  but  the  captains.  Of  three  of  these  boats  one  fell 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  another  was  burned,  and  the  third  went  up  the  Ouachita 
River.  As  I was  leaving  on  the  boat  on  Friday  evening,  April  25,  we  were  hailed  by 
some  Irishwomen  at  the  Marine  Hospital,  with  guns  in  their  hands ; we  stopped  and 


The  blank  is  in  the  original. 


Chap.  XVI.  ] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


631. 

got  tlie  guns,  some  ten  or  twelve  iu  number.  I do  not  know  whether  there  were  others 
there.  I met  a good  many  soldiers  the  evening  I left ; they  were  very  greatly  disor- 
dered and  moving  in  squads.  I was  closely  occupied  at  work  in  removing  my  ma- 
chinery after  the  passage  of  the  forts,  and  did  not  see  a great  deal.  This  is  about  all 
I can  remember  on  this  subject.  When  I left  the  wildest  confusion  prevailed  upon 
the  levee  ; men,  women,  and  children  were  removing  sugar  and  molasses  up  the  streets 
to  their  houses. 

Question.  In  the  foregoing  testimony  have  you  omitted  any  material 
fact  bearing  upon  the  fall  of  New  Orleans  or  the  loss  of  property  dur- 
ing the  evacuation  % 

Answer.  I recollect  nothing  more.  I have  stated  about  all  I know  of  my  own 
knowledge. 

Cross-examination  by  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell: 

Question.  Do  you  know  whether  or  not  many  of  the  stores  of  which 
you  speak  as  being  in  the  city  on  April  25,  the  day  you  left,  were  not 
subsequently  brought  out  on  railroads  and  by  the  lake  by  Majors  James, 
Yen  able,  and  others'? 

Answer.  They  might  or  might  not  have  been  saved.  I do  not  know. 

% 

The  deposition  of  Gapt.  E.  Powell,  assistant  quartermaster,  duly  at- 
tested, was  then  offered  in  evidence  by  General  Lovell,  it  being  within 
the  knowledge  of  the  court  that  the  witness  had  been  summoned  before 
the  court  at  Vicksburg,  and  in  obedience  to  its  summons  had  reached 
Jackson,  Miss.,  when  he  was  ordered  to  return  to  his  post  at  Natchez, 
by  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  who  informed  the  court  that  the 
services  of  Captain  Powell  could  not  be  spared  at  that  time,  and  since 
then  the  state  of  affairs  being  such  in  Mississippi  that  the  witness^  at- 
tendance could  not  be  procured,  although  all  proper  efforts  had  been 
made  to  that  end. 

To  the  reading  of  this  deposition  the  judge- advocate  objected,  because 
depositions  of  officers  in  the  line  or  staff'  of  the  Army  are  not  admissi- 
ble as  evidence  before  courts  of  inquiry. 

The  court  having  considered  the  objection,  decided  that  under  the 
circumstances  it  should  be  received. 

By  Major-General  Lovell: 

Question.  What  position  did  you  hold  before  and  at  the  evacuation 
of  New  Orleans,  in  April,  1862'? 

Answer.  I was  an  assistant  quartermaster  in  tbe  C.  S.  Army,  with  tbe  rank  of  cap- 
tain, and  was  in  charge  of  the  clothing,  camp  and  garrison  bureau,  in  the  city  of  New 
Orleans. 

Question.  What  amount  of  public  property  in  your  charge  was  saved 
at  that  evacuation  and  what  was  its  estimated  value  ? 

Answer.  I saved  the  whole  of  the  public  property  in  my  charge,  with  the  exception 
of  a few  castings,  and  would  have  saved  them  also  if  Major  Winnemore,  assistant  quar- 
termaster, had  not  taken  my  means  of  transportation  from  me.  I am  unable  to  state 
the  value  of  the  property  saved,  my  books  and  papers  having  been  removed  from  here 
(Natchez)  for  safety,  and  I cannot  refer  to  them.  I also  saved  all  my  books,  papers, 
and  funds  at  New  Orleans;  a considerable  quantity  of  stores,  &c.,  was  stolen  from  the 
cars  while  in  transitu  from  New  Orleans  to  Camp  Moore  and  above. 

Question.  Was  there  any  other  property  of  the  same  kind  belonging 
to  the  State  of  Louisiana  or  other  fiarties  brought  out  that  was  turned 
over  to  you ; if  so,  what  was  the  value  of  the  same  as  estimated  by  you? 

Answer.  There  was  no  other  property  turned  over  to  me  that  was  brought  out  of 
New  Orleans  belonging  to  the  State  of  Louisiana  or  others,  but  I picked  up  a portion  of 
the  clothing,  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  which  I believe  belonged  to  the  State  of 
Louisiana,  and  for  which  I gave  credit  on  my  papers,  together  with  a large  quantity 
of  quartermasters  stores,  for  which  I believe  Major  Winnemore,  assistant  quarter- 
master, was  responsible,  the  whole  amounting  to  about  $125,000. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow. 


636  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap,  xvl 

Eichmond,  Va.,  June  20,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court,  the  judge- advocate,  and  Maj. 
Gen.  M.  Lovell. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

Lieut.  A.  J.  Toutant  was  then  sworn  and  examined  as  a witness. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  position  did  you  hold  in  New  Orleans  from  October, 
1861,  to  May,  1862 

Answer.  I held  the  position  of  aide-de  camp  to  Major-General  Lovell. 

Question.  What  were  your  opportunities  for  knowing  the  routine 
business  habits  of  General  Lovell  in  New  Orleans?  If  you  know,  state 
what  they  were. 

Answer.  I was  with  General  Lovell  more  regularly  than  any  of  his  staff  officers,  not 
only  in  the  office,  but  also  in  all  outdoor  duty.  I,  in  fact,  accompanied  him  on  all 
his  tours  of  inspection  out  of  town,  which  gave  me  full  opportunities  to  judge  of  his 
business  habits.  He  was  industrious,  attentive,  punctual,  and  energetic  in  dispatch- 
ing all  business  connected  with  his  department. 

Question.  Was  he  ever  absent  from  his  office  or  from  duty  for  any 
cause  whatever  a single  day  while  in  command  at  New  Orleans  ? 

Answer.  He  was  never  absent  from  his  office  while  in  command  at  New  Orleans  ex- 
cept on  duty,  which  duties  consisted  in  the  inspection  of  camps,  fortifications,  also 
founderies  and  all  other  Government  works  about  the  city,  also  a thorough  inspection 
of  forts  and  defenses  commanding  the  different  entrances  to  it.  On  these  occasions  he 
took  particular  pains  to  examine  thoroughly  the  arms,  ammunition,  and  clothing  of 
the  garrison,  and  pointed  out,  if  any,  the  deficiencies  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
post.  The  visit  to  the  founderies,  &c.,  in  the  city  was  generally  done  after  dinner,  say 
4 p.  m.,  when  the  general  could  more  easily  be  spared  from  the  office.  His  time  then 
was  entirely  devoted  to  the  investigation  and  to  the  urging  of  the  completion  of  pub- 
lic works ; this  lasted  until  dark,  when  he  again  returned  to  the  office  to  finish  his  cor- 
respondence or  attend  to  some  other  business  matters,  which  invariably  kept  him  there 
until  10  p.  m.  and  often  later.  The  different  officers  of  the  staff  were  also  required  to 
be  in  their  respective  offices  until  that  hour. 

Question.  Did  you  have  occasion  to  observe  General  Lovell  during  the 
engagement  of  Fort  Jackson,  when  the  enemy’s  fleet  passed,  and  at  vari- 
ous times  during  the  evacuation  ? If  so,  state  what  was  his  demeanor 
as  to  calmness,  coolness,  and  decision. 

Answer.  As  on  almost  all  other  occasions,  I accompanied  the  general  to  the  forts 
below  the  city.  He  left  New  Orleans  the  evening  previous  to  the  passage  of  the  ene- 
my’s gunboats  and  arrived  there  probably  half  an  hour  before  the  attempt  was  made. 
He  had  gone  down  for  the  express  purpose  of  trying  to  have  the  position  of  the  Louis- 
iana changed ; also  to  verify  for  himself  the  amount  of  damage  done  to  Fort  Jackson 
by  the  enemy’s  shells.  We  observed,  as  we  arrived,  that  the  fort  was  being  slowly 
shelled  by  the  enemy’s  mortar  fleet,  when  all  of  a sudden  the  number  seemed  to  increase, 
and  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  both  ojjened  fire.  It  was  not  until  one  of  the  Fed- 
eral vessels,  the  Varuna,  had  got  close  by  us  that  General  Lovell  ordered  the  captain 
of  the  packet  boat  we  were  on,  the  Doublon,  to  steam  up  the  river  as  fast  as  possible, 
so  as  to  get  out  of  the  reach  of  the  gunboat  that  was  pursuing  us.  While  uuder  the 
fire  of  that  boat,  which  was  gaining  on  us.  Captain  Kenuon  engaged  and  sunk  her. 
General  Lovell  was  coolly  delivering  orders  to  some  of  the  river-defense  fleet,  which, 
to  his  great  contempt,  seemed  to  bo  getting  out  of  the  enemy’s  way.  He  ordered  them 
to  go  back  and  fight  him.  After  reaching  about  30  miles  from  the  city,  the  general, 
knowing  that  by  taking  a carriage  he  could  get  to  the  city  sooner,  concluded  to  pro- 
ceed by  land ; his  presence  he  knew  would  be  needed  there  as  soon  as  possible  during 
the  excitement  of  this  sad  news.  I continued  with  some  of  the  other  members  of  the 
staff  on  the  boat,  again  joining  the  general  that  afternoon.  I found  him  engaged  in 
giving  orders  in  reference  to  the  removal  of  Government  property;  also  in  giving  orders 
for  what  defense  could  be  made  at  Chalmette  in  case  the  enemy  should  make  his  appear- 
ance. I noticed  no  change  in  his  manner,  decision,  or  coolness.  I was  with  him  pretty 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


637 


near  the  whole  of  the  next  day  (April  20),  with  the  only  exce])tiou  of  the  moments  that  I 
was  conveying  his  orders.  And  again  I must  say  he  gave  the  orders  of  1 he  evacuation 
with  the  same  coolness,  determination,  and  precision  ihat  characterized  his  demeanor 
during  the  whole  time.  When  it  was  found  that  the  fortifications  at  Chalmette  could 
not  check  the  enemy’s  fleet,  orders  were  immediately  given  by  him  to  the  different 
commands  to  proceed  to  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad,  where  the  cars  were 
held  in  readiness  to  remove  them  from  the  city  in  case  of  need.  Due  notice  was  also 
given  to  the  boats  remaining  in  the  river  and  employed  in  removing  Government 
property,  he  himself  leaving  the  city  in  the  last  train.  General  Lovell  subsequently 
returned  to  the  city  on  the  28th,  but  I did  not  accompany  him. 

Major-General  Lovell  was  then  recalled  and  examined. 

By  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  In  yonr  testimony  yon  speak  of  many  deficiencies  in  De- 
partment No.  1 which  are  not  mentioned  in  your  correspondence  with 
the  War  Department.  Wh^"  were  you  silent  as  to  these  points  ? 

Answer.  I did  not  particularize  all  the  deficiencies  in  my  letters  to  the  War  Depart- 
ment because  before  I assumed  command,  and  while  in  Richmond,  I learned  from  con- 
versations with  the  Secretary  of  War  and  heads  of  bureaus,  in  substance,  that,  as  the 
Department  and  its  various  bureaus  had  been  but  lately  set  on  foot,  there  were  in 
almost  all  the  kinds  of  material  required  for  war  purposes  many  deficiencies,  not  only 
in  the  materials,  but  in  the  mechanical  means  and  ai)pliauces  for  erecting  them ; and 
I was  informed  that  my  predecessor  had  made  persistent  appeals  for  things  which  as 
yet  the  Department  had  no  means  of  furnishing,  which  was  a source  of  some  annoy- 
ance, and  I stated  that  I should  make  the  most  of  the  means  at  my  disposal,  without 
bothering  the  Department  about  deficiencies  in  which  I knew  they  could  not  help  me. 
When,  therefore,  I ascertained  these  deficiencies  I set  to  work  as  rapidly  as  x)ossible 
to  supply  them,  and  was  in  a fair  way  to  make  my  department  self-sustaining  when 
New  Orleans  fell,  both  as  to  guns,  powder,  munitions  of  war,  and  suxoplies  of  all  kinds. 

By  the  Court  : 

Question.  Was  not  the  impression  created  upon  the  pubic  mind  that 
you  had  at  New  Orleans  shortly  before  its  fall  a force  of  20,000  or  25,000 
men  If  so,  state,  if  you  can,  by  whom  it  was  created  and  for  what 
purpose. 

Answer.  In  February,  1862,  Governor  Moore  and  his  major-general  of  militia,  Lewis, 
proposed  a grand  turn-out  of  all  the  militia  in  the  city,  saying  that  they  could  x)arade 
about  25,000  men,  and  asked  my  opinion  as  to  the  policy  of  such  a display.  I asked 
how  many  of  them  could  be  furnished  with  arms  of  any  description,  even  pistols  and 
sabers,  to  which  they  replied  about  5,000  or  6,000.  I then  objected  strongly  to  parad- 
ing 18,000  or  20,000  men  without  a weapon  as  an  uncalled-for  display  of  weakness. 
They  replied  that  the  papers,  in  giving  an  account  of  it,  need  not  speak  of  their  arms 
and'equipment,  but  would  mention  their  numbers.  I said  we  would  only  deceive  our 
own  people,  as  the  enemy  had,  without  a doubt,  spies  among  us,  who  would  give  him 
correct  information.  A parade  was,  nevertheless,  made  of  25,000  or  26,000  men,  and 
the  adjutant-general  of  Louisiana,  at  my  request,  furnished  me  a return  of  all  those  in 
any  manner  armed,  who  numbered  about  6,000  men.  This  was  before  the  troops  were 
sent  to  Beauregard.  The  next  morning  all  the  papers  gave  glowing  accounts  of  the 
magnificent  parade  of  25,000  men  that  occurred  on  the  day  previous.  This  was  doubt- 
less the  origin  of  the  impression.  Had  I had  25,000  additional  infantry  I should  have 
still  evacuated  the  city,  as  numbers  would  only  have  added  to  the  slaughter.  They 
could  have  inflicted  no  damage  to  gunboats  anchored  off  the  city,  while  they  them- 
selves would  have  been  within  point-blank  range. 

General  Lovell  then  submitted  to  the  court  the  following  copies  of 
letters  from  the  official  letter-book  and  telegram-book  of  Department 
No.  1,  already  in  evidence,  viz  : A letter  from  Colonel  Gorgas,  Chief  of 
Ordnance,  on  the  subject  of  establishing  a laboratory  at  New  Orleans, 
and  disapproving  the  same ; appended  as  document  No.  26.  A letter  to 
Gov.  T.  O.  Moore,  suggesting  the  seizure  and  fitting  up  of  two  ocean 
steamers  for  the  defense  of  New  Orleans ; appended  as  document  No. 
27.  A letter  to  Gov.  T.  O.  Moore,  calling  for  militia  to  the  number  of 
10,000  men  for  defense  j appended  as  document  No.  28.  Two  letters 
from  General  E.  E.  Lee,  relative  to  the  evacuation  of  New  Orleans  by 


638  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

General  Lovell  and  his  occupation  of  Vicksburg;  appended  as  docu- 
ments Nos.  29  and  30.  A telegram  and  his  reply  to  Governor  Pettus, 
of  Mississippi,  relative  to  sending  heavy  guns  to  Vicksburg ; appended 
as  document  No.  31.  A letter  of  General  Eandolph,  Secretary  of  War, 
omitted  in  the  printed  correspondence  relative  to  New  Orleans;  ap- 
pended as  document  No.  32. 

The  said  letters  and  telegrams  were  admitted  by  the  judge-advocate 
to  be  correct  copies  and  were  read  to  the  court. 

The  deposition  of  W.  L.  Lanier  was  then  read  to  the  court. 

By  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell  : 

Question.  What  position  did  you  hold  in  New  Orleans  at  and  for  some 
months  prior  to  its  evacuation,  in  April,  1862  ? 

Answer.  I was  post  commissary. 

Question.  Did  you,  under  orders  of  General  Lovell,  make  an  examina- 
tion and  estimate,  a short  time  before  the  evacuation,  of  the  amount  of 
provisions  in  the  city  at  that  time  available  for  the  support  of  the  pop- 
ulation ? If  so,  please  state  how  many  days’  provisions  were  on  hand 
at  the  time  of  the  evacuation. 

Answer.  I was  ordered  by  General  Lovell  to  ascertain,  as  near  as  possible,  the  amount 
of  provisions  in  the  city  not  belonging  to  the  Government  for  the  support  of  the  pop- 
ulation. I did  so,  and  reported  supplies  for  from  sixteen  to  twenty  days’  subsistence. 

Question.  Was  the  great  bulk  of  the  commissary  stores  in  your  charge 
saved  at  the  time  of  the  evacuation  Did  any  amount  thereof  that 
was  fit  for  issue  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy?  Were  any  such  de- 
stroyed ? 

Answer.  It  was.  No  stores  fit  for  issue  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  as  all  sound  . 
stores  left  in  the  city,  by  order  of  General  Smith,  during  the  absence  of  General  Lovell 
at  Fort  Jackson,  the  day  previous  to  the  evacuation,  were  turned  over  to  the  Com- 
mittee of  Safety,  for  sale  to  the  citizens,  proceeds  of  which  to  be  placed  to  the  credit  of 
the  Government,  except  fifty  hogsheads  of  sugar,  which  had  been  sent  to  the  New 
Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad  depot  some  days  before  the  evacuation,  for  shipment 
to  Summit,  Miss.,  where  General  Lovell  had  ordered  me  to  establish  a depot  for  stores 
some  time  i^revious.  This  sugar,  on  the  evening  of  the  evacuation,  as  I learn,  was 
either  destroyed  or  taken  by  the  mob  from  said  depot. 

Cross-examination  by  the  Judge-Advocate  : 

Question.  Were  any  preparations  made  by  you,  under  orders  of  Gen- 
eral Lovell,  for  supplying  the  people  of  New  Orleans  with  provisions  in 
the  event  of  a siege? 

Answer.  None  that  I remember. 

Question.  Were  you  present  during  the  evacuation  of  New  Orleans? 

If  so,  state  the  manner  in  which  it  was  conducted;  and  if  you  saw 
General  Lovell  during  that  period  state  whether  or  not  he  was  self- 
possessed  and  seemingly  equal  to  the  emergency. 

Answer.  I was  in  the  3ity  until  about  2 o’clock  of  the  day  of  the  evacuation.  I did 
not  see  General  Lovell  more  than  once  during  the  day,  and  then  only  a very  short 
time.  He  seemed  to  be  a good  deal  excited. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  12  m.  the  24th  instant. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  June  24,  1863 — 12  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court  and  the  judge-advocate. 

To  enable  the  judge-advocate  to  prepare  a summary  of  the  evidence 
the  court  adjourned  until  11  a.  m.  the  28th  instant. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


639 


Kichmond,  Va.,  June  28,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court  and  the  judge-advocate. 

The  evidence  adduced  in  this  investigation  was  then  read  over  to  the 
court  by  the  judge-advocate. 

The  court  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  to-morrow. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  29,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  deliberated  upon  the  evidence  in  this  case. 

The  court  received  notice  from  the  Adjutant-General  (General  S. 
Cooper)  to  continue  in  session  until  the  deposition  of  A.  D.  Kelley 
arrived. 

Tho  court  then  adjourned  to  meet  at  11  a.  m.  July  9,  1863. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  July  9,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  court  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present,  all  the  members  of  the  court  and  the  judge-advocate. 

The  deposition  of  A.  D.  Kelley  is  hereto  appended,  and  marked  docu- 
ment A.* 

The  court,  having  maturely  considered  the  evidenced  adduced,  sub- 
mits the  following  report  of  facts  and  opinion  thereon.  (Eeport  of  the 
following  furnished  Secretary  of  State  October  17,  1863:) 

REPORT  OF  FACTS. 

Department  Ko.l  is  intersected  by  numerous  streams,  which  in  high 
water  afford  ten  or  twelve  different  approaches  to  Kew  Orleans,  and 
render  its  defense  difficult  without  a strong  naval  force.  When  General 
Lovell  assumed  command  of  the  department,  on  October  18,  1861,  but 
little  had  been  done  in  constructing  the  land  defenses  of  Kew  Orleans. 
Two  lines  of  intrenchments  had  been  laid  off,  but  were  wholly  incom- 
plete, without  platforms,  guns,  magazines,  ammunition,  and  all  neces- 
sary implements  and  equipments.  Ports  Jackson,  Saint  Philip.  Pike,. 
Macomb,  and  Livingston  were  in'  great  need  of  repair,  the  two  first 
named  in  better  condition  than  the  others,  but  all  of  them  deficient  in 
armament,  requiring  an  increase  in  the  number  and  caliber  of  their  guns. 
There  was  also  needed  at  these  works  ammunition  and  all  the  imple- 
ments necessary  to  the  use  of  heavy  guns.  The  keels  of  two  iron-clad 
gunboats  had  been  recently  laid.  Under  the  direction  of  General  Lov- 
ell the  forts  mentioned  were  strengthened  and  the  number  and  caliber 
of  guns  composing  their  armament  increased.  An  exterior  line  passing 
through  the  forts,  with  earthworks  to  defend  the  various  water  approaches, 
and  an  interior  line,  embracing  Kew  Orleans  and  Algiers,  designed  chiefly 
to  repel  attacks  by  land,  were  pressed  to  completion.  The  best  guns  that 
could  be  had  were  mounted  upon  these  lines,  magazines  constructed,  and 
ammunition  and  all  the  necessary  implements  supplied.  In  a word, 
everything  was  done  that  could  be  to  render  them  first-class  works  of 
their  kind.  The  various  water  approaches  were  obstructed  by  piling, 
&c.,  and  launches  prepared  and  put  in  service  to  protect  several  of  them 
from  navigation  by  the  enemy. 

An  immense  raft  was  constructed  in  December,  1861,  to  serve  as  an 
obstruction  in  the  Mississippi  Eiver  between  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint 
Philip,  but  owing  to  the  strong  current  of  that  river  in  its  highest  stages 
and  the  great  accumulation  of  drift  it  was  swept  away  in  the  latter  part 

Found  as  document  No.  2. 


€40  OPEEATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

of  February  following.  From  its  fragments  and  such  other  material 
as  could  be  obtained  it  was  attempted,  but  without  success,  to  make 
auotlier  effecthal  obstruction. 

Mills  were  erected  for  the  manufacture  of  powder,  considerable  quan- 
tities of  which  article  were  turned  out,  and  much  that  had  been  received 
at  New  Orleans  in  a damaged  condition  was  reworked  and  made  lit  for 
use.  At  the  time  of  the  fall  of  the  city  more  than  one  establishment 
was  ready  for  the  manufacture  of  heavy  guns,  which  until  then  had 
been  impracticable  for  the  want  of  suitable  furnaces. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  the  department  when  the  enemy,  on  April 
18,  1802,  opened  fire  upon  Fort  Jackson  from  a fleet  of  twenty-one  mor- 
tar boats.  The  bombardment  continued,  with  but  slight  intermission, 
until  the  morning  of  April  24,  when,  between  3 and  4 o’clock,  the  enemy’s 
vessels  of  war  and  gunboats  succeeded  in  passing  the  forts.  One  of  his 
vessels  was  sunk  j his  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  is  not  known.  Our 
loss  in  the  fight  and  during  the  bombardment  did  not  exceed,  at  the 
forts,  more  than  50  in  killed  and  wounded.  Owing  to  the  high  stage  of 
water,  the  river  being  higher  than  it  had  been  before  for  twenty-five 
years,  the  efforts  to  employ  sharpshooters  outside  the  forts  proved 
ineffectual.  In  the  forts  the  water  rose  to  a height  of  from  12  to  18 
inches,  causing  great  discomfort  to  the  garrisons,  and  requiring  tbe  men 
in  Fort  Jackson  to  work  day  and  night  to  prevent  the  magazines  from 
being  flooded.  The  damage  done  by  the  enemy  had  also  to  be  rei)aired 
under  heavy  and  incessant  fire,  which  added  much  to  the  suffering  of 
the  men.  While  the  bombardment  continued,  and  when  the  enemy  were 
making  the  passage  of  the  forts,  with  a fleet  consisting  of  five  steam 
sloops  of  war  and  eight  or  nine  gunboats,  the  men  fought  with  great 
courage  and  determination  j but  at  midnight  on  April  27  it  was  discov- 
ered that  they  were  in  open  mutiny  at  Fort  Jackson.  This  mutinous 
spirit  pervaded  the  entire  garrison  at  Fort  Jackson,  except  the  Saint 
Mary’s  Cannoneers.  It  was  also  soon  discovered  that  the  garrison  of 
Fort  Saint  Philip  was  similarly  affected.  The  dfiicers,  however,  by  their 
coolness  managed  to  hold  the  men  in  check  until  the  morning  of  April 
28,  when  the  forts  were  surrendered  to  the  enemy  upon  liberal  terms. 
For. this  strange  revolt  no  cause  could  be  ascertained.  A large  part  of 
the  enemy’s  fleet,  after  passing  the  forts,  proceeded  ui>  the  river.  At 
Chalmette  and  from  the  opposite  bank  its  farther  advance  was  resisted 
by  two  batteries  of  six  guns  each,  until  their  ammunition  was  exhausted, 
but  with  little  or  no  effect,  the  enemy  having  nearly  as  many  vessels  of 
war  and  gunboats  as  we  had  guns  in  position  at  that  point.  More  than 
half  of  the  ammunition  designed  for  these  batteries  had  been  given  to 
the  iron-clad  steamer  Louisiana.  Six  vessels  of  the  river-defense  fleet 
were  at  the  forts  at  the  time  they  were  passed,  but  rendered  no  assist- 
ance in  checking  the  enemy. 

To  meet  this  attack  it  is  shown  that  General  Lovell’s  plan  was  to 
concentrate  as  many  heavy  guns  as  possible  at  the  forts,  and  there,  by 
obstructions,  to  detain  the  enemy’s  vessels  under  their  fire,  as  w^ell  as  the 
fire  of  such  defenses  afloat  as  we  could  bring  to  bear. 

The  country  between  the  forts  and  New  Orleans  is  of  a character  most 
unfavorable  for  the  construction  of  batteries,  the  banks  of  the  river  in 
its  highest  stages  being  below  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  only  pro- 
tected from  inundation  by  levees,  which  might  easily  be  destroyed  by 
an  enemy.  It  also  shows  that  there  were  no  suitable  guns  in  depart- 
ment No".  1 for  such  batteries,  and  no  infantry  forces  adequate  for  their 
protection  against  a land  attack. 

On  the  morning  of  April  25  several  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  anchored 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G41 


off  New  Orleans,  about  wliicli  time  General  Lovell  gave  ii])  tlie  city  to 
tbe  control  of  the  miihicipal  authorities,  by  whom,  on  Ai)ril  29,  it  was 
surrendered  to  the  enemy. 

It  is  shown  that  but  little  or  no  provision  was  made  for  an  evacuation 
before  the  passage  of  the  forts.  After  that  event  the  work  of  removing 
supplies  was  prosecuted  with  energy,  and  a vast  amount  of  [)roperty 
belonging  to  the  Confederate  and  State  Governments,  as  well  as  that  of 
private  individuals,  was  saved. 

Forts  Like  and  Macomb  were  evacuated  by  the  order  of  Colonel 
Fuller,  and  without  the  knowledge  or  approval  of  General  Lovell,  on 
the  morning  of  April  27.  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  commanding  the 
forces  at  the  McGehee  and  Chalmette  lines,  numbering  about  1,000  in- 
fantry an<l  five  companies  of  artillery,  received  no  orders  as  to  their 
removal,  although  he  and  General  Lovell  were  together  on  the  afternoon 
of  April  24.  The  troops  withdrawn  from  New  Orleans  by  General 
Lovell  did  not  exceed  4,000  in  number,  and,  with  slight  exceptions,  were 
raw  levies,  belonging  to  the  militia  and  organizations  for  local  defense. 
A large  proportion  of  this  force  was  unfitted  for  service  in  the  field.  In 
their  movement  from  the  city  there  was  no  greater  confusion  manifested 
than  is  usual  among  such  bodies  of  men.  The  best  troops  in  depart- 
ment No.  1 had  been  sent  to  re-enforce  General  A.  S.  Johnston  after  the 
fall  of  Fort  Donelson.  General  Lovell  had  also  sent  many  supiilies 
from  his  department  to  the  army  of  that  general.  Between  General 
Lovell  and  the  naval  officers  on  duty  in  Department  No.  1 there  existed 
good  feeling  and  a desire  to  co-operate  for  the  public  defense.  General 
Lovell  often  supplied  the  Navy  with  guns  and  ammunition.  During  the 
bombardment  it  was  designed  by  Generals  Lovell  and  Duncan  that  the 
Louisiana  should  be  placed  in  a iiosition  from  which  they  thought  she 
could  enfilade  and  drive  off*  the  mortar  fleet  of  the  enemy,  but  this  re- 
quest was  not  complied  with — Capt.  J.  K.  Mitchell,  commanding  the 
defenses  afloat,  alleging,  in  reply,  that  the  Louisiana  was  without 
motive  power,  but  in  the  position  indicated  her  guns  could  not  be  given 
sufficient  elevation  to  reach  the  enemy,  while  she  would  be  in  full  range 
of  his  mortar  fleet,  and  that  her  top  deck  was  fiat  and  vulnerable. 
These  statements  are  jiroven  to  be  true.  He  also  added,  as  his  opinion, 
sustained  by  a council  of  naval  officers,  that  the  desired  movement 
would  result  in  the  destruction  of  the  vessel  by  the  enemy.  The  guard 
boats  and  fire  rafts  were  not  used  to  any  advantage,  if  at  all,  on  the 
night  preceding  the  passage  of  the  forts.  General  Lovell  left  New 
Orleans  for  Camp  Moore  on  Ajiril  25,  but  returned  on  the  28th,  and 
proposed  to  bring  back  his  command  to  the  city  if  the  authorities  would 
incur  the  risk  of  a bombardment,  which  he  thought  might  and  would 
ensue  if  the  city  were  occupied  by  his  troops.  The  proof  shows  that 
General  LovelFs  demeanor  was  cool  and  self-possessed  during  the  evac- 
uation. 

OPINION  OF  THE  COURT.^ 

1st.  As  against  a land  attack  by  any  force  the  enemy  could  probably 
bring,  the  interior  line  of  fortifications,  as  adopted  and  comiileted  by 
Major-General  Lovell,  was  a sufficient  defense  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans, 
but  his  ability  to  hold  that  line  against  such  an  attack  was  greatly  im- 
paired by  the  withdrawal  from  him  by  suj)erior  authority  of  nearly  all 
his  efl'ective  troops. 

2d.  The  exterior  line,  as  adopted  and  improved  by  him,  was  well 
devised,  and  rendered  as  strong  as  the  means  at  his  command  allowed. 

Publisliecl,  without  comment,  in  G.  O.,  No.  152,  A.  and  I.  G.  O.,  Nov.  24,  1863. 

41  R R — VOL.  VI 


642  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

3d.  Until  the  iron-clad  gunboats  Louisiana  and  Mississippi  should  be 
ready  for  service,  it  was  indispensably  necessary  to  obstruct  the  navi- 
gation of  the  Mississippi  Eiver  between  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 
The  raft  completed  under  General  Lovell’s  direction  was  adequate  for 
the  purpose  while  in  position,  but  it  was  swept  away,  and  left  the  river 
unimpeded,  either  by  reason  of  some  error  in  its  construction  or  neglect 
in  preventing  the  accumulation  of  drift,  or  because  of  insuperable  me- 
chanical difficulties,  as  to  which  this  court  feels  unprepared  to  give  an 
opinion.  General  Lovell  communicated  to  the  Government  no  opinion  as 
to  the  insecurity  of  the  raft  nor  any  apprehension  that  it  might  be  swept 
away,  nor  did  he  immediately  make  known  that  fact  when  it  occurred. 
In  this  it  is  considered  that  he  was  remiss  in  his  duty. 

4th.  When  the  raft  was  swept  away,  General  Lovell,  with  great  energy, 
immediately  endeavored  to  replace  it,  and  partially  succeeded,  but,  with- 
out fault  on  his  part,  this  last  obstruction  was  broken  by  the  carelessness 
of  vessels  of  the  river-defense  fleet  colliding  with  it  and  by  fire  rafts 
drifting  against  it,  and  by  the  failure  of  the  guard  boats  to  i)rotect  it 
against  night  expeditions  of  the  enemy. 

5th.  The  non-completion  of  the  iron-clad  gunboats  Louisiana  and  Mis- 
sissippi made  it  impossible  for  the  Navy  to  co-operate  efficiently  with 
General  Lovell. 

6th.  The  so-called  river-defense  fleet  was  wholly  useless  as  a means 
of  resistance  to  the  enemy,  for  which  General  Lovell  was  in  nowise 
responsible. 

7th.  Under  the  existing  circumstances  the  passage  of  the  forts  by  the 
enemy’s  fleet  could  not  have  been  prevented  by  General  Lovell  with  any 
means  under  his  control,  and,  the  forts  being  passed,  the  fall  of  New 
Orleans  was  inevitable  and  its  evacuation  a military  necessity. 

8th.  When  the  first  raft  was  broken,  and  the  danger  of  New  Orleans 
thus  became  imminent,  all  necessary  preparations  should  have  been 
made  for  removing  the  public  and  private  property  available  for  military 
uses,  and  when  the  second  obstruction  was  swept  away  the  removal  of 
such  property  should  have  been  commenced  immediately.  The  failure 
to  take  these  timely  steps  caused  the  losses  of  property  that  occurred, 
but  there  was  comparatively  little  property  lost  for  which  General  Lovell 
was  responsible. 

9th.  The  failure  of  General  Lovell  to  give  proper  orders  to  Brig.  Gen. 
M.  L.  Smith  for  the  retirement  of  his  command  from  Ohalmette  is  not 
sufficiently  explained,  and  is  therefore  regarded  a serious  error. 

10th.  The  proposition  of  General  Lovell  to  return  to  New  Orleans  with 
his  command  was  not  demanded  by  his  duty  as  a soldier,  involving,  as 
it  did,  the  useless  sacrifice  of  himseit  and  his  troops,  though  it  explains 
itself  upon  the  ground  of  sympathy  for  the  population  and  a natural 
sensitiveness  to  their  reproaches. 

11th.  General  Lovell  dis]>layed  great  energy  and  an  untiring  industry 
in  performing  his  duties.  His  conduct  was  marked  by  all  the  coolness 
and  self-possession  due  to  tfie  circumstances  and  his  position,  and  he 
'evinced  a high  capacity  for  command  and  the  clearest  foresight  in  many 
of  his  measures  for  the  defense  of  New  Orleans. 

The  court  respectfully  reports  that  its  assembly  was  delayed  by  the 
failure  of  its  president  to  receive  his  orders  in  due  time,  and  that  its  ses- 
sion was  protracted  by  the  taking  of  testimony,  under  the  order  of  the 
War  Department,  as  to  the  conduct  of  naval  officers  on  duty  in  Depart- 
ment No.  1.  This  order  was  rescinded,  thus  rendering  irrelevant  and 
useless  much  of  the  labor  of  the  court.  The  testimony  referred  to, 


Chap.  XVl.l 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


64o 


although  appearing  of  record,  was  not  considered  by  the  court  in  deter- 
mining its  findings  and  opinion. 

There  being  no  further  business  before  them,  the  court  adjourned  sine 
die. 

T.  C.  HINDMANT, 

Major-General  and  President  of  Court. 

L.  ll.  PAGE, 

Major,  Adjt.  Gen.^s  Dept..,  Judge- Advocate  and  Recorder. 


Kichmond,  Ya.,  July  13,  18G3. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  Ya. : 


General  : I have  the  honor  herewith  to  transmit  the  record  of  pro- 
ceedings of  the  court  of  inquiry  convened  to  examine  into  the  facts  and 
circumstances  attending  the  capture  of  ISTew  Orleans,  &c.,  and  accom- 
panying documents. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  E.  PAGE, 

Major,  Adjt.  GenJs  Dept.,  Judge-Advocate  and  Recorder. 


APPENDIX. 

Documents  1 to  32,  and  deposition  of  A.  D.  Kelley,  accompanying  and 
referred  to  in  record  of  the  Court  of  Inquiry  on  the  capture  of  New 
Orleans. 

[Document  No,  1.] 

( 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  173.  ) Richmond,  Va.,  October  7,  1861. 

*****  * * 

YIIT.  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  Provisional  Army,  will  proceed  to 
New  Orleans,  La.,  and  relieve  Maj.  Gen.  D.  E.  Twiggs,  Provisional  Army, 
in  command  of  Department  No.  1. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Document  No.  2.] 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  17,  1863. 

Interrogations  to  be  propounded  to  A.  D.  Kelley,  a citizen,  at  Columbia, 
S.  C.,  which,  with  the  answers  thereto,  will  be  read  as  evidence  before 
the  Court  of  Inquiry  convened  pursuant  to  paragraph  XXI,  Special 
Orders,  No.  41  (current  series),  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generai’s  Office, 
now  in  this  city. 

By  the  Jud&e-Advocate  : 

Question.  Where  were  you  residing  from  October,  1861,  to  May,  1862, 
and  what  was  your  occupation  during  that  time  ? 

Question.  State  whether  or  not  you  were  a member  of  the  Safety  Com- 
mittee of  New  Orleans  j and,  if  yea,  what  duties  were  devolved  ux^on 
you  as  such. 

Question.  State  whether  or  not  you  have  had  conversations,  official 


G44  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

or  otherwise,  with  General  Lovell  touching  the  defenses  of  Kew  Orleans; 
if  yea,  state  the  substance  of  such  conversations,  when  they  occurred, 
and  in  whose  presence. 

Question.  State  all  3^011  ma^^  know,  of  your  own  knowledge,  touching 
the  defense,  fall,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans. 

Cross-exauiination  bj^  Maj.  Gen.  M.  Lovell: 

Question.  Were  the  conversations  between  yourself  and  General 
Lovell  official  or  casual  private  conversations'?  If  both,  state  what  in- 
formation you  derived  from  official  and  Vv4iat  you  inferred  from  private 
conversations. 

(I  object  to  the  third  question  asked  by  the  judge-advocate,  asking 
for  conversations  other  than  official  between  General  Lovell  and  Mr. 
A.  D.  Kelley,  as  a member  of  the  Safety  Committee.  A general  officer 
in  command  of  a department  is  frequently  asked  officious  questions  by 
very  respectable  citizens  in  relation  to  public  affairs,  to  which  he  maj^ 
give  inaccurate  or  incorrect  replies,  either  as  a matter  of  policy  or  to 
avoid  making  known  matters  which  he  wishes  kept  secrVt.  Such 
answers,  if  sxiread  upon  the  record  as  testimony,  might  unjustly  pro- 
duce a iDrejudicial  effect.  I claim  that  the  witness  should  first  estab- 
lish the  fact  of  the  existence  of  such  relations  between  himself  and  the 
commanding  general  as  to  entitle  him  to  his  confidence,  and  not  give 
casual  conversations  as  testimony  bearing  upon  his  official  conduct  of 
affairs. 

M.  LOVELL.) 

The  answer  of  A.  D.  Kelley  to  the  interrogations  propounded  to  him  by 

L.  E.  Page,  major,  &c.,  and  judge-advocate,  in  the  case  of  Maj.  Gen. 

M.  Lovell,  on  trial  in  Eichmond,  and  which  interrogations  were  for- 
warded in  a letter  dated  June  17,  18G3. 

1st  question.  Where  were  you  residing  from  October,  18G1,  to  May, 
18G2,  and  what  was  3’our  occui^ation  during  that  time? 

Answer.  I resided  in  New  Orleans  from  October  1,  1861,  to  A]>ril,  1862.  My  occupa- 
tion was  that  of  commission  merchant,  tliongh  during  that  time  was  mnch  and  ear- 
nestly engaged  or  occupied  in  all  efforts  or  aid  that  1 could  give  for  the  protection  of 
New  Orleans. 

‘ 2d  question.  State  whether  or  not  you  were  a member  of  the  Safety 
Committee  of  New  Orleans;  and,  if  yea,  what  duties  where  devolved 
upon  you  as  such. 

Answer.  I was  a member  of  the  Safety  Committee  of  New  Orleans,  which  committee 
was  recognized  by  the  citizens  and  the  city  antlforities.  The  duties  of  said  committee 
wei-e  to  confer  with  the  military,  naval,  and  city  authorities  in  all  matters  in  relation 
to  the  defense  of  the  city,  and  to  tender  and  appropriate  any  money  from  the  city  that 
might  be  needed  in  in'omoting  the  safety  and  defense  of  New  Orleans. 

3d  question.  State  whether  or  not  you  have  had  conversations,  official 
or  otherwise,  with  General  Lovell  concerning  the  defense  of  New  Orleans; 
if  .vea,  state  the  substance  of  such  conversations,  when  thej^  occurred, 
and  in  whose  presence. 

4th  question.  State  all  that  jmu  may  know,  of  .your  own  knowledge, 
touching  the  defense,  fall,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans. 

Answer  to  3d  and  4th  questions.  By  direction  of  the  Safety  Committee,  I,  with  Dr. 
G.  W.  Campbell  and  two  other  members,  whose  names  I do  not  recollect  now,  were 
appointed  and  instructed  by  the  Safety  Committee  to  contbr  with  the  military  and 
naval  authorities  about  the  defenses,  and  to  tender  all  financial  aid  that  might  be  re- 
quired. We  conferred  with  General  Lovell;  tendered  to  him  all  needful  financial  aid, 
and  asked  many  questions  about  his  plans  of  defense  iu  certain  places ; also  about  his 


CfiAP.  XVL] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


645 


supply  of  arms,  ammunition,  &c.  He  replied  explicitly  to  some  of  the  minor  fpies- 
tioiis,  but  declined  replying  to  others,  staling  that  the  comnianding  general  deemed 
it  best  not  to  give  information  to  any  one  in  certain  matters.  Some  of  the  members 
appeared  satislied  with  the  interview,  though  I Avas  not,  and  so  exi)ressed  myself  to  the 
other  members,  and  in  two  or  three  days  al'terwards  I sought  another  interview  with 
General  Lovell  alone  at  his  office,  and  itrornptly  stated  that  I came  to  discuss  more  fully 
our  city  defenses,  and  at  the  same  time  I renewed  the  assurance  that  the  city  would 
furnish  any  money  that  he  might  need  in  making  any  defenses  for  the  city.  lr(uiewed 
this  assurance,  because  General  Lovell  had  the  day  before  complained  much  that  his 
draft  on  the  city  was  not  promiJtly  i)aid,  which  occurred  because  there  was  some  offi- 
cer in  the  city  treasury  department  who  was  not  aware  of  General  Lovell’s  authority 
to  draw  such  a draft  when  it  was  presented  to  liim.  During  this  interview  with 
General  Lovell  I discussed  many  matters  about  the  plan  and  the  j)ro8pect  of  the  suc- 
cessful defense  of  the  city.  In  this  discussion  some  of  my  iinpiiries  were  not  answered, 
as  he  did  not  consider  it  x>roper  for  the  commanding  general  to  do  so.  In  some  of  those 
positions  he  was  perhaps  correct ; but  the  effect  upon  my  mind  during  and  after  the 
discussion  was  that,  if  a vigorous  attack  was  made  by  the  enemy  and  the  forts  i)asse(l 
near  the  mouth  of  the  river,  1 did  not  believe  that  the  city  would  be  held  by  our 
forces.  This  impression  Avas  confirmed  after  an  interview  with  the  naval  commander. 
These  vicAvs  depressed  me  much,  and  I communicated  my  fears  not  only  to  my 
family,  but  to  several  friends,  and  we  most  decidedly  condemned  the  administration 
for  sending  such  an  officer  as  General  Lovell  to  defend  Ncav  Orleans,  the  most  im- 
portant point  in  the  Confederacy,  when  the  Government  had  in  the  field  tAvo  such 
generals  as  Beauregard  and  Bragg,  both  citizens  of  Louisiana.  When  the  enemy  eom- 
menced  the  attack  on  the  forts  I most  anxiously  Avatched  the  jorospect.  As  I had  before 
feared,  I found  that  our  reliance  Avas  altogether  u])on  a successful  defense  at  the  forts, 
though  I had  been  confident  that  a good  general,  with  such  resources  as  had  been  at  1 lie 
command  of  General  Lovell,  could  and  Avould  have  defended  the  city  from  the  exten- 
sive and  expensive  fortifications  a few  miles  below  the  city  and  on  both  sides  of  the 
river.  I could  not  see  or  hear  of  any  proper  arrangements  for  defense  at  that  point, 
and  as  our  defense  therefore  Avas  alone  at  the  forts,  I did  expect  to  see  the  command- 
ing general  go  promptly  to  that  point  and  there  see  that  all  possible  defense  Avas  made. 
Although  the  attack  lasted  seA'^eral  days.  General  Lovell  made  no  effort  to  go  to  the 
forts  until  about  the  time  the  enemy’s  fleet  passed  them.  I had  many  unofficial  cou- 
A^ersations  with  General  Lovell,  and  none  of  them  inspired  me  with  confidence  in  the 
safety  of  New  Orleans,  if  vigorously  attacked  by  the  enemy. 

A.  D.  KELLEY. 

Mayor’s  Office, 

Columbia,  S.  C.,  July  2,  1802. 

Personally  appeared  before  me  A.  D.  Kelley,  aiul  made  oath  that  the 
foregoing  statements  are  facts,  according  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge. 

T.  J.  GOODWYK, 

3Iagistrate  ex  officio,  - 


[Document  Ro.  3.] 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  October  17,  1861. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Sir:  I am  induced  by  the  impression  made  on  the  mind  of  the  Secre- 
tary of  War,  in  a conversation  which  you  had  with  him  just  before  your 
departure,  to  write  to  you  on  the  subject  of  your  relations  to  the  officers 
of  the  Navy.  When  you  mentioned  the  subject  to  me  I supposed  you 
referred  to  the  case  provided  for  in  the  sixty-first  and  sixty-second  arti- 
cles of  war,  as  enacted  by  the  Congress  of  the  Confederate  States; 
therefore  it  was  that  I read  and  commented  on  those  articles,  particu- 
larly tbe  sixty-second. 

The  fleet  maintained  at  the  port  of  Kew  Orleans  and  the  vicinity  is 
not  a part  of  your  command ; and  the  purposes  for  which  it  is  sent  there 
or  removed  from  there  are  communicated  in  orders  and  letters  of  a De- 
])artment  with  which  you  have  no  direct  communication.  It  must,  there- 
fore, be  obvious  to  you  that  you  could  not  assume  command  of  these 
officers  and  vessels,  coming  within  the  limits  of  your  geographical  de- 
partment, but  not  placed  on  duty  with  you,  without  serious  detriment 


G4G  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI, 

to  discipline  and  probable  injury  to  tbe  i:)ublic  service.  To  promote 
barmony,  to  secure  co-operation,  and  increase  the  power  for  public  de- 
fense it  will  often  be  desirable  that  each  arm  should  know  the  objects 
and  means  of  the  other.  To  this  end  it  is  hoped  that  there  will  be  un- 
restrained intercourse  and  cordial  fraternization. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

JEFFERSOISr  DAVIS. 

[Document  Xo.  4.] 

Department  of  State, 
Richmond j Ea.,  January  19,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

Sir  : I state,  at  your  request,  that,  while  I was  Secretary  of  War,  in 
giving  you  orders  to  take  charge  of  the  defense  of  the  Department  of 
Louisiana,  you  requested  authority  to  control  the  operations  of  the  offi- 
cers of  the  ^avy  within  the  department,  and  to  order  such  dispositions 
of  naval  forces  as  you  might  deem  best  to  aid  in  defense.  I answered 
you  that  your  request  could  not  be  granted ; that  the  Department  of 
War  could  assume  no  control  over  naval  operations,  which  were  confided 
by  law  to  a distinct  Department,  and  that  you  must  rely  for  securing  the 
aid  of  naval  forces  on  endeavoring  to  establish  concert  of  action  through 
mutual  understanding  between  yourself  and  the  naval  officer  highest  in 
rank  in  your  department. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BEYJAMIY, 

Secretary  of  State, 

[Document  No.  5. — By  telegraph.] 

Richmond,  Va.,  December  17,  1861. 

. General  Mansfield  Lovell  : 

The  Secretary  of  War  desires  you  to  send  seventeen  32-pounder  guns, 
if  you  can  spare  them,  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston. 

J.  GORGAS. 

[Document  No.  6. — ^By  telegraph.] 

Richmond,  Va.,  December  17,  1861. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell: 

Please  send  three  32  pounder  guns  to  General  Lee, 'at  Charleston,  S. 
0.  NTo  carriages  reouired. 

J.  GORGAS. 

[Document  Xo.  7. — ^By  telegraph.] 

Richmond,  Va.,  January  1,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell: 

Please  send  two  large  32-pounder  navy  guns  for  General  A.  S.  John- 
ston, care  of  Lieut.  M.  H.  Wright,  ordnance  officer,  Nashville,  Tenn. 

L.  GIBBON, 

Captain  (for  Chief  of  Ordnance), 

[Document  Xo.  13.] 

New  Orleans,  La.,  April  11,  1862. 

General  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va, : 

With  forty  vessels  in  the  lower  river,  please  protest,  in  my  name, 
against  sending  the  Louisiana  up  the  river.  If  she  must  go,  let  them 


Chap.  XVI. J 


CAPTURE  OE  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G47 


leave  ber  two  7-iucb  rifles,  now  at  Fort  Jackson.  She  ba>s  one  on  board, 
besides  other  heavy  guns  j all  she  can  use  in  the  ui)j)er  river  to  advan- 
tage. We  have  not  now  as  many  guns  of  heavy  caliber  as  at  Mobile.^ 

M.  LOVELL. 


[Document  Xo.  14.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  March  21,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jone«, 

Mobile,  Ala. : 

Dear  General  : Learning  that  most  of  the  guns  at  Pensacola  were 
to  be  removed,  I wrote  to  Bragg,  and  learned  that  he  had  requested 
some  to  be  sent  here.  Major  Duncan  then  went  after  them,  and  only 
succeeded  in  getting  one  10-inch  columbiad.  There  is  not  another  one 
in  this  whole  department  to  defend  this  the  most  important  city  on  the 
great  water  communication  from  the  Gulf  to  the  Ohio  Kiver.  The  enemy 
is  collecting  his  ships  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  to  combine  his  attack 
with  the  great  effort  from  above,  yet  all  the  heavy  guns  are  kept  at 
lilaces  of  minor  importance.  I shall  send  Major  Duncan  over  again, 
and  beg  that  you  will  give  him  every  10-incli  columbiad  and  10-inch 
sea-coast  mortar  that  you  can  possibly  spare.  Time  is  passing  rapidly. 
More  than  a dozen  ships  of  war  are  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  of  which 
seven  are  inside  the  bar.  If  you  can  spare  a dozen  10  inch  columbiads, 
do  let  us  have  them.  Beauregard  telegraphed  me  that  the  heavy  guns 
would  be  sent  here.  Duncan  only  got  two,  one  of  which  he  says  you 
took  from  him.  Give  us  a share.  What  is  Mobile  worth  with  the  Mis- 
sissippi in  the  hands  of  the  enemy 
Yours,  very  truly, 

M.  LOVELL, 
Major-General,  C.  8.  Army. 

(Document  No.  15.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  March  7,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Jachson,  Tenn.: 

Dear  General  : I received  your  notes  of  February  24  and  March 
3.  Have  ordered  the  additional  flags  you  wish.  I have  pushed  forward 
to  your  support  every  available  man.  Seven  companies  of  the  Crescent 
Begiment  left  here  yesterday  j the  remainder  will  leave  on  Saturday 
with  the  Washington  Artillery.  I shall  also  send  you  the  Twentieth 
Begiment  and  the  Orleans  Artillery,  with  a battalion  from  that  corps ; 
Gibson’s  and  Vaiden  artillery  has  already  been  sent.  You  will  have 
in  all  from  me  ten  infantry  regiments  and  four  batteries  of  artillery. 
Full  40  rounds  of  ammunition  (in  some  instances  100)  have  been  fur- 
nished to  every  description  of  troops  sent  on.  I shall  have  to  hold  up 
now  and  look  out  a little  for  New  Orleans.  I asked  Bragg  for  some 
10-inch  guns,  but  he  had  none  to  spare.  New  Orleans  has  inferior  cali- 
ber to  Mobile,  Pensacola,  and  even  Galveston.  People  send  here  for 
everything,  and  I have  literally  stripped  the  department,  but  never  get 
anything  in  return  that  I ask  for.  I wrote  and  urged  General  Polk  to 
send  me  the  anchors  and  chains  from  Columbus  to  obstruct  the  river  at 
the  forts  below  the  city,  but  he  never  would  send  them,  and  finally 

*See  answer,  of  same  date,  in  Corresx)ondence,  etc. — Confederate, ’^p.  873. 


648  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


abandoned  them  at  Columbus.  I intend  hereafter  to  hold  on  to  what  I 
have  until  I feel  perfectly  secure.  If  you  can  put  me  in  the  way  of  get- 
ting any  large  guns,  chains,  or  anchors,  I beg  you  will  do  so.  In  a few 
days  we  hope  to  be  able  to  cast  10-inch  columbiads  and  sea-coast  mor- 
tars. 

In  haste,  yours,  truly, 

M.  LOVELL. 


[Document  Xo.  16.] 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  March  8,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beaureoard, 

Jackson,  Tenn.: 

Dear  General  : The  current  and  drift  have  finally  got  the  upper 
hand  of  my  raft  between  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson.  This,  taken  in  con- 
nection with  the  facts  that  Captain  Hollins  has  taken  up  the  river  every 
vessel  that  mounts  a gun,  and  that  General  Polk  declined  to  ship  me 
the  chains  and  anchors  at  Columbus,  which  would  have  saved  my  raft, 
compels  a new  disposition  as  to  the  fourteen  vessels  of  Montgomery's 
expedition.  They  will  not  be  ready  under  ten  days,  but  I will  send  up 
eight  of  them,  with  circles  laid  for  one  32-pounder  each,  provided  you 
can  supply  the  guns  up  there.  I cannot,  under  the  circumstances,  send 
a gun  out  of  this  department.  The  remaining  six  vessels  I will  have  to 
keep  here  until  I ascertain  whether  I shall  be  able  to  fix  an  obstruction 
in  the  river  at  Fort  Jackson.  Their  fleet  in  the  Gulf  is  much  more  for- 
midable than  that  above,  and  the  river  is  now  ojien  to  them  if  they  pass 
the  lower  forts.  You  will  therefore  see  the  necessity  of  my  retaining 
every  gun  and  a portion  of  the  vessels  until  I can  bar  the  river  again. 
I should  have  to  dismount  guns  from  my  works  to  put  on  these  ships, 
and  under  the  circumstances  above  set  forth  you  will  be  able  to  do 
that  with  as  little  risk  as  I can.  I can  send  no  more  ammunition  up 
with  men,  as  we  have  no  caps.  Calls  are  made  upon  this  department 
from  all  parts  of  the  Confederacy^,  but  nothing  is  sent  here  in  the  way 
of  materials  to  make  np,  and  no  facilities  are  given  except  what  I take 
in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  heads  of  bureaus. 

Yours,  truly,  M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General,  C.  8.  Army. 


• [Document  No.  17.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  March  9,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Braou, 

Jackson,  Temi. : 

My  Dear  General:  I received  your  dispatch  this  afternoon,  asking 
me  to  send  up  all  the  small-arm  ammunition  that  I could  manufacture. 
This  I have  already  done.  The  department  has  been  literally  stripped 
of  everything — men,  arms,  guns,  and  munitions  of  war — so  much  so, 
that  evil-disposed  iiersons  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  I am  placing  New 
Orleans  in  such  a condition  as  to  make  it  an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy. 
More  than  1,000,000  cartridges  have  been  forwarded  in  the  past  few 
weeks,  nearly  ten  regiments,  well  armed  and  equipped,  and  four  bat- 
teries of  artillery.  I have  literally  nothing  more  to  send,  and  must  cast 
about  to  place  myself  in  condition  to  defend  this  important  position  in 
case  the  enemy  (informed  of  our  situation)  should  return  to  attack.  I 
have  called  upon  the  governor  of  the  State  for  the  militia,  who  are  com- 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


649 


ing  in  slowly  witli  sliot-guns,  for  which  I am  liaviiig  ammunition  made, 
but  we  are  out  of  caps  j they  were  to  have  been  furnished  us  from  Nash- 
ville, but  none  came ; nor,  in  answer  to  all  my  calls,  has  anything  of 
any  kind  been  sent  here.  Yesterday  I sent  ln,(){i()  jxmnds  of  musket 
powder  to  Eichmond,  which  leaves  ine  none  to  make  up,  and  I have  no 
caps.  The  powder  that  came  from  Cuba  is  all  inferior,  and  has  to  be 
reworked,  but  I can  get  no  saltpeter;  that  which  comes  from  Memi)his 
has  been  sent  to  Augusta,  and  if  the  raw  materials  are  sent  elsewhere, 
the  requisitions  must  be  made  in  the  same  direction.  With  a larger,  tleet 
concentrating  on  the  coast  and  a force  of  the  enemy  collecting  at  Ship 
Island  it  behooves  me  to  commence  to  make  some  preparations  to  defend 
my  own  position.  In  default  of  auy  definite  information  from  your  part 
of  the  country  as  to  your  supplies  and  necessities,  I shall  be  comx)elled 
to  use  my  best  judgment  as  to  what  further  can  be  spared  of  the  sup- 
plies that  I expect  to  get  together.  At  this  present  moment  I have 
nothing  to  send  unless  it  may  be  a small  amount  of  musket  cartridges. 
I wrote  to  Beauregard  to  day  my  reasons  for  applying  everything  here 
to  my  own  use.  If  you  can  i)ush  some  saltpeter  here  I will  try  to  help 
you,  but  you  must  not  rely  upon  me,  as  I have  deficiencies  here  to  make 
good  before  I can  send  off  anything,  except  upon  reasons  of  the  most 
imperative  necessity.  Those  reasons,  if  they  existed,  have  been  studi- 
ously withheld  from  me  thus  far. 

Very  truly,  yours,  ^ M.  LOYELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding, 

[Document  No.  18.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

^ New  Orleans^  La.^  March  21,  1862. 

Commander  Mitchell, 

Commanding  Naval  Station : 

Sir  : The  concentration  of  the  enemy’s  ships  of  war  at  the  mouth  of 
the  river  induces  me  to  suggest  to  you  the  propriety  of  putting  in  posi- 
tion at  the  forts  below  the  two  7-inch  rifled  cannon  lately  received  from 
Eichmond  by  you.  The  heavy  guns  from  Pensacola  have  mostly  been 
placed  on  the  river  above,  where  the  weight  of  metal  against  them  is 
less  than  we  may  expect  below.  When  Tift’s  vessel  is  ready  for  service 
the  guns  could  be  returned,  if  necessary. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General^  Commanding, 

[Document  No.  19.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.^  March  30,  1862. 

Commander  Whittle, 

Commanding  Naval  Station: 

Sir:  I learn  that  you  have  four  rifled  32-]3ounder  guns,  intended  for 
a gunboat  not  yet  comifleted.  As  the  enemy  is  collecting  in  force  at 
the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  may  attack  at  any  moment,  I should  like 
to  get  the  four  guns  alluded  to  to  place  temporarily  on  my  boats  to 
assist  in  reiielling  attack.  They  will  be  returned  when  your  vessel  is 
ready. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General j Commanding. 


650  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI 

[Document  ISTo.  20.] 

Headquarters  Department  iso.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.j  Ajyril  4,  18C2. 

Commander  Whittle, 

Commanding  Naval  Station : 

Sir  : Would  it  not  be  well  to  place  the  guns  lately  arrived  for  the 
Navy  in  position  on  the  floating  battery  until  such  time  as  the  Louisi- 
ana can  be  ready  to  receive  them?  They  would  make  a formidable  addi- 
tion to  the  strength  of  our  defenses  at  the  lower  forts,  and  I fear  that 
the  Louisiana  will  not  be  ready  for  them  in  time  to  take  part  in  the 
approaching  contest. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding, 


[Document  No.  21.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  April  11,  1862. 

Commander  Whittle, 

Commanding  Naval  Station : 

Sir  : I have  telegraphed  General  ]j^uncan  to  send  up  the  7-inch  rifles 
and  three  32-pounder  rifles.  I regret  that  these  guns  have  been  taken, 
as  in  my  judgment  the  safety  of  this  city  does  not  warrant  the  with- 
drawal from  below  of  a single  gun  while  so  many  vessels  of  war  are 
within  the  mouth  of  the  river. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL,  • 

Major-General,  Commanding, 


[Document  No.  22.] 

New  Orleans,  La.,  April  11,  1862. 

Major-General  Lovell, 

Commanding,  &g.  : 

Sir  : I have  received  your  note  of  this  date.  You  cannot  regret  more 
than  I do  the  necessity  which  compels  me  to  ask  the  return  of  the  guns 
loaned  you  by  the  Navy,  but  I am  ordered,  with  emphasis,  to  send  the 
Louisiana  with  all  dispatch  up  the  river,  and  these  guns  are  absolutely 
necessary  to  arm  her  partially. 

May  it  not  be  that  the  city  is  in  as  much  danger  from  above  as  from 
below?  This  opinion,  it  would  seem,  is  entertained  in  a high  quarter 
at  Eichmond ; I mean  at  the  Navy  Department. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ' 

W.  C.  WHITTLE. 


[Document  No.  23. — Copy  of  telegram.] 

New  Orleans,  La.,  April  17,  1862. 

General  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Ya,: 

After  conversation  with  Commander  Whittle  we  beg  that  Captain 
Hollins  may  be  allowed  to  remain  in  command  afloat,  at  least  until  he 
can  strike  a fair  blow  at  the  enemy,  which  he  is  ready  to  do. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


651 


[Document  l^o.  24.] 

Headquarters  Department  Xo.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  April  17,  18G2. 

General  G.  T.  Beaure&ard, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Mississippi : 

Dear  General  : I telegraphed  and  subsequently  wrote  you  in  ref- 
erence to  fortifying  the  vicinity  of  Vicksburg,  for  the  double  pur])ose 
of  protecting  the  river  and  giving  you  a point-d’appui  for  the  left  of 
your  line  in  case  you  are  compelled  to  occupy  a position  in  rear  of  your 
present  one.  I have  some  twelve  or  lifteen  guns  in  position  above  New 
Orleans,  and  in  case  others  could  be  got  we  might,  as  soon  as  the  works 
were  finished  and  the  platforms  laid,  transfer  our  batteries  to  that  point. 
There  is  no  engineer  ofiicer  here  to  be  sent  on  that  duty,  or  I should 
have  fortified  Vicksburg  long  since.  Have  you  any  one  in  your  army 
who,  with  the  help  of  a few  thousand  negroes,  could  put  up  the  works, 
and  thus,  perhai)S,  delay  the  enemy  until  we  can  finish  Titles  iron-clad 
steam  ram  I will  give  you  all  the  assistance  in  my  iiower  in  i)ushing 
forward  the  matter;  but  with  the  limited  means  at  my  command  and 
the  enemy  knocking  at  the  door  below  I cannot  give  it  personal  atten- 
tion. M.  L.  Smith,  now  a brigadier-general,  is  now  on  duty  here  with 
me,  organizing  troops  and  attending  also  to  the  engineer  duties  of  the 
department.  The  subject  of  fortifying  Vicksburg  strikes  me  as  of  press- 
ing importance,  and  if  you  agree  with  me  I will  endeavor  to  i)ush  it  as 
much  as  possible. 

Yours,  truly, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 


[Document  Xo.  25.]* 
[Document  Xo.  26.  J 


Ordnance  Office, 
Richmond,  Va.,  February  15,  18G2. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans,  La.: 

General  : I received  this  morning  a letter  from  Eichard  Lambert, 
ordnance  officer  on  your  staff,  inclosing  an  estimate  for  $G6,000,  coi)y 
of  which  I inclose.  We  have  already  one  disbursing  officer  at  New 
Orleans  (Maj.  M.  L.  Smith),  and  it  is  deemed  advisable  not  to  have  more 
than  one  for  the  department  at  the  same  post.  The  estimate  indicates 
the  intention  of  erecting  a laboratory,  shop,  &c.  This  has  not  been  con- 
templated by  the  Department. 

V ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  GOEGAS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  and  Chief  of  Ordnance. 


[Document  Xo.  27.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  February  19,  i8G2. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore: 

Sir  : I would  suggest  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  your  taking  pos- 
session of  the  steamers  Charles  Morgan,  Galveston,  and  W.  H.  Webb, 
or  two  of  them,  for  the  immediate  defense  of  the  city,  and  to  be  used  as 


Is  a duplicate  of  report  ou  p.  510. 


652  OPERATIONS  IN  \V.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [CiiAr.  XVI. 

transports  for  troops  in  case  the  occasion  should  require  it.  One  gun 
might  be  put  on  each  to  prevent  small  parties  of  the  enemy  from  annoy- 
ing them  with  boat  howitzers,  sent  up  the  river  by  launches  from  the 
shoal  water  to  the  eastward. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General,  Commanding, 

[Document  No.  28.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Neio  Orleans^  La.,  February  25,  1862. 
His  Excellency  Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  requisition  upon  you  for  volunteers 
and  militia  to  the  number  of  10,000  men,  to  be  placed  in  camp  and  held 
ready  for  defense  at  short  notice. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  Gen eral,  Commanding. 


[Document  No.  29.] 

Headquarters, 
Richmond,  Va.,  May  8,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Commanding,  &c..  Camp  Moore,  La.: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  26th  ultimo  to  the  Adjutant-General, 
containiDg  a report  of  the  circumstances  attending  the  fall  of  New  Or- 
leans, is  received.  The  loss  of  this  city  is  a very  severe  blow  to  us, 
and  one  that  we  cannot  fail  to  feel  most  sensibly,  but  it  is  believed  that 
with  the  means  of  defense  at  your  disposal  you  have  done  all  in  your 
power. 

Your  plan  of  collecting  all  the  troops  you  can  and  taking  a position 
which  will  enable  you  to  defend  the  rear  of  General  Beauregard  and 
protect  his  communications  is  fully  approved,  and  I regard  it  as  a mat- 
ter of  great  moment.  You  will  endeavor  to  collect  as  large  a force  as 
possible,  and  collect  all  the  arms  that  you  can  procure.  The  want  of 
arras  is  very  severely  felt  at  this  time,  and  I hope  you  will  spare  no 
efforts  to  collect  all  that  can  be  obtained  in  the  hands  of  the  people  that 
can  be  made  serviceable.  You  will  organize  and  prepare  the  troops 
that  you  may  be  able  to  collect,  to  act  most  efficiently  against  the  enemy, 
should  he  expose  himself  iu  any  manner,  and  protect,  as  far  as  it  is  pos- 
sible, the  army  of  General  Beauregard  from  any  movement  that  may 
endanger  his  communications  or  threaten  his  rear. 

I am,  general,  very  respecttully,  your  obedient  servant., 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


[Document  No.  30.] 

Headquarters, 
Richmond,  Ya.,  May  24,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Camp  Moore,  La.: 

General  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  11th 
instant.  My  reply  to  your  former  communicatiou  will  have  made  known 
to  you  the  opinion  I entertain  of  your  course  in  evacuating  New  Orleans. 
That  opinion  is  confirmed  by  the  additional  particulars  contained  in 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


G53 


your  letter  just  received.  After  the  enemy  succeeded  in  passing  the 
forts  it  seems  there  was  nothing  left  lor  you  to  do  but  to  withdraw  the 
troox)S.  I think  you  may  confidently  rely  upon  the  judgment  of  intelli- 
gent and  reflecting  men  for  the  justification  of  your  course  as  soon  as 
the  facts,  as  they  actually  existed,  shall  be  known.  The  city  being  lost, 
I approve  of  your  purpose  to  confine  the  enemy  to  its  limits  as  closely 
as  possible  and  to  protect  the  State  from  his  ravages.  The  means  with 
which  you  propose  to  accomplish  this  seem  to  be  the  best  that  you  can 
now  employ,  and  I must  urge  you  to  put  them  in  operation  without 
delay,  soliciting  bold  and  judicious  partisans  who  can  raise  i)roi)er  corps, 
and  whose  appointment,  when  recommended  by  you,  will  be  subject  to 
the  approval  of  the  President.  In  the  mean  time  set  them  vigorously  to 
work.  The  want  of  arms  is  much  lelt  everywhere,  and  no  exertions 
should  be  spared  to  procure  all  of  serviceable  kind.  I hope  to  be  able 
to  send  you  1,000  rifles  from  a cargo  lately  arrived  at  Charleston,'  should 
it  embrace  arms  for  the  Confederacy. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

li.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


[Document  Xo.  31.] 


' Camp  Moore,  La.,  28,  1862. 

Gov.  John  J.  Pettus, 

JacJisonj  Miss.: 

Please  send  cannon  from  Mobile  intended  for  l^ew  Orleans  to  Ticks 
burg:  also  any  powder.  General  Jones  says  he  sent  both  from  Mobile 

M.  LOVELL. 


[Answer.] 


Jackson,  Miss.,  April  20,  1862. 

General  Lovell  : 

Five  army  guns  here  from  Mobile;  nine  navy  guns  without  carriages. 
Do  you  want  many  guns  sent  to  Vicksburg? 

JOHN  J.  PETTUS. 

[Document  Xo.  32.] 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.^  April  12,  1862. 

General  Georue  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  we  shall  in  a few  days  have 
about  5,000  men  in  this  part  of  the  State  enlisted  for  the  war  for  whom 
I have  no  arms.  All  the  troops  for  the  interior  lines  about  the  city  that 
I had  organized  were  sent  to  Corinth,  and  the  defense  of  those  lines  left 
in  the  hands  of  a few  badly-organized  volunteers,  very  iioorly  armed. 
The  forces  of  the  enemy  at  Ship  Island  and  Isle  Breton  cannot  be  less 
than  10,000  or  12,000  men,  and  I deem  it  my  duty  to  lay  before  you  the 
entirely  defenseless  condition  of  the  city  against  any  attack  by  land. 
Should  the  enemy  attempt  to  land  at  Bay  Saint  Louis,  and  march  a 
column  of  12,000  or  15,000  men  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  he  would  cut  off  all 
communication  with  Beauregard  without  the  iiossibility  of  my  prevent- 
ing it.  Learning  that  a large  number  of  arms  had  arrived  in  the  conn 
try,  I telegraphed  and  wrote  at  once  for  them,  as  I have  only  about  200, 
but  have  received  nothing. 

The  condition  of  our  defenses,  so  far  as  regards  artillery,  has  been 
represented  to  the  Department,  yet  upon  the  evacuation  of  Pensacola 


654  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

tlie  greater  portion  of  the  heavy  guns  were  sent  to  Mobile  and  other 
points,  and  that,  too,  at  a time  when  the  whole  mortar  fleet  of  the  enemy 
and  twelve  steamers  were  in  the  river  below  the  forts.  I wrote  to  Gen- 
eral Jones,  at  Alobile,  and  telegraphed  the  Department,  and  received  the 
reply  that  some  of  the  heavy  guns  were  ordered  here.  I learn  that  four- 
teen 10-inch  columbiads  were  kept  at  Mobile  while  three  were  seut  here. 
Mr.  Benjamin  also  wrote  me  that  44,000  pounds  of  powder  had  been  sent 
from  Columbus,  but  it  was  depleted  on  the  road  to  less  than  half  that 
amount.  With  powder-mills  that  have  an  abundance  of  sulphur  and 
charcoal  and  facilities  for  making  3,000  pounds  of  i>owder  per  day,  salt- 
peter has  been  sent  from  Arkansas  to  Georgia,  while  Memphis  and  Cor- 
inth were  making  requisitions  on  me  for  powder.  Kot  a pound  of  salt- 
peter has  been  sent  here  for  three  months. 

I mention  these  things,  not  that  I am  by  any  means  discouraged  or 
disheartened,  but  to  account  in  some  measure  for  the  dissatisfaction  that 
exists  among  the  people  here,  who,  having  sent  men,  arms,  and  eA^ery- 
thing  they  had  to  Virginia  and  Tennessee,  now  find  the  enemy  at  their 
doors,  both  by  land  and  water,  while  they  can  obtain  neither  heavy  guns 
nor  small-arms,  which  they  learn  by  the  papers  are  being  sent  to  places 
which  certainly  are  not  considered  so  important  as  the  city  of  hfew  Or- 
leans and  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi.  The  whole  city  is  in  a fever  of 
anxiety  about  the  finishing  of  the  Louisiana  and  ]\Iississipi)i,  which  they 
consider  as  their  salvation  against  the  fleet  below,  and  I should  not 
regard  it  as  wise  to  send  them  above,  unless  we  could  place  in  position 
at  Fort  Jackson  such  a number  of  guns  of  heavy  caliber  as  would  insure 
that  hfew  Orleans  could  not  be  taken  by  a bold  dash.  It  is  scarcely 
probable  that  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy  would  come  down  the  river 
much  in  advance  of  their  army.  Meanwhile  Ave  might  clear  the  mouth 
of  the  rAer,  and  then  send  the  whole  fleet  above  and  drive  them  back 
to  Cairo;  but,  in  any  event,  we  require  several  more  10-inch  guns  and 
at  least  4,000  or  5,000  stands  of  small-arms.  I would  also  earnestly  urge 
the  confirmation  of  Colonel  Smith  as  a brigadier-general.  I have  but 
one  ofiicer  of  that  rank  in  the  department,  which  compels  me  to  do  a 
great  deal  of  work  that  should  deAmlve  upon  subordinate  officers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding, 


^ Ko.  9. 

Message  from  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States j transmitting  eorre- 
spondence  with  the  Governor  of  Louisiana  and  General  Lovell. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  Mareh  11,  1863. 

To  the  Mouse  of  Representatives  : 

In  response  to  your  resolution  of  the  3d  ultimo  I herewith  transmit  for 
your  information  a copy  of  my  correspondence,  together  with  that  of 
the  Secretaries  of  AVar  and  of  thehfaA^y,  Avith  the  governor  of  Louisiana 
and  Major-General  Lovell,  during  the  period  beginning  October  25, 1861, 
and  ending  Avith  the  date  of  the  capture  of  the  city  of  hiew  Orleans,  in 
reference  to  the  defenses  of  that  city.* 

JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 

*Siicli  of  tho  correspondence  referred  to  as  does  not  relate  to  mere  matters  of  detail 
or  to  subjects  embraced  in  the  Fourth  Series  of  this  publication,  will  follow,  in  chro- 
nologicai  order,  in  the  Correspondence,  etc. — Confederate,”  post. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS. 


655 


[Inclosures.] 

War  Department, 
Richmond^  Va.,  February  27,  18G3. 

To  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit,  under  a resolution  of  the  House  of 
Kepresentatives,  copies  of  the  correspondence  between  Major-General 
Lovell  and  the  War  Department,  in  reference  to  the  defense  of  NTew  Or- 
leans, from  October  25,  1861,  to  the  date  of  the  surrender  of  that  city  5 
also  copies  of  the  correspondence  on  file  in  this  Department  between  the 
President  and  Secretary  of  War  and  the  governor  of  Louisiana  on  the 
same  subject.  A copy  of  General  Lovell’s  report  has  been  already  sub- 
mitted to  Congress.  It  is  believed  that  all  the  corresiiondence  pertinent 
to  the  subject  is  embraced  in  the  volume  now  placed  before  you. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  A.  SEDDOIsr, 

Secretary  of  War. 

Executive  Department, 
Richmond.,  Fu.,  February  4,  1863. 

To  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I am  directed  by  the  President  to  forward  for  your  attention  and 
the  proper  action  the  following  resolution  of  the  House  of  Pepresenta- 
tives  of  the  3d  instant : 

Eesolved  by  the  House  of  Representatives,  That  tlie  President  be  requested  to  fiirnisli 
this  body,  if  not  incompatible  with  the  public  interests,  with  copies  of  the  corre- 
spondence between  Major-General  Lovell  and  the  War  Department  in  reference  to  the 
defenses  of  New  Orleans  from  Oetober  25,  1861,  to  the  date  of  the  surrender  of  that 
city;  also  copies  of  all  correspondence  between  the  President  or  Secretaries  of  War 
and  the  Navy  and  the  governor  of  Louisiana  on  the  same  subject. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

BUETOY  K.  HAEEISOIn, 

Private  Secretary. 

Yavy  Department, 
Richmond,  F«.,  February  9,  1863. 

The  President: 

Sir  : In  response  to  the  following  resolution,  adopted  by  the  House  of 
Eepresentatives  on  the  3d  instant — 

Resolvedby  the  House  of  Representatives,  That  the  President  be  requested  to  furnish  this 
body,  if  not  incompatible  with  the  public  interests,  with  copies  of  Ihe  correspondence 
between  Major-General  Lovell  and  the  War  Department  in  reference  to  the  defenses 
of  New  Orleans  from  October  25,  1861,  to  the  date  of  the  surrender  of  that  city  ; also 
copies  of  all  correspondence  between  the  President  or  Secretaries  of  War  and  the  IS'avy 
and  the  governor  of  Louisiana  on  the  same  subject— 

I have  the  honor  to  state  that  this  Department  had  no  correspondence 
with  the  governor  of  Louisiana  in  reference  to  the  defenses  of  Yew  Or- 
leans from  October  25,  1861,  to  the  date  of  the  surrender  of  that  city. 
I transmit,  however,  copy  of  a letter  addressed  to  the  governor  of  Lou- 
isiana on  September  18,  1861,*  by  the  Department,  to  which  no  reply  was 
received. 

With  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  MALLOEY, 
Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


Not  found. 


656  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


APRIL  27-MAY  8,  1862. — Evacuation  of  Fort  Quitman,  La.,  by  the  Confed- 
erates, and  capture  of  blockade  runner  in  Bayou  Grand  Caillou. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  C.  8.  Army, 

Headquarters  Department  ]S^o.  1. 

Jaelcson,  Miss.,  June  19,  1862. 

General  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  lOth  instant  [following],  re- 
questing the  reasons  for  evacuating  Fort  Quitman,  on  the  Bayou  Grand 
Gaillou,  I have  to  state  that  it  was  a little  earthwork,  with  two  smooth- 
bore 32-pounders,  established  by  me  to  prevent  ingress  for  marauding 
parties  by  the  enemy  in  small  vessels  through  the  Caillou  and  other  inlets 
into  the  northern  parishes  of  Louisiana. 

The  fall  of  New  Orleans  laid  open  the  route* to  those  parishes,  and  as 
the  troops  stationed  in  the  fort  were  supplied  from  the  city,  and  were 
at  any  moment  liable  to  be  taken  in  the  rear  and  captured  by  way  of  the 
Opelousas  Bailroad,  which  was  in  the  enemy’s  hands,  I ordered  the  guns 
to  be  spiked  and  the  garrison  (a  small  company  of  twelve-months’  vol- 
unteers) to  bring  away  their  small-arms,  ammunition,  and  stores,  and  to 
rejoin  me  at  Camp  Moore.  The  enemy  did  not  go  down,  it  is  true,  for 
some  days,  but  they  could  have  gone  at  any  hour  and  any  day  and  taken 
the  men  with  their  arms,  which  i was  anxious  to  preserve.  The  order  I 
gave  was  not  obeyed.  Instead  of  joining  me  at  Camp  Moore,  the  men 
mutinied  and  disbanded,  and  both  officers  and  men  returned  to  New  Or- 
leans. It  would  be  well,  as  your  correspondent  suggests,  to  punish  the 
officers,  but  as  they  are  now  in  New  Orleans  such  a step  is  impracticable. 

A glance  at  the  map  which  I sent  to  the  Department  some  mouths  ago 
will  show  that  alter  the  city  fell  the  little  works  on  the  coast  must  be 
abandoned,  being  altogether  unnecessary. 

The  report  of  the  cargo  of  the  vessel  and  her  capture,  as  in  all  other 
instances,  is  grossly  exaggerated. 

Some  few  citizens  fired  upon  two  or  three  Federalsj  in  retaliation  a 
number  of  them  were  taken  prisoners  and  threatened  with  death  if  they 
did  not  produce  the  parties  who  had  committed  the  act,  but  the  i)enalty 
v as  not  inflicted. 

I had  no  force  to  protect  the  ])eople  in  that  district  of  country,  but 
sent  an  officer  to  raise  a partisan  corps  for  that  purpose,  yet  the  prom- 
inent citizens  earnestly  entreated  that  the  corps  should  not  be  raised 
there  unless  I could  send  a large  body  of  troops  to'  protect  them  from 
the  additional  outrages  to  Avhich  they  Avould  be  subject  from  the  Yan- 
kees for  having  raised  such  a corps.  Having  no  large  force  to  send,  and 
objections  being  raised  to  a small  one,  I countermanded  the  order.  . 

The  fact  is  that  that  part  of  the  country  is  inhabited  by  two  classes  of 
people — the  rich,  fearful  of  their  property  and  not  anxious  to  resist  unless 
supported  by  an  army  in  eA^ery  parish  •,  and  the  poor,  miserable  mixed - 
breed,  commonly  called  Dagos  or  Acadians,  on  whom  there  is  not  the 
slightest  dependence  to  be  placed.  I gave  authority  to  several  persons 
to  raise  partisans  there,  but  they  met  with  no  success.  When  I urged 
that  the  bridges  over  the  railroad  be  destroyed,  a parish  delegation 
entreated  that  it  be  not  done,  as  it  would  bring  down  upon  them  Yankee 
A^engeance.  They  would  only  consent  to  assist  on  condition  that  I should 
send  a large  body  of  troops  there.  MoreoA^er,  if  the  railroad  had  been 
destroyed,  the  stage  of  water  was  such  that  free  access  could  hav^e  been 
had  to  Thibodeaux  through  Bayou  La  Fourche.  I therefore  concluded, 
at  the  request  of  many  of  the  most  influential  citizens,  to  delay  opera- 


Chap.  XYL]  EVACUATION  OF  FORT  QUITMAN,  ETC.  657 

tions  until  the  subsiding  water  should  have  deprived  the  enemy  of  the 
means  of  entering  the  interior  at  pleasure. 

Had  a contrary  course  been  pursued  the  whole  country  would  have 
been  devastated  without  a possibility  of  preventing  it.  Nine  out  of 
every  ten  persons  from  that  part  of  the  country  warmly  appr«)ved  of  my 
decision. 

I trust  that  the  Department  will  not  give  ear  to  the  many  false  and 
absurd  rumors  that  are  set  afloat  by  persons  who  think  that  there  should 
be  an  army  stationed  on  every  plantation  for  its  protection. 

I am  satisfied  that  our  present  condition  is  to  be  attributed  in  a great 
measure  to  the  fact  that  we  have  followed  this  plan  too  much  already, 
dispersing  instead  of  concentrating  our  troops,  and  thus  rendering  them 
an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General j Commanding » , 

Hon.  GEORaE  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War, 

[Indorsements.] 

Eespectfully  submitted  to  the  President  for  his  information. 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 

Eead.  It  might  be  well  to  furnish  the  complainant  with  a copy  of 
this  reply.  The  abandonment  of  the  fort  was  a necessary  consequence 
of  the  fail  of  New  Orleans  and  the  subsequent  events.  Whether  it  was 
possible  to  save  the  armament  for  use  elsewhere  was  a question  which 
the  commanding  general  of  course  duly  considered.  As  he  established 
the  post  under  the  discretionary  power  conferred  on  him,  the  application 
of  his  remark  about  the  error  of  dispersion  is  not  perceived. 

J.  D. 

War  Department, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  June  10,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Gaynp  Moore^  Tangipahoa^  La,: 

General  : Your  attention  is  respectfully  called  to  the  annexed  copy 
of  a letter  received  from  a person  in  Louisiana  in  regard  to  the  evacua- 
tion of  the  forts  at  Grand  Caillou,  and  you  are  requested  to  report  to 
this  Department  the  facts  of  the  case. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 

[Inclosure.] 

Opelousas,  La.,  May  21,  1862. 

President  Davis: 

Dear  Sir:  * * a steamer  (name  not  known)  reached  Grand 
Caillou  on  the  night  of  the  7th,  with  350,000  pounds  of  powder  and  4,500 
rifles.  The  Federals,  duly  informed  of  it  by  telegraph,  which  has  not 
been  cut  from  Terre  Bonne  to  New  Orleans,  came  by  the  Opelousas 
Eailroad,  which  has  not  been  interrupted,  and  took  possession  of  her  on 
the  niglit  of  the  8th.  A party  of  determined  citizens  started  on  the  10th 
to  recapture  her.  Eight  hundred  Federals  were  sent  out  from  New  Or- 
42  R R — VOL  VI 


658  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

leans  and  secured  her,  and  Lave  sent  her  to  the  city.  They  have  taken 
with  them  sixteen  citizens,  four  of  whom  they  threaten  to  han^,  declar- 
ing they  are  not  prisoners  of  war,  but  persons  taken  in  rebellion  since 
the  authority  of  the  Union  has  been  restored. 

The  fort  at  Grand  Caillou  had  been  evacuated  on  April  27  by  order 
of  General  Lovell,  the  guns  spiked,  and  the  powder  thrown  into  the 
bayou.  Eleven  days  after  the  enemy  made  their  first  appearance  there. 
This  is  the  manner  in  which  all  our  forts  (of  course  I do  not  include 
Jackson  and  Saint  Philip)  were  evacuated.  There  was  not  a Yankee 
near  one  of  them  until  more  than  a week  after  the  powder  was  all 
destroyed  and  the  interior  of  the  fort  burned.  Ample  time  was  had  to 
save  the  guns  as  well  as  powder,  &c.  If  for  these  acts  some  of  the  offi- 
cers are  not  cashiered  or  shot,  we  need  not  expect  either  a brave  or  a 
disciplined  Army.  The  Uavy  emulated  this  conduct  of  the  Army,  the 
fleet  in  Pontchartrain  being  run  up  the  bayous  and  scuttled  or  burned.* * 
* * ***** 

I am,  very  respectfully,  &c. 

[The  above  from  Governor  Moore.  In  copy  furnished  General  Lovell 
his  name  was  omitted.] 


MAY  9-12,  1862. — Pensacola,  Fla.,  abandoned  by  the  Confederates  and 
occupied  by  the  Union  forces. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones,  Twenty-seventh  Mississij)pi  Infantry. 


Uo.  1. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  Q.  Arnold^  TI.  8.  Army. 

/ Hdqrs.  Western  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Pensacola,  Fla.,  May  10,  18G2. 

Ma.ioe:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  about  12  o’clock  last  night  it 
was  reported  to  me  that  Fort  McRee,  the  navy-yard.  Marine  Hospital 
and  Barracks,  and  several  other  buildings,  and  two  rebel  steamboats 
were  on  fire,  which,  being  simultaneously  ignited,  indicated  that  they 
had  been  abandoned  by  the  rebels  and  purposely  fired  by  them.  To  pre- 
vent the  spread  of  these  fires  and  to  disperse  these  wicked  destroyers  of 
property,  I opened  my  batteries  with  a very  happy  effect.  I directed  ^ 
my  aide-de-camp  and  acting  assistant  adjutant- general,  Lieutenant 
Jackson,  to  go  on  board  a small  naval  schooner  Ijdug  off  the  harbor,  to 
run  in,  and  summon  the  city  of  Pensacola  to  surrender,  whi(Ji  the 
mayor  did  to  the  extent  of  his  authority,  which  has  been  very  limited. 

Commodore  Porter  arrived  here  this  morning  on  board  tlie  gunboat 
Harriet  Lane.  With  his  kind  assistance  in  transporting  my  men  across 
the  bay  I have  been  enabled  to  take  military  possession  of  Forts  Bar- 
rancas and  McEee,  Barrancas  Barracks,  and  the  navy-yard,  over  which 
the  flag  of  the  Union  now  waves.  Fort  Barrancas  is  very  little  injured 
by  the  fire  and  Barrancas  Barracks  not  at  all.  Fort  McKee  is  seriously 

* The  portions  of  Governor  Moore’s  letter  here  omitted  relate  to  events  in  Louisiana 

subsequent  to  May  12,  1862,  and  will  appear  in  another  chapter. 


G59 


Chap.  XVI.]  PENSACOLA,  FLA. 

damaged,  Marine  Hospital  destroyed,  and  several  store-houses  in  the 
navy-yard  were  burned. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  AEKOLD, 

Brigadier- General j U.  S.  Volunteers,  Commanding. 
Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Ad juta7it- General,  IT.  S.  Vols.,  Dept,  of  the  ISouth. 


Hdqrs.  Western  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Pensacola,  Fla.,  May  15,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  with  a portion  of  my  com- 
mand (1,000  strong),  I took  military  possession  of  Pensacola  on  the  12th 
instant. 

The  march  from  Fort  Barrancas  was  uninterrupted,  excepting  that  the 
vedettes  of  some  rebel  cavalry  that  were  hovering  around  the  city  fired 
two  shots  at  my  advanced  guard.  I had  the  troops  formed  in  square 
around  the  flag-staff  in  the  center  of  the  plaza,  and  raised  the  flag  of  the 
United  States  amid  the  cheers  of  the  soldiers,  mingled  with  those  of  many 
citizens. 

I take  pleasure  in  adding  that  the  United  States  schooner  M.  A.  Wood, 
Anthony  Chase  master  (U.  S.  Navy),  commanding,  was  the  first  vessel 
that  had  the  honor  to  run  into  the  harbor  of  Pensacola  since  the  attack 
on  Sumter.  He  with  his  ofiicers  and  crew  participated  with  much  spirit 
in  reeving  new  halyards  on  the  flag-staff  and  in  raising  the  flag. 

Capt.  David  D.  Porte^^,  U.  S.  Navy,  ordered  the  sloop-of- war  Vincennes 
from  Mobile  Bay  to  Pensacola.  She  arrived  off  the  city  a short  time 
after  I had  entered  it  with  my  command,  where  she  now  lies. 

The  citizens  seem  orderly  and  quiet,  arid  the  acting  mayor,  Brosenham, 
zealous  and  apparently  loyal.  1 have  had  posted  up  at  diferent  points 
of  the  city  the  inclosed  circular,*  which  1 considered  necessary  and  iiroper 
to  promulgate  for  the  information  of  all  good  and  loyal  citizens. 

A stronger  force  is  very  necessary  here  to  guard  the  city  and  my  new 
line  trom  Pensacola  to  Fort  McRee,  a distance  of  10  miles.  A regiment 
of  cavalry  should  be  ordered  here  immediately  for  scouting  and  picket 
service,  and  to  capture  or  drive  to  their  homes  the  irregular  cavalry  in. 
this  vicinity,  and  to  enable  me  to  carry  on  other  important  military 
operations  that  I have  in  view.  I have  neither  horses,  mules,  nor  trans- 
portation of  any  kind  for  this  new  business  5 scarcely  suflicient  mules 
and  carts  for  the  wants  of  Fort  Pickens,  where  my  depot  of  supplies  is 
established.  My  small  force  in  its  new  position — very  different  from 
that  on  Santa  Kosa  Island,  within  striking  distance  of  "Mobile  and  Pol- 
lard, which  place  I understand  they  are  fortifying  and  occupy  in  force — 
might  invite  an  attack  5 all  of  which  makes  it  important  that  re-enforce- 
ments should  be  sent  here  immediately. 

The  steam  propeller  General  Meigs  has  just  arrived  for  service  in  this 
district,  which  facilitates  very  much  keeping  up  communications  with 
Forts  Barrancas  and  Pickens  and  my  depot  of  supplies  on  Santa  Eosa 
Island. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  ARNOLD, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Volunteer's,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  South. 


Not  found. 


GGO  OPEKATIONS  IX  AV.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones,  Twenty -seventh  Mississippi  Infantry, 

Mobile,  Ala.,  May  14,  1862. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  your  instructions  1 have  the  honor  respect- 
fully to  tender  the  following  report  of  my  evacuation  of  the  forts,  navy- 
yard,  and  position  at  and  near  Pensacola,  Fla. : 

On  being  j)laced  in  command  of  that  place  by  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones, 
March  9 last,  his  instructions  were  to  move,  as  fast  as  my  transportation 
would  allow,  the  machinery  and  other  valuable  property  from  the  navy- 
yard.  This  was  kept  up  steadily  until  the  night  of  the  evacuation. 

On  receiving  information  that  the  enemy^s  gunboats  had  succeeded  in 
passing  the  forts  below  New  Orleans  with  their  powerful  batteries  and 
splendid  equipments,  I came  to  the  conclusion  that,  with  my  limited 
means  of  defense,  reduced  as  I have  been  by  the  withdrawal  of  nearly 
all  my  heavy  guns  and  ammunition,  I could  not  hold  them  in  check  or 
make  even  a respectable  show  of  resistance.  I therefore  determined, 
upon  my  own  judgment,  to  commence  immediately  the  removal  of  the 
balance  of  my  heavy  guns  and  their  ammunition,  and  dispatched  to  you 
for  your  ajjproval,  which  was  answered  by  one  advising  me  to  continue 
doing  so.  On  receipt  of  General  Lee’s  written  instructions  on  the  sub- 
ject I pushed  on  the  work  with  renewed  vigor,  and  night  and  day  kept 
up  the  removal  of  guns  and  valuable  property. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  instant  I received  a dispatch  from  your 
adjutant-general  stating  that  there  were  a number  of  mortar  and  gun- 
boats otf  Fort  Morgan,  and  that  the  fort  had  fired  ten  shots  at  them. 
Conceiving  that  the  contingency  named  in  General  Lee’s  instructions 
had  arrived,  viz,  to  bring  all  my  available  force  to  this  point  in  the 
event  of  an  attack,  I concluded  to  promptly  leave  my  position.  I there- 
fore sent  to  Montgomery  a regiment  ot  unarmed  troops. 

On  the  next  day  I ordered  the  Eighth  Mississippi  Eegiment,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Yates  commanding,  to  proceed  at  once  to  this  place  and 
report  to  you,  and  on  the  9th  1 iirepared  my  plans  for  generally  evacu- 
ating. 

On  the  night  of  the  8th  three  companies  of  cavalry  arrived  from  Mont- 
gomery. With  these  and  two  companies  I already  had  I determined  to 
destroy  the  public  property,  &c.,  which  I had  not  been  able  to  remove, 
and  which  might  prove  of  benefit  to  the  enemy.  As  the  few  troops 
were  so  disposed  that  any  reduction  in  the  day-time  would  attract  the 
notice  of  the  enemy,  I merely  withdrew  the  camp  and  garrison  equipage 
and  sick,  in  accordance  with  an  order  from  General  Lee,  to  keep  the 
army  mobilized. 

On  the  morning  of  the  9th,  all  the  work  of  removing  sick  and  baggage 
having  been  completed,  I published  orders  that  my  forces  should  pre- 
sent themselves  to  the  best  advantage  to  the  enemy,  and  as  soon  as  it 
was  dark  they  were  quietly  marched  out  of  their  camps  and  started  on 
the  road  to  Oakfield.  Sentinels  were  posted  as  usual  on  the  beach,  and 
they  were  withdrawn  one  hour  after  the  other  troops  had  left.  All  these 
instructions  were  obeyed  to  the  letter,  and  much  to  the  credit  of  the 
comparatively  raw  troops  under  my  command. 

When  my  infantry  were  well  on  the  road,  and  out  of  range  of  the 
enemy’s  guns,  the  cavalry  were  assigned  their  places  to  commence  the 
necessary  destruction  at  a signal  previously  agreed  upon,  to  be  given 
from  the  cupola  of  the  hospital,  and  one  answering  at  the  navy-yard. 
Barrancas,  and  Fort  McEee.  Precisely  at  11.30  o’clock,  when  every- 


Chap.  XVI. j 


PENSACOLA,  FLA. 


GGl 


tiling  was  perfectly  quiet,  both  on  the  enemy’s  side  and  ours,  the  most 
]3ainful  duty  it  ever  fell  to  my  lot  to  perform  was  accomplished,  namely, 
the  signalizing  for  the  destruction  of  the  beautiful  place  which  1 had 
labored  so  hard  night  and  day  for  over  two  months  to  defend,  and 
which  I had  fondly  hoped  could  be  held  from  the  polluting  grasj)  of  our 
insatiate  enemies.  The  two  blue-lights  set  off  by  Colonel  Tattnall  and 
myself  at  the  hospital  were  promptly  answered  by  similar  signals  from 
the  other  i)oints  designated,  and  scarcely  had  the  signals  disaj)peared 
ere  the  public  buildings,  camp  tents,  and  every  other  combustible  thing 
from  the  navy-yard  to  Fort  Mcltee  were  enveloped  in  a sheet  of  flames, 
and  in  a few  moments  the  flames  of  the  public  property  could  be  dis- 
tinctly seen  at  Pensacola.  The  custom-house  and  commissary  store- 
houses were  not  destroyed  for  fear  of  endangering  private  i^roperty,  a 
thing  I scrupulously  avoided. 

As  soon  as  the  enemy  could  possibly  man  their  guns  and  load  them, 
they  opened  upon  us  with  the  greatest  fury,  and  seemed  to  increase  his 
charges  as  his  aaiger  increased.  But  in  spite  of  bursting  shell,  which 
were  thrown  with  great  rapidity  and  in  every  direction,  the  cavalry 
proceeded  with  the  greatest  coolness  to  make  the  work  of  destruction 
thorough  and  comi^lete,  and  see  that  all  orders  were  implicitly  obeyed. 
Their  orders  were  to  destroy  all  the  camp  tents.  Forts  McKee  and  Bar- 
rancas, as  far  as  possible,  the  hospital,  the  houses  in  the  navy-yard,  the 
steamer  Fulton,  the  coal  left  in  the  yard,  all  the  machinery  for  drawing- 
out  shix)s,  the  trays,  ^hears — in  fact  everything  which  could  be  made 
useful  to  the  enemy.  The  large  piles  of  coal  were  tilled  with  wood  and 
other  combustibles  and  loaded  shells  put  all  through  it,  so  that  when 
once  on  lire  the  enemy  would  not  dare  to  attempt  to  extinguish  it. 
Loaded  shell  were  also  placed  in  the  houses  for  the  same  purpose,  and 
the  few  small  smooth-bore  guns  I was  compelled  to  leave  were  double- 
shotted,  wedged,  and  spiked,  and  carriage-chassis  burned.  The  shears 
in  the  navy-yard  were  cut  half  in  two,  and  the  spars  and  masts  of  the 
Fulton  were  cut  to  pieces. 

By  the  most  unremitting  labor  I succeeded,  with  my  little  force  and 
limited  transportation,  in  saving  all  the  heavy  guns  and  nearly  all  the 
small-sized  guns.  I took  away  all  the  flanking  howitzers  from  Bar- 
rancas and  the  redoubt. 

In  removing  the  large  columbiads  from  the  batteries  which  were  in 
full  view  of  the  enemy,  I was  compelled  to  resort  to  General  Johnston’s 
plan  of  replacing  them  with  wooden  imitations  as  they  were  removed. 

All  of  the  powder  and  most  of  the  large  shot  and  shell  were  removed  ; 
the  small-sized  shot  were  buried.  I succeeded  in  getting  away  all  the 
most  valuable  machinery,  besides  large  quantities  of  copper,  lead,  brass, 
and  iron ; even  the  gutters,  lightning-rods,  window  weights,  bells,  pipes, 
and  everything  made  of  these  valuable  metals  were  removed  5 also  cord- 
age, blocks,  cables,  chain  cables,  and  a large  number  of  very  valuable 
articles  of  this  character  which  I cannot  here  enumerate. 

All  the  quartermaster  and  commissary  stores,  except  such  as  were 
not  woith  the  transportation,  were  sent  away.  As  soon  as  this  was 
completed  I set  hands  to  work  taking  u^)  the  railroad  iron  at  Pensacola 
and  others  to  reeling  uj)  the  telegraph  wires,  under  the  i)rotection  of  a 
strong  guard  of  cavalry,  infantry,  and  one  piece  of  light  artillery.  Hav- 
ing received  orders  not  to  destroy  any  private  property,  I only  destroyed 
at  Pensacola  a large  oil  factor^",  containing  a considerable  quantity  of 
resin,  the  quartermaster’s  store-houses,  some  small  boats,  and  three 
small  steamers  used  as  guard  boats  and  transi^orts.  The  steamers 
Mary  and  Helen  were  the  only  private  loroperty  of  their  kind  burned. 


6G2  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

Tlie  steamboat  Tiirel,  which  we  had  been  usin^  as  a transport,  was  sent 
lip  the  Escambia  Eiver,  she  being  of  very  light  draught,  w^ell  loaded 
with  stores,  machinery,  &c.,  with  orders  to  cut  down  trees  and  place 
every  obstruction  possible  in  the  river  behind  her.  She  has  arrived 
safely  at  a point  I deem  beyond  the  enemy^s  reach,  and  she  has  been 
unloaded  of  her  freight.  The  casemates  and  galleys  of  Fort  McEee 
were  tilled  with  old  lumber  and  many  loaded  with  shell  and  fired.  The 
galleries  and  implement  rooms  at  Barrancas  were  similarly  dealt  with, 
and  the  destruction  at  both  iilaces  was  as  complete  as  it  could  be  with- 
out the  use  of  gunpowder.  This  I did  not  deem  it  necessary  or  proper 
to  use  for  this  jiurpose.  The  eiiemy^s  furious  cannonade  only  served  to 
make  the  havoc  more  complete.  There  was  no  damage  done  by  it  to 
man  or  horse. 

When  it  is  remembered  that  all  this  work  has  been  done  by  a mere 
handful  of  raw  troops,  with  but  few  arms,  and  many  of  them  without 
any  arms  at  all,  and  this,  too,  in  the  very  face  of  a formidable  force,  I 
deem  it  but  simple  justice  to  my  men  to  say  that  the  conduct  of  each 
and  all  of  them  was  worthy  of  the  highest  praise.  It  not  unfrequently 
happened  that  after  standing  guard  all  night  they  cheerfully  labored 
all  the  next  day  and  night.  I have  not  room  to  make  distinctions  where 
all  did  so  well,  but  I feel  constrained  to  make  particular  mention  of 
Oapt.  J.  H.  Kelson,  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Mississippi  Eegiment,  who 
commanded  at  Fort  McEee,  the  most  exposed  and  dangerous  point; 
Major  Kilpatrick,  who  commanded  at  the  navy-yard,  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  [J.  F.]  Conoley,  who  commanded  at  Pensacola.  These  gentle- 
men deserve  the  greatest  credit  for  their  zeal  and  watchfulness  in  the 
management  of  their  respective  stations.  I feel  that  I am  also  author- 
ized in  saying  of  the  Twenty-seventh,  under  Captain  Hays,  that  during 
the  frequent  and  terrible  alarms,  so  unavoidable  with  new  troops,  it  was 
always  cool  and  ready  for  serious  work. 

The  unwearied  exertions,  both  night  and  day,  of  my  personal  staff 
officers  have  received  my  personal  thanks,  and  I feel  called  upon  to 
remark  that  they  deserve  great  credit,  as  they  were  so  zealous  and  un- 
remitting in  their  exertions  to  assist  me  in  carrying  out  my  orders  and 
of  serving  the  country,  that  I frequently  had  to  insist  on  their  taking- 
rest,  for  fear  that  they  would  comi)letely  wear  themselves  down. 

On  the  completion  of  my  work  I proceeded  to  rejoin  my  army  at 
Oakfield,  6 miles  north  of  Pensacola,  on  the  railroad,  leaving  five 
coiiq^anies  of  cavalry,  in  command  of  Capt.  J.  T.  [F.  J.*?]  Myers,  an 
efficient  and  daring  officer,  to  watch  the  enemy^s  movements. 

The  next  morning  I proceeded,  with  the  Twenty- seventh  Mississippi 
Eegiment,  to  Mobile,  leaving  Lieutenant-Colonel  Conoley,  with  tbe 
Twenty-ninth  Alabama  Eegiment,  and  Lieutenant- Colonel  Tullen,  with 
five  companies  of  Florida  Volunteers,  two  of  which  companies  were 
armed,  to  guard  the  railroad  while  the  iron  was  being  removed. 

I regret  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a telegraphic  dispatch  from 
the  honorable  Secretary  of  War,  dated  subsequent  to  my  evacuation, 
directing  me  not  to  burn  the  houses  in  the  navy-yard.  I received  one 
irom  him  the  day  before  the  evacuation,  directing  me  to  spare  all  private 
dwellings  not  useful  to  the  enemy  for  war  purposes,  which  was  done. 
The  first-named  dispatch  reached  me  after  my  arrival  in  the  city. 

I am,  sir,  very  resiiectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  M.  JOKES, 

Acting  Brigadier- General^  C.  S.  Army. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Fornea^, 

Commanding  Department  of  AUibama  and  West  Florida. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


PENSACOLA,  FLA. 

[Indorsement.] 


663 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

May  15,  18G2. 

I have  the  honor  to  transmit,  with  my  approval,  the  foregoing  report 
of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  M.  Jones  of  the  evacuation  of  Pensacola. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

elNO.  H.  FOBXEY, 
Brigadier-  General^  Coniinanding. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General^  Eichmondj  Va, 


Headquarters  Army  of  Mobile, 

May  24,  18G2. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the 
following  dispatch  from  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War,  referred  to  me  by 
the  general  commanding  the  department : 

The  President  desires  that  you  inquire  into  the  reported  destruction  of  the  dwelling- 
houses  in  the  navy-yard  at  Pensacola  sfcid  many  houses  in  the  town  on  its  evacuation. 
He  is  determined  to  punish  the  wanton,  useless  destruction  of  j)roperty  by  our  officers 
(which  we  fear  has  reached  a great  and  most  injurious  extent  to  ijroperty)  Avhich 
would  merely  prove  a convenience  to  the  enemy,  the  loss  of  which  indicts  great  and 
lasting  iujury  to  our  own  people,  and  should  not  be  destroyed.  Cotton,  tobacco,  and 
navy  stores  should  always  be  destroyed  if  in  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy. 

lu  answering  this  dispatch  I might  rely,  I think,  on  the  plain  state- 
ment of  facts  set  forth  in  my  report  of  the  evacuatiou,  as  it  meets  the 
requirements  made  upon  me  by  yourself,  but  something  further  in  rela- 
tion to  the  orders  under  which  I acted  may  not  be  imfiroper. 

On  assuming  command  at  Pensacola,  9th  of  March  last,  written  and 
verbal  instructions  were  given  me  by  Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones,  in  both 
of  which  the  property  the  War  Department  desired  to  be  destroyed  was 
particularly  and  specially  designated.  In  these  instructions  the  dwell- 
ing-houses in  the  navy -yard  were  not  only  named,  but  were  actually  fire- 
pared  for  conflagiation  by  having  combustibles  placed  in  them.  Certain 
private  and  public  property  in  Pensacola  was  also  named.  A dispatch 
from  the  honorable  the  Secretary  of  War,  dated  Gth  instant,  so  modified 
my  instructions  as  to  require  me  not  to  destroy  private  property  and 
dwellings  at  Pensacola.  This  dispatch  was  literally  obeyed  and  re- 
spected, for  not  a single  dwelling  was  touched  intentionally  in  the  town ; 
one  very  small  house  which  stood  near  the  oil  factory  was  consumed,  I 
learn,  in  spite  of  the  most  strenuous  efforts  to  prevent  it.  So  decided 
and  specific  were  my  instructions  to  the  officer  in  command  at  Pensacola, 
that  several  houses  embraced  in  the  orders  for  destruction  were  not  fired 
at  all  for  fear  of  endangering  private  property. 

That  the  President  is  displeased  at  the  houses  belonging  to  the  Gov- 
ernment in  the  navy-yard  being  burnt  I most  sincerely  regret,  since 
my  most  ardent  desire  was  so  to  execute  my  orders  as  to  give  entire 
satisfaction  to  those  above  me,  and  for  this  I labored  unremittingly  for 
two  months,  sleeping  only  at  intervals  in  the  day-time  at  such  moments 
as  I could  snatch,  as  it  were,  from  the  incessant  demands  made  upon 
my  energies.  I flattered  myself  that  I had  succeeded  until  the  telegram 
from  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War  was  received,  three  days  after  the  evac- 
uation, ordering  that  the  dwellings  in  the  navy-yard  be  not  destroyed. 
Having  served  as  a soldier  for  fourteen  years,  I scarce  know  how  to  dis- 
obey orders  j and  in  destroying  this  property  (the  profiriety  of  which  I 


664  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

♦ 

never  entertained  a doubt),  though  the  task  was  a painful  one,  it  was 
nevertheless  imperative. 

As  an  evidence  of  how  scrupulous  I was  in  carrying  out  my  orders  in 
respect  to  private  property  I refer  you  to  the  inclosed  copies  of  dis- 
patches which  passed  between  the  commanding  officer  at  Pensacola  and 
myself  in  reference  to  this  subject. 

In  conclusion  I ask  leave  respectfully  to  say  that,  from  the  tenor  of  this 
dispatch  in  reference  to  my  official  acts  in  evacuating  Pensacola,  I am  con- 
strained to  believe  that  representations  have  been  made  by  evil-minded, 
designing  persons — with  little  regard  for  veracity  and  much  less  for 
the  interest  of  our  cause  and  country  than  their  own — with  the  view  of 
injuring  me  before  I had  an  opportunity  of  placing  myself  and  my  actions 
properly  before  those  to  whom  I am  responsible.  Though  it  i^  discourag- 
ing and  disheartening  to  an  officer  whose  highest  aim  has  been  to  serve 
his  country  and  merit  the  approbation  of  his  superiors,  I have  yet  the 
consolation  to  feel  that  I did  my  duty  to  the  very  best  of  my  knowledge 
and  ability,  and  only  ask  for  an  impartial  hearing  before  punishment  or 
censure  is  inflicted  upon  me.  Knowing  that  the  task  of  evacuating  was 
a difficult  and  thankless  one,  I asked  that  an  older  and  wiser  officer 
might  be  assigned  to  it,  but  this  was  refused,  and  if  the  manner  in  which 
I have  executed  it  has  not  given  satismction,  I can  only  say  that  it  was 
not  for  want  of  efibrt  on  my  part  or  of  the  little  army  I had  the  honor  to 
command. 

With  the  hope  that  this  communication  may  be  received  in  the  re- 
spectful spirit  it  is  intended,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 
your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  M.  JONES, 
Acting  Brigadier  General, 

General  John  H.  Forney. 


[Indorsement.! 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

May  25,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General^  Bichmond: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  state  that  on  assuming  the  com- 
mand of  the  department  at  this  point  I found  Col.  T.  M.  Jones  in  com- 
mand of  the  Army  of  Pensacola.  Knowing  him  to  be  an  officer  of  dis- 
cretion and  capacity,  and  being  myself  heavily  pressed  with  work,  I did 
not  think  it  necessary  to  be  very  particular  in  giving  him  instructions; 
in  fact  I placed  the  greatest  confidence  in  his  integrity  and  judgment, 
and  therefore  did  not  interfere  particularly  with  his  operations.  I was 
well  aware  that  he  was  better  acquainted  with  what  was  necessary  to 
be  done  at  that  point  than  I,  as  he  had  long  been  stationed  there. 

If,  therefore,  any  blame  is  to  attach  to  him  for  what  he  did  there,  and 
I candidly  think  there  should  not,  I feel  that  it  should  rest  on  me  rather 
than  on  him,  and  if  any  one  is  to  be  punished  for  anything  that  occurred 
there  let  it  fall  on  me,  for  if  any  one  is  guilty  it  is  myself. 

In  conclusion  I beg  to  be  permitted  to  say  that  I consider  General 
Jones’  conduct  as  highly  creditable  to  him  as  an  officer  and  a gentleman, 
and  that  he  will  receive  praise  instead  of  censure  when  his  instructions 
and  the  difficulties  by  which  he  was  surrounded  are  considered. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ JNO.  H.  FOKNEY, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


Chap.  XVLl 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

[Incloaure  Xo.  1.] 


6G5 


O’Bannonville,  May  0,  18G2. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  r.  CONOLEY, 

Pensacola. : 

In  destroying  public  property  and  such  as  General  Sam.  Jones  has 
ordered  of  private  property,  remember  that  there  is  an  act  of  Congress 
prohibiting  the  destruction  of  private  property  other  than  what  can  be 
used  against  us  for  war  purposes.  Tell  your  men  that  much  of  their 
reputation  as  honorable  men  and  true  patriots  is  at  stake,  and  that  cool- 
ness and  judgment  must  characterize  the  destruction,  and  no  more  than 
what  is  absolutely  necessary  must  be  burned. 

THOS.  M.  JOISTES, 

Brigadier- General, 

[Inclosure  Xo.  2.] 


Cooper’s,  May  23,  18G2. 

General  Thomas  M.  Jones: 

General:  Ko  private  dwellings  were  destroyed  by  my  order  and 
none  were  destroyed  known  to  me,  except  one  near  the  oil  factory, 
which  was  unavoidable. 

J.  F.  COKOLEY. 


COERESPO^IDEKCE,  ORDERS,  AN^D  RETURNS  RELATING 
TO  EVENTS  IN  WEST  FLORIDA,  SCUTHERN  ALABAMA, 
SOUTHERN  MISSISSIPPI,  AND  LOUISIANA  FROM  SEP- 
TEMBER 1,  18G1,  TO  MAY  12,  18G2. 

XINION"  COREiESPO'JSrDLC^S-CE;,  ETC. 

Headquarters  DePxIrtment  of  Florida, 

Port  Picliens^  Pensacola.,  Seytemher  3,  18G1. 
Lieut.  Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

A ssistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Colonel  : The  rebels  have  endeavored  to  occupy  and  remove  the  dry- 
dock,  and,  having  notified  General  Bragg  that  I should  consider  his 
doing  either  as  an  act  of  hostility,  I last  night  ordered  it  to  be  burned, 
which  was  done. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARVEY  BROWN, 
Colonel,  Commanding. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Troops  at  Key  West,  Fla., 

No.  82.  ( September  G,  18G1. 

1.  Within  ten  days  from  this  date  all  male  citizens  of  the  Island  of 
Key  West  who  have  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance  will  send  their  names 
to  these  headquarters  to  be  registered. 

2.  Within  thirty  days  from  this  date  all  the  citizens  of  this  island  are 
required  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States. 

3.  At  the  termination  of  sixty  days  aU  citizens  of  this  island  who 


66G  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

have  failed  and  refused  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United 
States  will  be  removed  from  Key  West.  This  will  also  apj^ly  to  their 
families  and  the  families  of  those  who  have  left  the  island  to  join  the 
Confederate  States. 

^YM.  H.  FRENCH, 

Brevet  MajoTj  TJ.  S.  Army,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Piclcens,  September  10,  1861. 

Lieut.  Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General : 

Colonel:  Yesterday  morning  nine  men,  being  the  crew  of  one  of  the 
enemy’s  guard  boats,  deserted  to  this  post,  bringing  their  boatt  and  arms. 
They  belonged  to  a rebel  company  of  marines.  I have  closely  questioned 
them  and  obtained  valuable  information. 

The  same  morning  two  citizens  arrived  here.  They  have  been  con- 
tractors for  supplying  saw-mills  with  logs,  and  have  staid  in  the  coun- 
try, vainly  hoping  to  get  the  mone^^  due  on  their  contract.  They  have 
been  living  the  last  eighteen  weeks  at  or  near  Milton,  30  miles  up  the 
bay.  They  represent  there  being  many  Union  men  in  this  country,  but 
the  expression  of  Union  sentiments  to  be  dangerous.  1 shall  send  all 
North  by  the  first  opportunity. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARVEY  BROWN, 
Colonel,  Commanding. 


New  York,  October  1,  1861. 

Hon.  Simon  Cameron, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  At  the  recent  cutting  out  and  destruction  of  the  Judah,  at  Pen- 
sacola, by  boats  from  the  Colorado,  it  is  noticed  that,  although  the  boats 
w’ere  tired  at  and  a considerable  force  rushed  forward  to  beat  them  off, 
no  gun  was  fired  from  Fort  Pickens.  It  seems,  too,  that  the  fort  could 
at  any  time  have  destroyed  the  Judah. 

A large  gang  of  mechanics  are  now  reported  finishing  the  steam- 
frigate  Fulton  for  launching  at  Peusacola  as  a war  vessel,  within  reach 
of  the  guns  from  th^  fort,  or  by  the  aid  of  those  guns  capable  of  being 
reached  by  our  boats  and  seamen. 

Colonel  Brown  refers  to  old  orders  to  act  at  the  fort  strictly  on  the 
defensive.  I beg  to  call  your  attention  to  this  point,  in  order  that  you 
may  see  if  there  is  not  some  oversight  or  miscarriage  or  change  of  cir- 
cumstances requiring  a correction  of  the  apparent  inconsistency  of  the 
Navy  acting  ofiensively  and  the  fort  defensively  on  the  same  ground 
and  at  the  same  time,  so  that  they  cannot  unite  in  a common  object. 
Whether  Colonel  Brown  already  has  sufficient  liberty  by  his  orders  to 
use  his  discretion,  or  whether  he  needs  some  prompting  to  insure  co-  • 
operation  with  the  naval  officers — often  a difficult  thing  between  Army 
and  Navy — or  whether  any  other  officer  would  be  better  at  that  place, 
we  of  course  leave  wholly  to  the  Government.  But  we  are  here  deeply 
interested  that  no  effort  of  either  Army  or  Navy  be  omitted  to  i)reveut 
lirivateers  or  steamships  from  being  built  or  fitted  out  to  prey  upon  our 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


G67 


commerce  besides  our  general  interest  in  success,  and  suppose  such 
intimations  as  the  [)reseiit,  based  upon  distinct  information  which  may 
not  be  so  open  to  you,  are  what  you  Avish  us  to  make. 

In  belialf  of  underwriters,  yours,  very  resi)ecttully, 

CUAS.‘  B.  MOORE. 


[October  6, 18G1. — For  General  Butler’s  order  assuming  command  of 
the  Department  of  Xew  England,  see  Series  III,  Yol.  I,  i>.  511.] 


Fort  Pickens,  October  12,  18G1. 

Brigadier- General  Meios, 

Quartermaster- General : 

My  Dear  General:  The  prediction  contained  in  my  letter  to  you 
of  the  15th  July*  lias  been  sooner  ful tilled  than  I expected.  If  Barry’s 
battery  had  been  here  not  one  hundred  of  the  enemy  would  have  left 
the  island  aiiv’e  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  instant. 

If  the  companies  of  Barry,  Hunt,  and  Duane  had  not  been  with  so 
little  ceremony  taken  from  me  I should  have  had  a much  better  account 
to  render  than  I now  have;  and  if  I had  sat  down  and  grieved  over  what 
I considered  great  wrongs  in  being  so  inconsiderately  weakened  and 
done  nothing,  instead  of  exerting  every  iierA^e  and  taking  responsibili- 
ties that  few  under  existing  circumstances  would  have  taken  in  sending 
three  Zouave  companies  away  and  replacing  them  by  two  regular  com- 
panies, what  would  now  be  our  condition?  We  would  have  been  dis- 
gracefully whipped  and  this  fort  at  this  moment  would  be  closely  be- 
leaguered by  the  rebels — all  our  batteries  being  lost — for  I could  not 
then  have  had  the  means  of  sending  a man  from  the  fort  to  sustain  and 
support  the  batteries  and  to  repel  the  invaders;  and  Billy  Wilson’s 
Zouaves,  I am  sorry  to  say,  disgracefully  ran  and  took  shelter  under  our 
batteries. 

I do  not  say  this,  my  dear  general,  in  a spirit  of  self-laudation,  but  as 
re-expressing  to  the  fullest  extent  the  opinions  and  fears  I so  fully  and 
freely  expressed  at  the  time  and  for  which  I Avas  so  much  condemned. 

I must  also  add  that  in  the  coming  conflict,  which  the  defense  of  the 
honor  of  our  insulted  flag  imposes  on  me,  if  I had  these  companies  of 
A^ich  I haA^e  been  deprived,  and  especially  the  ofhcers,  I should  prob- 
ably be  able  to  gHe  a better  account  of  my  stewardship  than  I can  now 
hope  for ; but  my  command  is  in  good  condition  and  good  spirits. 

We  have  a just  and  noble  cause,  and  may  humbly  hoj)e  for  the  bless- 
ing of  God,  which  I daily  fervently  invoke.  H 

I am,  my  dear  Meigs,  yours,  truly, 

HARVEY  BROWN. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pickens^  October  12,  18G1. 

Lieut.  Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army^  Washington^  P.  C.: 
Colonel:  All  my  letters,  all  mj^  suggestions,  and  all  my  requests, 
written  and  made  since  I haA^e  been  in  command  of  this  post,  having 


See  p.  438,  Vol.  I. 


668  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [CHAr.  XVI. 

met  with  so  mortifying,  and  I must  add  such  undeserved  neglect,  not 
once  having  received  the  slightest  notice,  that  I now  only  write  you  at 
any  time  from  a sense  of  duty.  I do  so  now  to  report  that  this  fort,  with 
its  appendant  batteries,  is  now  as  ready  for  service  as  it  probably  will  at 
any  future  time  be,  and  that  the  enemy  are  still  erecting  batteries  and 
arming  them  with  guns  of  heavy  caliber,  so  that  the  relative  strength  is 
constantly  changing  to  our  loss.  If  I had  not  been  confined  by  positive 
orders  to  defensive  operations,  and  which  I have  in  vain  tried  to  have 
rescinded,  I would  open  my  batteries  on  the  enemy,  believing  that  at 
this  time  true  policy  and  the  best  interest  of  the  service  and  of  the 
country  demand  it. 

I fired  the  dry-dock  with  the  hope  and  expectation  that  the  enemy 
would  open  on  me,  but  he  has  not  yet  thought  proper  to  clo  so.  I can 
therefore  only  i>atiently  wait  the  course  of  events,  while  the  strength 
of  my  command  is  constantly  and  rapidly  diminishing  by  disease  and 
orders. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARVEY  BROWK, 
Colonel^  Commanding . 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington^  October  14,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Harvey  Brown, 

Fort  Fichens,  Fensacola^  Fla.: 

Sir:  The  General-in-Chief  directs  me  to  say  that  your  several  com- 
munications from  the  time  of  your  assuming  command  of  Fort  Pickens 
have  been  duly  read  to  him,  and  such  as  required  such  reference  have 
been  laid  before  the  War  Department. 

Your  operations  have  been  approved  and  your  zeal  and  energy  appre- 
ciated. 

The  usual  luinctuality  in  acknowledging  your  letters  has  been  un- 
avoidably departed  from  because  of  the  incessant  pressure  of  matters 
which  demanded  immediate  attention  and  left  no  time  for  anything  else. 

The  circumstances  which  prevented  ofiensive  operations  on  your  i)art 
changed  with  your  ability  to  assume  them,  the  cause  of  the  prohibition 
having  been  evidently  removed  by  the  state  of  active  and  open  war 
which  now  exists. 

More  regular  troops  as  well  as  ofiQcers  would  have  been  gladly  sent 
you  if  they  were  to  be  had,  but  the  pressing  need  of  regulars  can  hardly 
be  appreciated  ^cept  by  the  authorities,  on  whom  urgent  requisitions 
are  made  for  th  A from  all  quarters.  At  some  posts  there  is  not  one 
officer  to  a company.  The  General  could  not  give  you  leave  of  absence 
when  you  asked  it  or  since,  because  he  had  no  one  to  relieve  you  to 
whom  he  could  confide  your  responsible  command. 

The  Commissary-General  reports  that  a vessel  left  Kew  York  loaded 
with  beef  and  ice  in  September,  and  one  is  now  preparing  with  live 
cattle,  stores,  and  vegetables.  The  subject  of  pay  for  your  command 
has  been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Paymaster-General. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  D.  TOWYSEKD, 
Assistant  Adjutant- Gerieral. 


Chap.  XYL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  GG9 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  FiclcenSj  October  15,  18G1. 

Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General j Washington^  Z>.  (7.  : 

Colonel:  I have  to  report  to  you  that  I sent  the  McClellan  with 
dispatches  to  Flag-Officer  McKean  on  the  9th  instant,  proposing  a joint 
attack  on  the  enemy,  to  which  he  readily  acceded,  and  on  the  11th  he, 
with  the  Niagara  and  Colorado,  arrived  here.  After  consultation  we 
agreed  on  a plan  of  attack,  which  was  to  have  been  carried  into  execu- 
tion to-morrow  morning  at  daybreak.  At  the  request  of  the  flag-officer 
I had  lent  him  two  Parrott  rilled  guns  and  the  steamer  to  carry  them  to 
the  Mississippi.  She  returned  this  morning,  bringing  the  commodore 
a report  of  the  unfortunate  affair  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  which, 
as  you  will  perceive  by  his  letter  (A),  renders  his  immediate  presence 
at  the  Southwest  Pass  necessary;  and  as  I am  thus  deprived  of  his 
assistance,  I have  been  comi^elled  to  listen  to  his  suggestion  to  suspend 
operations  until  he  can  co-operate  with  me.  I need  not  say  with  what 
feelings  of  disappointment  I have  been  compelled  now  the  third  time  to 
forego  an  attack  on  the  enemy. 

I intended  to  have  sent  the  prisoners  taken  on  the  9th  to  New  York 
by  the  McClellan,  but  the  captain  represents  that  he  cannot  take  them 
with  safety  to  his  vessel. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAEVEY  BEOWN, 
Colonel,  Commanding, 

[Inclosure  A.] 

U.  S.  Flag-ship  Niagara, 

Off  Fort  Fichens,  October  15,  1861. 

Col.  Harvey  Broavn, 

Commanding  Department  of  Florida^  Fort  Fichens. 

Sir:  The  information  received  by  the  McClellan  is  such  as  to  make  it 
indispensable  that  I should  proceed  immediately  to  the  Mississippi. 
The  Eichmond  is  leaking  badly,  having  three  planks  stove  in  below  the 
water  line  by  the  ram.  The  Vincennes  has  thrown  overboard  all  her 
guns  but  four.  At  one  of  the  passes  there  is  not  a sufficient  force  to 
contend  with  that  of  the  enemy.  It  is  exceedingly  mortifying  and  try- 
ing, but  my  duty  seems  plain.  I ought  to  be  there  at  this  time.  I 
would  suggest  that  you  defer  your  operations  until  lean  assist  you  with 
a suitable  naval  force.  The  Colorado  I will  leave  here.  Lieutenant  May 
will  give  you  particulars,  as  I am  much  hurried. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  W.  McKEAN, 
Flag-Officer,  Commanding  Gulf  tSguadron, 


[October  21,  1861. — For  General  ButlePs  General  Orders,  No.  2,  of 
this  date,  see  Series  III,  Vol.  I,  p.  521.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Ficliens,  October  29,  1861. 

Col.  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  A djutant-  Genera  I : 

Colonel:  I herewith  inclose  you  three  letters  which  passed  between 
General  Bragg  and  myself.  The  two  first  were  imblished  by  him  in  the 


670  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Pensacola  Observer,  with  a very  laudatory  editorial  notice  of  him,  and 
one  not  so  very  much  so  of  me,  in  which  I am  accused,  among  other 
delinquencies,  of  being  in  cold  blood  a murderer  of  a sick  enemy. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAKVEY  BROWN", 
Colonel^  Commanding, 


[Inclosures.] 

Headquarters  Departmnt  of  Florida, 

Fort  Ficlcens,  October  9,  1861. 

General  Braxton  Brago,  * 

Commanding  Troops  near  Pensacola. 

Sir  : I observe  this  morning  for  the  first  time  a yellow  flag  hoisted 
over  a large  building  directly  in  front  of  my  batteries.  I also  under- 
stand that  officers’  wives  and  children  are  in  the  adjoining  buildings. 
I do  not  make  war  on  the  sick,  women,  or  children.  These  buildings 
will  necessarily  be'  exposed  to  my  fire  should  there  be  a bombardment, 
and,  besides,  they  are  subject  under  this  flag  to  be  used  as  a protection 
to  any  of  your  troops  that  may  take  shelter  behind  or  before  them.  I 
therefore  give  you  this  notice,  that  the  sick,  the  women,  and  the  children 
may  be  removed,  so  that  if  fired  on  the  responsibility  may  rest  where 
it  belongs. 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARVEY  BROWNT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Hdqrs.  Troops  C.  S.,  near  Pensacola,  Fla., 

October  10,' 1861. 

Sir:  1 received  late  last  evening  your  communication  of  that  date 
with  profound  astonishment.  The  building  on  which  you  had  for  the 
first  time  observed  a yellow  flag  has  been  well  known  to  you  and  all 
your  command,  as  well  as  to  the  United  States  Niavy,  as  the  military 
hospital  of  this  station,  and  you  could  not  help  knowing  that  it  is  now 
used  for  that  purpose. 

Healing  with  one  who  had  been  an  old  brother  soldier  of  high  reputa- 
tion, I had  hoped  that  our  intercourse  and  conduct  in  the  hostile  atti- 
tude in  which  we  are  placed  would  be  marked  by  all  the  courtesies  and 
amenities  of  civilized  warfare^  but  it  seems  from  your  communication 
that  you  claim  the  right  ta  violate  a hospital  flag  because  it  may  be 
abused.  Admit  this  principle,  and  w^e  revert  to  a state  of  barbarism. 
The  sick,  the  women  and  the  children,  and  prisoners  must  become  the 
objects  of  vengeance;  the  white  flag  must  be  abolished;  booty  and 
beauty,”  ‘‘rape  and  rapine,”  must  follow  in  the  track  of  a victorious 
commander.  I decline  your  invitation  to  make  these  the  objects  of  war. 
Your  hospital  flag  has  been  and  shall  be  resjmcted.  In  the  affair  of 
Tuesday  night  jmur  hospital  with  its  inmates  was  in  our  possession  for 
at  least  one  hour,  and  as  far  as  I can  learn  my  orders  to  scrupulously 
resj)ect  both  were  rigidly  enforced. 

Our  hospital  and  the  two  adjacent  building^  occupied  by  medical 
officers  will  continue  to  be  used  for  legitimate  purposes.  iNothing  has 
been  or  will  be  done  to  attract  your  fire.  If,  under  these  circumstances, 
you  should  put  your  threat  into  execution,  which  would  only  be  in 
accordance  with  the  acts  of  some  of  your  brother  commanders  of  little 
experience  in  the  customs  of  war,  I shall  take  care  that  the  facts  shall 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  671 

be  raade  known,  that  it  may  receive,  as  it  will  deserve,  the  execration 
of  the  civilized  world. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BlIAXTONT  BRAGG, 
Major-  General^  Commanding, 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  FicJccnSj  October  10,  1801. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Brago, 

Commanding  Troops  near  Pensacola. 

Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  10th  instant  was  duly  received,  and  I should 
deem  it  unworthy  of  an  answer  had  5^011  not  thought  proper  to  i)ublish 
it  to  the  world  and  to  countenance  an  editoral  in  a Pensacola  paper 
every  way  worthy  of  it. 

You  have  knowingly  and  willfully  misconstrued  my  letter,  for  the 
evident  purpose  of  having  your  Christian  answer  iiublished,  so  as  to 
make  capital  with  your  deluded  followers.  You  have,  in  the  very  face 
of  my  declaration  that  I did  not  make  war  on  women,  the  children,  and 
the  sick,  declined  an  invitation  that  I never  made,  and  which  you  knew 
I never  made,  to  make  those  the  objects  of  war.  You  knew  that  in  call- 
ing to  your  notice  that  these  buildings  would  necessarily  be  exposed  to 
my  fire  I was  influenced  by  a desire  to  save  the  sick,  women,  and  chil- 
dren from  danger,  for  previously  to  writing  the  letter  to  which  yours  is 
an  answer  I mentioned  to  your  inspector-general,  who  was  here  with  a 
flag,  my  intention  to  do  so,  and  then,  on  the  spot  where  the  batteries 
and  buildings  could  be  plainly  seen,  I pointed  out  that  I could  not  fire 
from  certain  batteries  of  mine  at  some  of  yours  without  endangering 
your  hospital,  which  is  in  a direct  line  with  them  (and  this  is  perfectly 
obvious  to  your  own  sight).  You  therefore  knew  that  I must  either 
omit  to  fire  on  particular  batteries  of  yours  or  it  must  necessarily  be 
exposed  to  my  fire,  and  yet  your  Christian  xihilanthropy  is  such  that 
you  declare  your  intention  of  keeping  .vour  sick,  your  women,  and  your 
children  in  this  dangerous  situation.  And  for  what  motive  but  in  the 
hope  of  fixing  on  me  the  stigma  of  firing  on  your  hospital  or  killing 
women,  children,  and  the  sick?  Your  conduct  shall  not  influence  mine. 
I intend  to  prosecute  this  war  as  a Christian  man  who  has  an  account 
to  give  to  his  Maker.  I will  do  my  duty  as  I construe  it,  regardless  of 
your  calumny  and  that  of  the  wretch  who  edits  the  Pensacola  Observer. 

I have  had  three  of  your  officers  prisoners.  They  have  notified  ^^ou 
that  they  were  treated  as  brother  officers  by  mine.  I have  had  some 
thirty  of  your  privates  prisoners.  They  have,  with  one  solitary  excep- 
tion (and  he  said  nothing),  in  writing  to  their  friends,  declared  that 
they  were  well  and  kindly  treated,  and  I have  your  sick  in  my  hosifltal, 
and  they  have  also  reported  that  they  receive  the  same  attention  as  my 
own.  I have  released  three  of  your  medical  officers  without  parole.  I 
have  collected  and  buried  your  dead  with  the  same  decency  as  my  own. 
I have  done  much  more.  At  your  special  request  I have  for  two  days 
employed  my  soldiers  in  disinterring  and  carting  to  the  wharf  your  dead, 
so  that  their  friends  might  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  their  bodies 
were  cared  for,  and  this  has  been  done  with  the  full  knowledge  of  the 
entirely  different  treatment  our  prisoners  and  our  dead  have  received 
and  are  receiving  from  your  hands  at  Manassas  and  Richmond.  And 
you,  knowing  all  this,  have  malignantly  and  falsely  accused  me  of  invit- 
ing you  to  make  war  on  the  sick,  women,  and  children. 

I will  hold  no  terms  of  courtesy  with  a man  who  so  far  forgets  what 
is  due  to  an  honorable  profession,  anc^  who  so  well  knows,  yet  so  little 


672  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

l)ractices,  the  principles  of  honorable  warfare.  I decline  all  further 
com muDi cations  with  you  unless  it  be  by  verbal  message  and  strictly  on 
official  subjects. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAKVEY  BROWN^, 
Colonel^  Commanding, 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  Florida,  Col.  Harrey  Broivn,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artil- 
lery, commanding,  for  the  month  of  OcLohtr,  1861. 


Stations. 

Presei 

du 

oS 

o 

sa 

o 

at  for 

ty. 

S 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  killed  or  miss-  '* 

ing  in  action. 

Aggregate  wounded  in 

action.  ^ 

_ ® 

moran 

Pris( 
of  ^ 

oS 

u 

o 

o 

56 

o 

da. 

)ner8 

var. 

g 

Pieces  of  field  artillery. 

"Port  PicTrftns  "Fla,  

21 

709 

833 

4 

20 

1 

8 

Camp  Brown,  Santa  Kosa  Island 

12 

243 

370 

10 

9 

13 

Total  in  Pensacola  Harbor 

33 

952 

1,  203 

1 14 

29 

1 

21 

Fort  J efferson , Fla 

10 

238 

330 

Fort  Tavlor,  Fla 

9 

190 

273 

4 

52 

1,  380 

1,  806 

14 

29 

1 

21 

4 

Adjutant-General’s  Office, 

Washington.,  November  1,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Harvey  Broivn, 

U,  8.  Forces,  Commanding  Department  of  Florida  : 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  12th  ultimo  has  been  received  and  referred  to 
the  Headquarters  of  the  Army,  and  in  reply  I am  directed  to  transmit 
to  you  the  indorsement  there  made  upon  it.  You  will  perceive  that  a 
letter  was  addressed  to  you  on  the  14th  of  October,  two  days  subsequent 
to  the  date  of  yours,  which  has  doubtless  reached  you  by  this  time,  and 
will  contain  the  answer  to  your  inquiries. 

1 am,  sir,  very  resiiectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  BAIRD, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington.,  October  28,  1861. 

This  letter  having  been  handed  me  by  the  Adjutant-General,  I re- 
spectfully report  that  Colonel  Brown’s  letters  were  all  promptly  com- 
municated to  the  General-in-Chief  as  they  were  received.  On  the  14th 
of  October  a letter  was  addressed  to  Colonel  Brown  from  this  office  which 
is  believed  ter  cover  all  the  points  in  the  correspondence,  a copy  of  which 
was  forwarded  to  the  Adjutant- General  at  its  date.  Owing  to  the  secrecy 
with  which  General  Brown’s  expedition  was  fitted  out  no  copies  of  the 
instructions  to  him  are  found  in  this  office.  I was  not  informed  on  a 
single  point  touching  the  exjiedition,  nor  have  I been  able  to  gain  any 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


G73 


information  concerning  Colonel  Brown’s  orders,  &c.,  until  furnislied  a 
day  or  two  since  with  a rough  copy  in  his  possession  by  General  Meigs. 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[November  9-19,  1862. — For  Secretary  of  War  to  General  Butler 
(November  9),  in  relation  to  transportation  j General  McClellan  to  Butler 
(November  15),  calling  for  reports  of  strength  and  condition  of  command  j 
Butler’s  reply  of  November  18,  and  order  suspending  the  embarkation 
of  the  expedition,  see  Series  III,  Yol.  I,  pp.  545,  552, 555,  559.] 


Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

^ Washington.,  December  26,  1861. 

Col.  Harvey  Brown,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Department  of  Florida.,  Fort  Fichens^  Fla. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  highly  im- 
portant dispatches,  as  follows : 

October  9 and  11,  with  inclosures,  reporting  the  attack  of  the  rebels 
and  their  disastrous  repulse  on  the  9th  October. 

October  15,  in  relation  to  joint  attack  intended  to  be  made  by  you 
with  the  naval  force. 

Three  letters  of  November  25,  and  report,  with  inclosures,  of  Decem- 
ber 2,  in  relation  to  the  bombardment  of  the  rebel  forts  and  batteries 
around  Pensacola  by  the  fort  and  fleet  of  the  United  States  on  the  22d 
and  23d  November. 

Letter  of  December  3,  remarking  upon  bravery  and  good  conduct  of 
officers  and  men  of  your  command. 

The  brilliant  and  successful  operations  detailed  in  these  dispatches 
have  been  read  with  lively  satisfaction  by  the  President,  Secretary  of 
War,  and  General-in-Chief.  The  General  will  not  forget  to  bring  spe- 
cially to  notice  the  valuable  services  thus  rendered  by  yourself,  your  offi- 
cers, and  your  whole  command,  and  to  urge  an  appropriate  recognition 
of  them  by  the  Government. 

Your  suggestions  in  relation  to  armament,  &c.,  have  already  been 
brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Ordnance  and  also  of  the  Navy  Depart- 
ments. The  regiment  sent  to  re-enforce  you  has  doubtless  arrived  before 
this,  and  it  is  hoped  that  some  if  not  all  the  absent  officers  of  your  regu- 
lar companies  have  also  joined  by  this  time. 

I am,  sir,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  THOMAS, 
Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Departj^ient  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pichens,  December  27,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army.,  Washington,  D.  C.: 

General:  Nothing  of  special  import  has  occurred  at  this  fort  since 
the  bombardment.  The  Seventy-fifth  New  York  Volunteers,  whose 
arrival  I duly  reported,  are  encamped  and  industriously  engaged  in 
drilling.  The  Sixth  [N.  Y.]  Eegiment,  I am  sorry  to  say,  so  far  as  the 
officers  are  concerned,  is  in  a state  of  disorganization  j criminations, 
recriminations,  charges,  and  countercharges,  between  the  officers,  and 
43  R R VOL  VI 


674  OPERATIONS  IN  \V.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYL 

especially  between  the  colonel  and  two  or  three  espousing  bis  side  and 
the  other  officers  of  the  regiment,  became  of  such  daily  occurrence,  that 
I had  peremjjtorily  to  stop  it,  and  to  notify  all  concerned  that  I would 
entertain  no  more  complaints  until  the  result  of  those  forwarded  had 
been  acted  on  at  Washington.  I ordered  a court,  which  is  now  in  session, 
for  the  trial  of  two  of  the  captains  and  some  privates,  and  since  then 
charges  against  almost  every  officer  of  the  regiment  have  been  sent  me. 

I do  not  deem  it  expedient  to  exercise  the  authority  vested  in  me  by 
your  letter  of  the  18th  November,  unless  in  marked  cases,  but  I must 
reiterate  the  opinion  expressed  in  my  letter  of  the  12th  October,  that 
the  good  of  the  service  requires  some  stringent  action  in  reference  to  the 
officers  of  this  regiment.  ’ 

And  while  on  this  subject  I desire  to  call  the  especial  attention  of  the 
Department  to  the  fact  that  Colonel  Wilson  is  the  next  to  me  in  rank,  and 
if  I am  rendered  unserviceable  the  command  will  devolve  on  him,  and 
this,  serious  under  almost  any  circumstances,  but  remote  and  isolated  as 
we  are,  might  be  of  the  most  vital  consequence,  and  I therefore  think 
it  my  duty  to  call  your  attention  to  it. 

Some  more  appropriate  and  efficient  means  of  unloading  vessels  is  a 
subject  of  serious  consideration.  The  boats  we  have  answered  tolerably 
well  the  purpose  in  summer  when  the  sea  was  smooth,  but  in  the  heavy 
surf  which  now  almost  constantly  prevails  they  are  nearly  or  quite  use- 
less. A receiving  vessel  and  good  surf-boats  are  almost  of  indisx)ensable 
and  immediate  necessity. 

I respectfully  again  submit  that  an  officer  of  more  rank  than  I have 
should  be  stationed  here,  and  I beg  leave  to  state  that,  while  willing  to 
devote  my  whole  being  to  the  service,  I know  that  I cannot  endure 
another  summer  in  this  enervating  climate,  and  that  my  health  and 
probably  my  life  will  be  sacrificed  b}^  it.  I have  now  spent  upwards  of 
fifteen  years  in  Florida,  and  I require  the  bracing  influences  of  a Northern 
climate.  If,  therefore,  consistent  with  the  good  of  the  service,  it  will  be 
gratifying  to  me  to  be  relieved  by  one  of  the  many  efficient  general  offi- 
cers now  in  service,  and  to  be  ordered  to  duty  in  the  North. 

The  rebels  have  been  for  some  six  weeks  busily  engaged  with  a large 
force  in  putting  up  batteries  on  Oak  Island,  at  Deer  or  Town  Point,  and 
are  putting  heavy  (10  inch  columbiads)  guns  in  them,  and  since  the 
bombardment  they  have  erected  a battery  at  the  mouth  of  the  Big 
Lagoon  and  put  one  or  two  heavy  guns  in  it,  and  have,  besides,  greatly 
strengthened  their  existing  batteries. 

I have  never  doubted  but  that  with  three  or  four  gunboats  and  5,000 
men  the  navy-yard  at  Pensacola  could  at  any  time  until  October  have 
been  taken,  and  I think  the  day  after  the  bombardment,  such  was  their 
panic,  it  might  even  with  a smaller  force  have  been  successfully  assailed, 
but  since  October  they  have  so  materially  strengthened  their  works  and 
erected  so  many  batteries  that  I should  consider  an  attack  as  hazardous 
without  strong  land  and  naval  forces.  We  are  no^v  strong  enough  for 
defense  (unless  in  case  of  bombardment,  when  we  ought  to  have  more 
artillery  troops),  and  more  will  be  useless  unless  a sufficient  number  is 
sent  to  act  ofensively;  and  this  can  only  be  done  with  the  co-operation 
of  gunboats  of  light  draught  of  water. 

I respectfully  renew  my  application  for  Parrott’s  rifle  guns  and  for  a 
large  suioply  of  ammunition  for  those  I have.  I would  also  report  that 
there  are  two  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars  here,  but  no  beds. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HAEYEY  BEOWN, 
Colonel^  Commanding. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  675 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  Florida,  Col.  Harvey  Brown,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artil- 
lery, commanding,  for  month  of  December,  1861. 


Present  for 
duty. 

a 

00 

o 

Stations. 

Troops. 

Officers. 

Men. 

0 

"S 

tn 

1 
to 

Santa  Eosa  Island ; 

Fort  Pickens 

Detacliments  Ist  and  2d  Artillery  and  3d  In- 

19 

568 

704 

Camp  T.iTipnln - . . 

fantry. 

fith  N’pi'w  Vorlc  Infantry 

13 

228 

474 

Ca,mp  Sftwarfi 

7 nth  "Mpiw  Vnrlr  Infantry 

32 

7il 

829 

Fort  Jefferson 

Detachments  Ist  Artillery  and  6th  New  York 

10 

307 

347 

Fort  Taylor 

Infantry. 

Detachments  1st  Artillery,  and  1st  Infantry, 

6 

209 

201 

Total 

80 

2,  023 

2,  615 

Ship  Island,  Miss.,  January  3,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  New  England  Division,  Boston,  Mass.: 

Sir:  The  Jast  few  days  have  been  occupied  with  muster  of  the  troops* 
As  these  troops  are  raw,  much  time  and  attention  have  been  necessary 
to  examine  the  rolls.  To  show  how  raw  these  troops  are,  I may  state 
that  three  men  have  already  been  wounded  in  one  month  by  the  care- 
less use  of  fire-arms. 

The  transport-ships  George  Green  and  Bullion  arrived  on  the  31st 
ultimo.  The  former  landed  138  horses,  G of  which  are  private  property, 
in  good  condition.  Twelve  died  on  board,  and  1 has  died  since  com- 
ing ashore.  The  captain  of  the  George  Green  (Fairbanks)  stopped  at 
Key  West,  when  it  is  thought  there  was  no  necessity  for  it. 

Captain  Clouet,  of  the  French  steamer  Milan,  came  into  the  harbor 
recently,  and  is  receiving  facilities  to  go  to  Kew  Orleans,  being  detained 
at  this  present  moment  by  a fog,  which  appears  to  continue  day  and  night. 
He  informed  me  that  the  French  have  some  twenty  vessels  of  war  in  the 
Gulf.  I should  feel  more  at  ease  if  we  had  our  Sawyer  guns  mounted, 
for  we  need  them  to  insure  respect,  if  for  nothing  else. 

January  7,  1862. 

From  some  cause  or  other  the  captain  of  the  Milan  went  to  Kew 
Orleans  in  one  of  his  own  ship’s  boats.  I should  have  been  very  glad 
to  supply  him  with  the  small  steam-tug  belonging  to  the  Quartermaster’s 
Department,  which  has  been  sent  us  from  Pensacola  by  Colonel  Brown, 
but  I understood  from  the  flag-officer  that  he  intended  to  send  the  Water 
Witch  gunboat  on  this  service,  and  hence  gave  the  subject  no  further 
attention  until  I incidentally  learned  that  the  captain  had  gone.  Should 
I see  him  again,  I shall  express  to  him  my  regret  at  not  having  the  pleas- 
ure of  giving  him  a passage  by  one  of  our  vessels. 

I had  designed  making  use  of  the  occasion  to  gain  some  knowledge  as 
to  the  defenses  of  the  Eigolets,  with  a view  to  ascertain  whether  our 
long-range  rifle  guns  might  reach  them  from  the  sound.  I have  sug- 
„gested  to  the  flag-officer  to  make  use  of  the  Lewis,  the  captured  light- 


676  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVH 

draught  high-pressure  steamer,  for  making  reconnaissances.  She  went 
over  to  Biloxi  the  other  day,  and  from  all  I can  learn  I should  judge 
that  a great  deal  of  property  lies  exposed  to  us  on  the  northern  shore  of 
the  sound.  If  so,  the  condition  of  affairs  presents  the  curious  spectacle 
of  a rebel  army  lying  in  wait  to  seize  upon  Washington,  staking  every- 
thing upon  the  hazard  of  seizing  upon  our  capital  and  its  capital  influ- 
ences with  the  unrelenting  determination  of  accomplishing  our  ruin, 
while  at  the  same  time  they  leave  their  rear  comparatively  unprotected,, 
and  their  property  exposed  in  a way  that  appeals  rather  to  mercy  and 
pity  than  to  the  ordinary  visitations  of  war.  I may  possibly  be  mistaken 
in  this  view  of  things.  The  waters  of  the  opposite  coast  are  very  shal- 
low, and  may  be  regarded  as  unnavigable  for  albour  vessels  except  the 
Lewis,  which  for  various  reasons  has  not  been  in  condition  for  recon- 
noitering  till  within  the  last  week  or  fortnight.  I shall  endeavor  to  ex- 
tend our  knowledge  of  this  region  of  country  by  all  the  means  in  my 
power,  which,  however,  are  exceedingly  limited.  It  might  become  de- 
sirable to  transfer  our  camp  to  the  northern  shore,  and  especially  if  the 
rebellion  should  continue  through  the  summer.  The  glare  and  heat  of  the 
sand  of  which  the  island  is  composed  would  i3robably  be  intolerable  dur- 
ing that  season.  The  depot,  however,  must  be  here,  whatever  direction 
the  forces  may  take. 

So  convenient  thus  flir  have  we  found  the  harbor,  admitting  easily  of 
large  vessels  of  war,  that,  taken  together  with  the  modern  tendency  of 
building  large  vessels,  I think  that  it  must  become  of  more  importance 
than  l!^ew  Orle'ans.  By  means  of  railroads  terminating  on  the  other 
shore,  and  large  vessels,  like  the  Constitution,  I think  that  it  would  be 
cheaper  to  dispatch  a cargo  of  rice  or  cotton  from  this  point  than  it 
would  be  from  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi.  The  question  is  whether 
we  ought  not  to  adopt  a plan  from  the  very  beginning  with  regard  to 
this  point  and  begin  its  execution  at  once;  for  under  any  circumstances, 
holding  in  view  even  a temporary  independence  of  the  South,  the  pos- 
session of  the  island  would  be  valuable  to  us.  The  opposite  shore  is 
comparatively  healthy,  and  by  means  of  long  wharves  and  light-draught 
steamers  vessels  could  be  expeditiously  laden  at  this  point  in  almost 
any  weather  that  we  have  had  since  being  here.  It  would  be  economy 
in  the  long  run  to  have  a plan  to  follow.  The  plan  should  be  well 
matured,  covering  at  least  a period  of  thirty  years,  and  be  left  with  the 
head  of  the  Engineer  Corps  for  preservation  and  execution. 

January  8,  1802. 

I am  informed  that  the  mail  will  leave  to-day  for  the  Korth. 

It  may  be  well  to  state  that  the  Schenkl  shot  that  have  been  supplied 
to  the  battery  appear  to  be  too  large  in  their  paper  envelopes,  these 
envelopes  or  cylinders  fitting  too  close  for  a foul  piece.  The  only 
means  that  I have  of  reducing  them  is  to  pass  them  through  a hot  ring. 

Just  previous  to  my  leaving  Newi>ort  News  I applied  for  two  officers, 
viz.  Lieutenant  Tyler,  of  the  Second  Vermont,  and  Lieutenant  Hol- 
brook, of  the  Fourth  Vermont,  as  staff  officers.  I have  heard  nothing 
from  them  since,  but  I trust  that  the  application  has  been  favorably 
entertained  and  the  officers  authorized  to  report  to  me  for  duty.  With- 
out either  a staff  or  the  usual  blank  forms  to  do  business  by,  my  duties- 
are  rendered  more  difficult  than  they  need  be. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier- Oencral^  Commanding, 


677 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

War  Depart:ment, 

. ' Washington^  D.  (7.,  January  24,  18G2. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  TnoiviAs, 

Adjutant- General : 

Ordered,  That  the  general  commanding  report  without  delay  his 
opinion  whether  the  expedition  proposed  by  General  B.  F.  Butler  shall 
be  prosecuted,  abandoned,  or  modified,  and  in  what  manner. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary, 


Adjutant-General’s  Office, 

Washington,  January  25,  1862. 

To  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  instructions  of  yesterday,  I have  the 
honor  to  report  in  reference  to  the  expedition  of  Maj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler, 
U.  S.  volunteers,  as  follows  : 

It  appears  that  on  the  10th  of  September  a general  authority  was 
given  in  the  following  terms ; 

War  Department,  Sejytemher  10,  1861. 

^laj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler  is  liereby  authorized  to  raise,  organize,  arm,  uniform,  and 
■equip  a volunteer  force  for  the  war  in  the  New  England  States,  not  exceeding  six  reg- 
iments of  the  maximum  standard,  of  such  arms,  and  in  such  proportions,  and  in  such 
manner  as  he  may  judge  expedient ; and  for  this  purpose  his  orders  and  requisitions 
•on  the  Quartermaster’s,  Ordnance,  and  other  staff  departments  of  the  Army  are  to  he 
obeyed  and  answered,  provided  the  cost  of  such  recruitment,  armament,  and  equip- 
ment does  not  exceed  in  the  aggregate  that  of  like  troops  now  or  hereafter  raised  for 
the  service  of  the  United  States. 

SIMON  CAMERON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

This  authority  was  extended,  and  an  object  for  the  expedition  indi- 
cated by  an  order  from  the  Secretary  dated  two  days  after,  as  follows : 

War  Department,  September  12,  1861. 

Major-General  Butler  is  authorized  to  fit  out  and  prepare  such  troops  in  New  En- 
gland as  he  may  judge  fit  for  the  iDurpose,  to  make  an  expedition  along  the  Eastern 
Shore  of  Virginia,  via  the  railroad,  from  Wilmington,  Del.,  to  Salisbury,  and  thence 
through  a portion  of  Maryland,  Accomac  and  Northampton  Counties,  of  Virginia,  to 
Cape  Charles. 

Transportation  agents,  quartermasters,  and  commissaries  of  subsistence  will  answer 
General  Butler’s  requisitions  for  this  purpose. 

SIMON  CAMERON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

The  object  of  General  Butler’s  expedition,  as  given  in  these  last-quoted 
orders,  seems  to  have  been  soon  after  abandoned,  and  the  general  seems 
to  have  contemplated  an  attack  on  Mobile. 

Again,  on  the  2d  of  December,  he  submitted  a plan  for  invading  the 
coast  of  Texas,  and  he  appears  to  have  had  in  view  an  ultimate  attempt 
to  capture  New  Orleans.*  On  the  2d  of  December  he  reports  that  a 
part  of  his  expedition  sailed  in  the  steamer  Constitution  from  Portland 
for  Ship  Island  on  the  23d  of  November,  touching  at  Fort  Monroe  the 
27tli  of  November,  to  take  on  board  Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Phelps,  IT.  S.  Vol- 
unteers, who  at  the  request  of  General  Butler  t was  detached  from  Fort 
Monroe  to  command  this  detachment,  consisting  of  nine  companies  Ninth 
Connecticut  and  the  Twenty-sixth  Massachusetts  Infantry  Kegiments 

^ See  Series  III,  Vol.  I,  p.  580.  t Of  November  13.  See  Series  III,  Vol.  I,  p.  548. 


678  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVl. 

and  the  Fifth  Massachusetts  Light  Battery,  in  all  about  1,900  men.. 
General  Phelps’  command  landed  and  occupied  Ship  Island  on  the  5th 
to  the  7th  of  December,  and  has  since  been  fortifying  itself  there  j a very 
proper  measure,  as  it  enables  the  Government  to  hold  a very  important 
point,  interrupting  a part  of  the  communications  of  the  rebels.  General 
Phelps’  command  is  the  only  part  of  General  Butler’s  expedition  that 
has  so  far  gone  to  the  Gulf  coast. 

The  great  points  from  which  important  operations  are  to  be  conducted 
are,  first,  the  Department  of  the  Potomac,  in  front  of  which  is  posted 
and  strongly  intrenched  the  largest  and  best-armed  body  of  the  insur- 
gents guarding  the  approach  to  Eichmondj  second,  the  Department  of 
the  Ohio,  opposed  to  the  next  great  body  of  the  rebels  in  Kentucky ; 
third,  the  Department  of  the  Missouri,  the  army  in  which,  besides  the 
clearing  of  the  State  of  Missouri,  has  for  a prime  object  the  control  of 
the  Mississippi  Eiver  and  operations  against  NTew  Orleans.  Kext  to 
these  the  Department  of  Kansas  is  to  furnish  a heavy  column,  to  move 
in  co-operation  with  that  in  Missouri.  There  are  other  separate  opera- 
tions, designed  to  draw  off  and  distract  the  enemy  along  the  sea-coast. 
These  are,  Sherman’s  expedition,  which  has  already  occupied  Port 
Eoyal,  S.  0.,  and  which  is  to  attack  Charleston  or  Savannali  or  both 
second,  Burnside’s,  which,  having  entered  Albemarle  Sound,  will  be 
directed  against  Korth  Carolina  or  Southern  Virginia;  third, the  occu- 
pancy of  Fort  Jefferson,  on  the  Tortugas,  of  Fort  Taylor,  Key  West,, 
and  of  Fort  Pickens,  Pensacola,  together  with  demonstrations  against, 
the  Florida  coast.  These  outside  operations  are  deemed  to  be  the  only 
ones  that  ought  to  be  undertaken  at  this  time  in  support  of  the  main 
plan.  It  would  be  only  a wise  and  necessary  measure  to  hold  in  reserve 
the  troops  raised,  but  not  yet  assigned,  to  corps  d’armee,  ready  to  sup- 
port and  re-enforce  in  any  quarter  where  they  may  be  required,  and 
which  can  only  be  determined  by  circumstances  in  the  course  of  active 
operations.  Thus  they  should  not  be  withdrawn  to  raise  General  But- 
ler’s expedition  to  the  number  (not  less  than  30,000  men,  and  it  is  be- 
lieved 50,000)  which  would  be  required  to  insure  success  against  Kew 
Orleans  in  a blow  to  be  struck  from  the  Gulf.  It  is  assumed  that  Kew 
Orleans,  being  the  vital  point  on  the  Gulf,  should  be  the  object,  rather 
than  Mobile  or  the  coast  of  Texas.  Under  all  these  circumstances  it  is 
clear  to  my  mind  that  wliat  is  known  as  General  Butler’s  expedition”^ 
ought  to  be  suspended.  The  part  of  it  now  at  Ship  Island  is  well  placed, 
and  is  quite  adequate,  with  the  co-operation  of  the  Kavy,  to  hold  that 
important  position.  The  remaining  troops  of  this  expedition  now  at 
Fort  Monroe  cannot  at  present  be  better  disposed  of  than  by  adding 
them  to  the  command  of  Major-General  Wool  at  that  post.  They  will 
there  have  ample  opportunity  for  discipline  and  instruction,  and  can  be 
readily  transferred  thence  to  another  point  whenever  required.  The 
supplies  intended  for  them  under  the  supposition  they  were  to  go  to 
Ship  Island  will  serve  them  as  well  at  Fort  Monroe. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,. 

GEO.  *B.  McGLELLANT, 
Major-General^  Commanding  U.  S.  Army. 


[January  25,  1802. — For  Governor  Andrew’s  communication  to  the 
Secretary  of  War  in  relation  to  complications  growing  out  of  the  organ- 
ization of  the  Butler  expedition,  &c.,  see  D.  Andrew  to  Stanton,  January 
27,  1862,  Series  HI,  Yol.  II.] 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  679 

Ship  Island,  Miss.,  January  20,  1802. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General,  Washington^  D.  C.: 

Sir:  There  is  not  much  of  importance  to  communicate  from  my  com- 
mand. 

The  period  of  maximum  cold  has  passed  j warm  weather  is  approach- 
ing, and  some  ]irovision  must  be  made  for  it  in  any  plan  of  operations 
that  may  be  adopted  for  this  region  of  country.  The  climate  is  so  damp 
that  our  tents  mildew  speedily  and  threaten  a rapid  decay. 

One  of  the  regiments  here,  the  Ninth  Connecticut,  is  very  much  in 
want  of  clothing  of  all  kinds.  Instead  of  coats,  blouses  are  the  best  for 
this  climate. 

At  the  hazard  of  frequent  repetition  I must  again  refer  to  the  subject 
of  blanks.  Another  muster  day  will  soon  be  at  hand,  and  if  we  are  not 
soon  supplied  with  blanks  it  will  be  difiQcult,  if  not  impossible,  to  make 
out  the  rolls.  Matters  of  this  kind  are  of  great  importance  to  the  disci- 
pline and  accountability  of  the  troops. 

By  the  Milton  we  received  a small  engine,  which  is  now  at  work  un- 
loading that  ship.  Temporary  store-houses  have  been  constructed,  and 
a bake-house  will  soon  go  into  operation.  The  9-inch  shell  gun  on  navy 
carriages  is  being  put  up  to  the  number  of  ten,  but  I am  in  hopes  that 
Sawyer’s  rifled  24  pounder  and  8 or  10  inch  columbiads  will  be  sent  to 
replace  them.  I would  take  this  occasion  to  state,  as  my  opinion,  that 
if  the  42-pounder  were  bored  for  Sawyer’s  24-pounder  it  would  be  the 
best  heavy  ordnance  that  we  have,  either  for  land  or  sea  service. 

Several  of  the  men  of  the  regiments  and  battery  are  considered  unfit 
for  service,  and  I have  concluded  to  send  them  back  to  New  England, 
with  a view  to  their  discharge.  Three  ofiicers  have  tendered  their  resig- 
nations, which  I shall  forward  to  your  office  for  acceptance,  at  the  same 
time  allowing  them  to  return  with  the  men  to  Lowell,  Mass.,  where  they 
will  be  directed  to  await  action  on  their  resignations  from  your  office. 

Some  arrangement  seems  called  for  with  a view  to  the  regular  trans- 
mission of  intelligence  between  the  posts  of  the  Gulf  station  and  the 
North.  We  have  been  here  nearly  two  months,  and  have  yet  received 
no  communication  from  any  military  source  and  but  very  few  letters  or 
papers  of  any  kind. 

Intelligence  from  Washington  occasionally  reaches  us  through  the 
rebels  and  the  Navy.  We  are  thus  informed  that  the  Constitution  has 
l£|Dded  her  troops  at  Old  Point. 

*Our  field  of  view  and  our  sphere  of  action  are  both  limited  here,  but 
from  general  appd'arances  I should  suppose  it  well  to  be  provided  against 
the  contingency  of  collision  with  some  foreign  power — at  least  to  the 
extent  of  having  an  unobstructed  channel  of  communication  open  for 
the  receipt  of  intelligence  and  supplies. 

It  might  be  well,  perhaps,  to  fortify  this  point  more  strongly  than  I 
have  proposed,  even  against  immediate  contingencies. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  AW  PHELPS, 
Brigadier-  General  Volunteers. 


Ship  Island,  Miss.,  February  3,  1862. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General,  Washington,  B.  C.: 

Sir:  I write  on  the  occasion  of  the  gunboat  Massachusetts  being 
about  to  sail  for  the  North. 


G80  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Some  definite  plan  should  be  adopted  with  reference  to  this-  point. 
Few  of  the  officers  of  the  Government  are  aware,  perhaps,  of  the  char- 
acter of  the  island  on  which  we  are  situated,  or  what  it  is  to  be  amid 
glaring  white  sand  during  the  heats  of  summer.  If  troops  remain  here 
they  must  have  wooden  structures  for  shelter,  and  even  then  they  will 
need  some  protection  for  the  eyes,  I think.  I would  beg  to  be  informed, 
at  as  early  a moment  as  may  suit  your  convenience,  whether  there  are 
any  particular  designs  or  not  with  respect  to  this  point,  or  at  least  what 
direction  I shall  give  to  requisitions  for  carrying  out  such  designs  as  I 
may  entertain  of  my  own.  As  it  is,  we  are  threatened  with  a shortness 
of  provisions,  having  but  about  three  weeks’  of  some  articles  on  hand. 

One  of  my  instructions  was  to  place  the  island  in  a state  of  defense^ 
but  I have  not  the  means  of  rendering  it  as  strong  as  I should  desire. 
To  this  end  there  would  be  necessary  a better  class  of  guns  and  car- 
riages, with  a large  supply  of  bricks  and  mortar,  pintles,  traverse- circles, 
materials  for  a magazine,  &c.  The  magazine  ought  to  be  of  peculiar 
structure,  perhaps  made  of  iron,  and  strong  enough  when  buried  in  sand 
to  resist  11-inch  shells.  It  should  exclude  the  air  as  much  as  possible, 
for  the  climate  is  very  damp.  It  would  be  good  economy  to  have  a gen- 
eral plan,  embracing  a long  period  of  time,  and  have  everything  done 
in  accordance  with  it. 

As  I understand  the  policy  of  the  Government  with  regard  to  this 
region  it  was  to  establish  new  sites  for  commercial  centers  in  the  place 
of  NTew  Orleans  and  Mobile,  which  were  founded  without  any  reference 
to  cotton  shipping  and  large  vessels.  As  a war  measure  this  could  be 
done  by  the  same  means  that  would  secure  the  most  effective  military 
operations,  or,  at  all  events,  military  points  could  be  found,  I think, 
which  would  threaten  the  trade  of  those  two  cities,  and  would  have  a 
great  influence  upon  the  security  of  slave  property. 

We  now  have  24  of  the  enemy’s  negroes,  which  we  employ  in  lighter- 
ing vessels  at  an  unfixed  rate  of  pay.  They  appear  to  be  intelligent, 
and  fiir  more  dignified  and  manly  than  many  of  their  masters,  whom 
they  look  upon  with  mingled  feelings  of  pity  and  contempt  as  well  as 
dread.  Some  of  them  crossed  the  sound  to  us,  a distance  of  10  or  11 
miles.  One  of  them  came  at  night  in  a thunder  gust,  finding  that  more 
friendly  than  the  sympathies  of  his  master.  One  of  the  mulattoes  came 
originally  from  Korth  Carolina,  another  from  Virginia.  They  are  aware 
of  their  alliance  with  the  white  race,  and  of  the  ties  which  have  been 
snapped  in  their  leaving  home.  They  are  ripe  for  manumission,  and  any 
measure  to  avert  it  may  put  off,  but  cannot  long  prevent,  a revolution— 
a revolution  of  that  kind  where  men  are  restored  to  thbir  original  rights. 

In  case  that  wooden  structures  should  be  put  up  upon  the  island  for 
the  two  regiments  and  one  battery  now  here,  we  should  need  some  more 
lumber  than  we  have  on  hand. 

To  take  possession  of  a point  on  the  main-land  and  hold  it  we  should 
need  more  troops,  I think,  than  we  now  have,  since  the  conspirators 
might  possibly  be  able  to  direct  a large  force  against  us.  We  should 
also  need  some  siege  and  garrison  artillery  and  the  shallow- draught 
boats  I have  alluded  to  in  former  communications. 

In  conclusion,  permit  me  to  call  your  attention  to  the  main  point  of 
this  letter,  which  is  the  necessity  of  some  channel  through  which  my 
wants  in  the  due  form  of  requisitions  and  the  intentions  of  the  Govern- 
ment can  be  made  known.  Clothing,  and  probably  provisions,  will  be 
needed  as  soon  as  they  can  be  got  here. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PIIFLPS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding, 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


681 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  England, 

Boston,  February  G,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  United  States,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  followiug  matters  existing 
at  Ship  Island,  as  reported  by  Brigadier-General  Phelps,  which  will 
bear  upon  the  necessities  of  our  expedition,  and  which  may  be  of  inter- 
est to  the  Commanding  General. 

General  Phelps  reports  that  seventeen  9-inch  guns  upon  navy  car- 
riages arrived  at  Ship  Island  from  the  Tortugas  on  the  18th  of  January, 
from  which  he  has  taken  enough  for  the  fortifications. 

He  further  reports  that  the  health  of  the  troops  is  good,  and  that  the 
intercourse  through  the  sound  between  Mobile  and  New  Orleans  has 
been  stopped. 

I would  desire  respectfully  to  inquire  when  the  Seventeenth  Massa- 
chusetts Eegiment,  the  Fifth  New  York  Eegiment,  and  Nims’  battery 
will  be  at  Fortress  Monroe  ready  for  embarkation. 

T>he  steamer  Constitution  can  be  ready  to  take  these  troops,  with  good 
fortune,  in  ten  days  from  to-day,  if  this  meets  the  approbation  of  the 
Commanding  General.  All  other  transportation  has  been  and  will  be 
provided  for. 

I have  the  honor  further  to  report  that  the  Fourteenth  Maine  Eegi- 
ment sailed  on  Saturday,  and  that  the  Thirteenth  and  Fifteenth  Maine 
Eegiments  will  sail  within  seven  days  from  this  date.  The  Twelfth  Con- 
necticut Eegiment  is  expected  to  sail  on  board  the  steamer  Fulton  this 
week,  and  the  Western  Bay  State  Eegiment  upon  the  steamer  Missis- 
sippi also  within  a week. 

I take  the  liberty  to  urge  the  subject  of  the  Maine  cavalry.  The  regi- 
ment expects  to  be  disbanded  and  there  are  now  applications  for  a court- 
martial  upon  some  of  the  officers.  The  keeping  up  of  the  regiment  is 
attended  with  large  expense,  and  it  is  very  desirable,  if  the  horses  are 
to  be  turned  over  to  me,  that  they  should  be  shipped  as  soon  as  possi- 
ble, that  they  arrive  out  in  season  for  training  and  use.  These  circum- 
stances make  it  desirable  that  such  orders  as  may  be  considered  neces- 
sary should  be  given  at  the  earliest  possible  moment. 

Very  respectfully,  BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 

3Iajor-  Genera  I,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  England, 

Bostoii,  February  G,  18G3. 

To  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army  : 

General  : In  compliance  with  the  order  from  the  War  Department 
of  the  24th  day  of  January,  18G3,  that  General  Butler  report  without 
delay — 

1st.  The  present  state  and  condition  of  the  expedition  now  under  his  charge; 

2d.  The  amount  of  expenditures  made  and  liabilities  incurred,  specifying  in  detail 
the  nature  and  amount  of  each  expenditure ; 

3d.  The  probable  expenditure  required  to  place  the  expedition  at  its  contemplated 
destination ; — 

General  Butler  has  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report,  which  he 
prepared  himself  to  do  immediately  upon  his  return  to  New  England 
as  soon  as  the  necessary  documents  could  be  copied: 

1st.  There  are  now  at  Ship  Island,  in  Mississippi  Sound,  the  Twenty- 


G82  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 

sixth  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Yolunteers  and  nine  companies  of  the 
Ninth  Regiment  Connecticut  Yolunteers,  together  with  the  First  Bat- 
tery of  light  artillery  of  the  New  England  Division  (P'ourth  Massachu- 
setts), armed  with  two  G-pounder  rifled  guns  and  four  12-pounder  how- 
itzers 5 in  the  aggregate  about  2,000  men,  all  under  the  immediate  com- 
mand of  Brigadier-General  Phelps,  whose  various  reports  have  been 
from  time  to  time  as  received  forwarded  to  the  Department,  to  which 
reference  is  requested  for  particular  information  in  regard  to  the  condi- 
tion of  that  portion  of  General  Butler’s  command. 

There  are  now  en  route  for  Ship  Island,  on  board  the  Constitution,  the 
Twelfth  Regiment  Maine  Yolunteers  and  nine  companies  of  the  Eastern 
Bay  State  Regiment,  with  three  companies  of  mounted  men ; say  2,20G 
men  in  the  aggregate. 

There  are  embarked  on  board  ship  in  Boston  Harbor,  ready  to  sail, 
the  Fourteenth  Regiment  of  Maine  Yolunteers  and  the  Third  Battery 
of  light  artillery,  New  England  Division  (Second  Yermont),  armed  with 
six  6-pounder  Sawyer  guns,  the  Second  Battery  of  said  division  (First 
Maine),  armed  with  six  12-pounder  rifled  guns,  and  the  Fourth  Battery 
of  said  division,  armed  with  two  6-pounder  rifled  and  four  6-pouhder 
smooth-bore  guns,  with  the  tenth  company  of  the  Eastern  Bay  State 
Regiment ) say  1,500  men. 

There  are  in  Massachusetts  the  Western  Bay  State  Regiment  at  Pitts- 
field, now  ready  to  start  at  a moment’s  notice,  waiting  only  for  the  pay- 
master, and  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire,  now  at  Fort  Independence, 
waiting  for  transportation,  which  will  be  ready  immediately j say  1,900 
men,  to  be  2,000  by  the  time  of  sailing. 

In  Connecticut  the  Twelfth  Connecticut  Yolunteers  at  Hartford  is  full, 
and  only  awaits  the  paymaster  to  be  ready  to  move  as  soon  as  necessary. 

In  Yermont  the  Eighth  Yermont  Yolunteer  Regiment  is  full  at  Brat- 
tleborough  and  ready  to  be  mustered  in  and  to  march  immediately,  and 
the  Seventh  Yermont  Regiment  Yolunteers  will  be  ready  as  soon  as 
transportation  is  obtained  for  them.  By  the  last  reports  they  contained 
about  1,800  men,  and  will  be  full  by  the  time  of  sailing. 

There  are  in  the  State  of  Maine,  in  various  conditions  of  readiness, 
the  Thirteenth  Regiment  Maine  Yolunteers,  the  Fifteenth  Regiment 
Maine  Yolunteers,  and  five  batteries  of  light  artillery,  to  wit,  the  Second, 
Third,  Fourth,  Fifth,  and  Sixth  Maine  Batteries,  which  will  be  hurried 
to  completion  and  ready  for  embarkation  within  ten  days ; in  all  about 
2,500  men. 

For  an  exact  statement  of  the  numbers  and  condition  of  the  troops 
now  in  New  England  reference  is  made  to  the  report  marked  A,  for- 
warded herewith,*  containing  a summary  of  the  latest  reports  from  all  in 
New  England  except  from  the  Seventh  and  Eighth  Yermont  Regiments 
and  the  Second  and  Sixth  Maine  Batteries. 

A resume  of  these  troops  shows — 

At  Ship  Island : Twenty-sixth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Yolunteers ; 
Ninth  Connecticut  Yolunteers  (nine  companies),-  First  Battery  N.  E.D. 
(Fourth  Massachusetts). 

Bn  route  per  Constitution : Twelfth  Regiment  Maine  Yolunteers ; 
Eastern  Bay  State  Regiment  (nine  companies);  three  companies  mounted 
men. 

On  board  shq)  in  Boston  Harbor:  Fourteenth  Regiment  Maine  Yol- 
unteers; Third  Battery  N.  E.  D.  (Second  Yermont);  Second  Battery 
N.  E.  D.  (First  Maine) ; Fourth  Battery  N.  E.  D.;  tenth  company  of 
Eastern  Bay  State  Regiment. 


Omitted  iu  view  of  tlie  resume  following. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.—  UNION. 


683- 


At  their  camps  ready : Twelfth  Kegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  at 
Hartford;  Seventh  and  Eighth  Eegiments  Vermont  Volunteers,  at 
Brattleborough;  Eighth  Eegiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  at  Fort 
Independence;  Fifteenth  Eegiment  Maine  Volunteers,  at  Augusta. 

To  be  ready:  Thirteenth  Eegiment  Maine  Volunteers,  at  Augusta f 
Second,  Third,  Fourth,  Fifth,  and  Sixth  Batteries  Maine  Volunteers,  at 
Augusta. 

The  aggregate  of  infantry  and  artillery  now  in  New  England,  8,500 ; 
on  Constitution,  2,200;  at  Ship  Island,  2,000;  total,  12,700;  eleven  reg- 
iments infantry,  three  companies  mounted  men,  and  nine  batteries  of 
artillery.  These  troops  as  they  are  moved  are  fully  armed  and  equipped 
for  service. 

2d.  Quartermaster’s  department. — The  amount  of  expenditures  made 
in  the  quartermaster’s  department  to  the  1st  of  February,  1802,  is 
$497,033.25,  the  details  of  which  are  fully  set  out  in  Schedule  B,*  for- 
warded herewith.  (The  original  bills,  with  the  accounts  of  the  quarter- 
master, will  be  forwarded  to  Washington  immediately.)  The  liabilities 
incurred  in  that  department  are,  so  far  as  they  can  be  ascertained  on 
that  date,  $422,911.52,  as  per  Schedule  C,*  forwarded  herewith. 

Ordnance  department. — The  expenditures  in  this  department  to  Feb- 
ruary 1,  1802,  are  $178,774.90,  as  per  Schedule  H,*  herewith  forwarded. 
For  liabilities  incurred,  $39,730.87,  as  per  Schedule  E.* 

Adjutant  general’s  department. — The  expenditures  in  this  department 
to  February  1,  1802,  are  $14,895.92,  as  per  Schedule  F*  and  Captain 
Goodhue’s  statement.  These  expenditures  were  for  recruiting  expenses, 
transportation  of  recruits,  and  rations  of  the  several  regiments.  No 
liabilities. 

Commissary  department. — The  expenditures  in  this  department  have 
been  $191,897.51,  as  per  Schedule  G.*  No  liabilities. 

Medical  department. — The  expenditures  in  this  department  have  been 
$2,190.72.  No  liabilities. 

To  resume,  the  exj)enditures  in  all  the  departments  to  February  1, 
1802,  are : 


Quartermaster’s $497, 633  25 

Ordnance 178, 774  90 

Adjutant  general’s 14,895  92 

Commissary 191, 897  51 

Medical 2,190  72 

$885, 392  30 

Liabilities  incurred: 

Quartermaster’s 422,911  52 

Ordnance 39,730  87 

The  others  none 

462, 642  39 


Total  cost  to  February  1 1, 348, 034  69 


It  will  be  observed  that  a very  large  proportion  of  all  these  expendi- 
tures should  not  be  put  to  the  account  of  the  expedition,  but  are  for  the 
raising,  arming,  and  equipping  of  some  6,000  men. 

3d.  The  probable  expenditure  necessary  to  place  the  expedition  at  its 
contemplated  destination  must  now  substantially  be  the  expenses  of 
transportation  and  transport  ships.  The  troops  being  now  all  armed, 
uniformed,  and  equipped,  it  will,  of  course,  cost  no  more  to  feed  and 
pay  them  in  one  place  than  in  another,  and  the  others  may  be  fairly  put 

See  resume  following. 


<884  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

at  $30  per  man  as  the  maximum,  but  apart  of  this  expenditure  for  trans- 
portation has  already  been  incurred. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLEE, 
Major- General j Commanding, 


Office  Chief  Engineer  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Washington^  February  7,  1862. 

Col.  A.  Y.  Colburn, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : I do  not  know  how  General  Butler  proposes  to  operate. 
The  memorandum  I drew  up  was  made  for  the  use  of  Mr.  Fox,  and  with- 
out consultation  with  others.  It  proposed  to  attack  New  Orleans  and 
obtain  command  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver  by  a combined  naval  and 
land  [force],  operating  through  the  mouths  of  the  river,  and  making  the 
capture  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  an  essential  feature  of  the 
plan. 

I believe  that  any  other  way  of  approaching  New  Orleans  is  to  run 
great  risk  and  half  do  the  work,  and,  under  the  most  favorable  issue,  to 
protract  the  period  of  complete  triumph  of  our  arms  in  the  Mississippi 
Valley.  Take  these  works,  and  New  Orleans  falls,  and  our  gunboats 
appear  at  once  before  Vicksburg,  Natchez,  and  Memphis,  and  the  rebel 
defense  both  ways  (our  armies  and  flotilla  in  the  Upper  Mississippi  co- 
operating) is  completely  annihilated.  The  approaches  to  New  Orleans 
by  Lakes  Borgne  and  Pontchartrain  are  very  intricate  j require  the  expe- 
ditionary force  to  be  put  in  boats  or  barges  and  towed  for  15  or  20  miles; 
then  to  attack  works  not  easily  taken;  then  to  encounter  the  hazards  of 
a defile  through  narrow  bayous  and  over  narrow  causeways,  &c. 

Assuming  the  attack  by  the  Mississippi  adopted,  I thought  10,000  men 
to  be  more  than  would  be  required  for  the  capture  of  those  works,  in 
which  I depended  mainly  upon  a coup  dHnstant  of  the  Navy,  that  it 
would  be  enough  for  the  immediate  capture  (aided  by  the  fleet)  of  New 
Orleans,  and  therefore  that  it  would  not  be  best  to  encumber  the  expe- 
dition with  a larger  mass  of  transports  than  that  number  of  troops 
required,  but  that  20,000  men  should  be  available  in  all,  the  balance 
being  left,  say,  at  Ship  Island,  to  be  brought  up  immediately  or  as  soon 
as  necessary.  I thought  a dozen  siege  24-pounders  enough ; even  this 
perhaps  is  excessive ; for  if  the  works  fall  at  all  they  will  fall  at  once,  or 
they  will  be  reduced  more  slowly  by  naval  bombardment  and  cutting  off 
of  provisions  and  supplies.  I should  think  the  forces  estimated  in  the 
“Memoranda  of  changes  in  General  Butler’s  suggestions”*  to  come  pretty 
near  the  mark,  and  that  the  cavalry,  artillery,  troops,  and  light  batte- 
ries were  sufficient.  I look  upon  this  expedition  as  one  of  immense 
importance.  Its  failure  would  be  a terrible  blow ; its  success  would  bring 
us  almost  to  the  close  of  the  war.  Hence  I recommended  in  my  memoran- 
dum that  the  Chief  Engineer  United  States  Army  should  be  consulted 
on  account  of  his  thorough  knowledge  of  the  works  and  his  great  experi- 
ence in  such  matters. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  BAENAED, 

Brigadier -General^  and  Chief  Engineer, 


See  pp.  687,  688. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


G85 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Office  of  Chief  Engineer  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

* ^YasllingtonJ  Fchriiary  7,  1802. 

Col.  A.  Y.  Colburn, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Colonel  : I would  add  to  what  I addressed  you  this  moruing  that 
I deem  it  very  important  that  an  Engineer  officer  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  fortifications  about  New  Orleans,  and  who  has  traveled  through 
the  intricate  routes  of  approach,  should  accompany  the  expedition. 
There  is  (besides  myself  and  General  Totten)  one  such,  viz,  Lieutenant 
Weitzel.  McFarland  has  some  little  acquaintance,  not  at  all  approach- 
ing to  WeitzeRs.  Palfrey  knows  nothing  of  the  works  nor  the  country. 
Yours,  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  G.  BAKNAKD, 

Chief  Engineer. 


February  7,  18G2. 

General  George  B.  McClellan: 

My  Dear  General  : I would  be  glad  if  you  would  find  time  to  look 
over  attentively  the  plan  I submitted  for  taking  Forts  Jackson  and 
Saint  Philip.  I do  not  care  that  that  particular  mode  of  operation  be 
adopted,  if  any  other  as  good  or  better  offers,  but  what  I do  wish  is, 
that  the  matter  shall  be  carefully  concerted  and  prepared  for,  with  a 
full  sense  of  the  important  consequences  likely  to  ensue.  Engrossed  as 
I have  been  with  local  duties,  I have  not  comprehended  their  conse- 
quences nor  how  attainable  they  were.  To  attack  Port  Eoyal  or  Charles- 
ton or  Savannah  successfully  is  to  attain,  indeed,  a great  moral  effect, 
but  to  capture  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  and  take  New  Orleans 
is  to  conquer  the  whole  Mississippi  Valley,  and  I may  add  the  whole 
Gulf  coast.  All  would  speedily  fall.  I would  not,  therefore,  have  this^ 
expedition  fail  or  produce  a mere  half-way  result. 

I would  add  that  besides  myself  there  is  one  other  Engineer  officer, 
Lieutenant  Weitzel,  thoroughly  acquainted  with  these  works,  and  a 
most  capital  officer  he  is,  too.  McFarland  was  there  a short  timej  he  is 
much  too  inexperienced.  I think  some  one  ought  to  go.  Beauregard 
has  told  them  that  New  Orleans  is  safe  from  the  Mississippi.  I should 
confess  to  a personal  gratification  (besides  my  general  interest  in  the 
matter)  in  seeing  this  region,  so  associated  with  Chase  and  Beauregard, 
recaptured.  I believe  that  in  three  months  we  may  have  the  rebellion 
by  the  throat. 

Yours,  respectfully,  &c.,  J.  G.  BAENARD, 

Chief  Engineer. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  England, 

Boston^  February  7,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commander-in- Chief  U,  S.  Army: 

General  : In  reply  to  telegram  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Colburn  I 
have  the  honor  to  state  that  the  heavy  artillery  required  by  me  (in 
addition  to  four  Sawyer  rifled  guns,  5 and  8 inch,  &c.,  which  are  being 
prepared  here)  is  simply  as  follows : 

1.  Four  8-inch  siege  howitzers  and  carriages,  now  at  Fort  Jefferson, 
the  shells  for  them  at  Fortress  Monroe. 

2.  One  battery  of  six  20-pounder  Parrott  guns,  with  carriages,  ammu- 
nition, &c.,  complete. 


686  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

The  first  were  promised  some  time  since  by  General  Eipley.  The 
Parrott  guns  will  be  required  immediately,  and  could  be  shipped  from 
jSTew  York,  Baltimore,  or  Washington. 

With  First  and  Second  [Vermont],  First  Maine,  and  Fourth  and  Sixth 
Massachusetts  Batteries,  all  of  which  are  recruits,  if  there  can  be  given 
to  us  Nims’ battery  at  Baltimore  (understood  to  be  a well-drilled  corps), 
these  six  batteries  might  be  sufficient  of  field  artillery  for  my  expedition. 
There  remain  five  batteries  in  Maine  which  (when  mounted  from  dis- 
mounted cavalry  regiment  there)  might  be  sent  to  Fortress  Monroe. 

The  above  estimate  for  heavy  artillery  provides  nothing  for  the  fort 
at  Ship  Island,  which  it  is  understood  will  be  furnished  from  Tortugas 
by  navy  guns  there. 

It  will  be  seen,  then,  that  we  require  but  one  more  complete  field  bat- 
tery (six  guns — 12-pounder  howitzers  preferred)  to  be  furnished  by  the 
Ordnance  Department,  as  I now  have  guns  for  five,  if  I include  Nims’, 
which  I would  be  glad  to  have  done  within  ten' days. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEKJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  England, 

Boston^  February  12,  1862. 

The  Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  as  fast  as  possible  the  troops  and 
supplies  are  being  dispatched  to  the  Gulf. 

The  Eighth  New  Hampshire  embarks  to-morrow.  The  transportation 
for  the  remainder  is  in  such  progress  that  I hope  to  get  all  but  two 
regiments  off  next  week. 

1 propose  to  have  3,000  men  sail  on  Tuesday  next;  one  of  the 
steamers  to  take  me  up  at  Fortress  Monroe,  where  we  are  to  get  some 
ordnance  stores.  By  taking  the  rail  I can  gain  time  enough  to  meet 
the  ship  there,  and  visit  Washington  for  my  final  instructions,  if  you 
think  that  desirable. 

In  this  connection  I desire  to  call  attention  to  the  fact,  but  not  com- 
l)lainingly,  that  I have  as  yet  received  no  written  instructions  or  infor- 
mation in  regard  to  the  details  of  the  expedition,  a memorandum  of 
which  I gave  to  the  Commanding  General,  to  which  he  was  kind  enough 
to  signify  his  approval  except  as  to  the  number  of  light  batteries.  I pre- 
sume, in  the  press  of  more  important  matters,  these  details  may  have 
been  overlooked.  Fearing,  however,  that  the  memorandum  may  be 
mislaid,  and,  in  order  to  refer  to  it,  a duplicate  is  sent  herewith. 

I desire  to  be  informed  as  to  the  disposition  of  the  Seventeenth  Mas- 
sachusetts and  Fifth  New  York  and  Nims’  battery,  which  were  to  be 
detached  from  Major-General  Dix’s  division  at  Baltimore  and  sent  to 
Fortress  Monroe.  When  will  they  be  at  the  fortress  and  what  are 
their  numbers,  so  that  I may  prepare  transportation  for  man  and  horse? 
Very  early  knowledge  is  r^eeded  upon  this  topic.  Also  a detail  of  signal 
officers  for  the  service.  I should  like  six  at  least,  and  could  take  them 
up  at  Fortress  Monroe. 

The  preparation  immediately  of  two  light-draught  steamers  is  an  im- 
perative necessity. 

I have  to  thank  the  Commanding  General  and  Ordnance  Department 
for  the  battery  of  Parrott  guns  so  promptly  ordered. 

I must  again  call  attention  to  the  Maine  Cavalry  Eegiment — if  I am  to 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  — UNION. 


687 


have  the  horses ; if  not,  I must  purchase  others  for  battery  and  trans- 
portation purposes.  I would  most  strongly  advise  the  dismounting  of 
that  regiment,  both  in  an  economical  and  military  point  of  view.  I send 
this  report  directly  to  the  Secretaiy  of  War  because  I hear  of  the  absence 
of  the  Commanding  General  across  the  Potomac. 

Most  truly  and  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major- General^  Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

February  17,  1862. 

The  within  letter  is  referred  to  the  General  Commanding,  and  his 
immediate  attention  requested  to  General  ButleFs  expedition,  and  to 
the  instructions  to  be  given  to  him,  if  he  is  to  command  the  expedition. 
By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

P.  H.  WATSOE", 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 

Memorandum. 


It  is  suggested  that  a military  geographical  department  be  created, 
to  be  called  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  coast  west  of  Fort  Pickens 
and  so  much  of  the  adjoining  States  as  may  be  occupied  by  the  United 
States  troops ; headquarters  wherever  the  commanding  general  may  be. 

That  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  military  operations  there  the 
following  corps  be  init  under  the  command  of  Major-General  Butler,  viz : 


1.  12t]i  Connecticut  Volunteers 900  . 

2.  IStli  Connecticut  Volunteers 900 

3.  7th  Vermont  Volunteers 900 

4.  8th  Vermont  Volunteers 900 

5.  8th  New  Hampshire  Volunteers 900 

6.  13th  Maine  Volunteers 900 

7.  14th  Maine  Volunteers 900 

8.  15th  Maine  Volunteers 900 

9.  12th  Maine  Volunteers  {en  route  to  Ship  Island) 900 

10.  26th  Massachusetts’ Volunteers  (at  Ship  Island) 900 

11.  Eastern  Bay  State  Regiment  Volunteers  {en  route  to  Ship  Island) 900 

12.  Western  Bay  State  Regiment  Volunteers 900 

13.  9th  Connecticut  Volunteers  (Battalion)  Ship  Island 600 

14.  5th  New  York  Volunteers  (at  Baltimore) 900 

15.  17th  Massachusetts  Volunteers  (at  Baltimore) 900 


13,200 

CAVALRY. 

Three  companies  of  mounted  men  {en  route  to  Shij)  Island) 275 

LIGHT  ARTILLERY. 

1st,  2d,  3d,  4th,  5th,  and  0th  Maine  Batteries  Volunteers  (145  men  each) 870 

4th  Massachusetts  Battery  Volunteers  (at  Ship  Island) 145 

Ist  and  2d  Vermont  Batteries  Volunteers  (145  men  each) 290 

EveretPs  Massachusetts  battery  volunteers 145 

Nims’  Massachusetts  Battery  Volunteers  (at  Baltimore) 145 

■Capt.  P.  A.  Davis’  company  (unattached,  at  Fortress  Monroe) 100 


15, 170 


That  SO  much  of  the  supplies  of  siege  artillery  now  in  depot  at  Fort 
Jefferson  as  may  be  needed  by  him  be  put  at  General  Butler’s  direction, 
together  with  that  suggested  in  General  Butler’s  report  of  December  2, 
1861. 


688  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYL 

That  this  force,  with  proper  supplies,  be  transported  with  the  greatest 
possible  rapidity  to  Ship  Island  and  the  adjacent  islands,  there  to  be 
made  ready  for  such  movements  as  may  be  directed  in  concert  with  the 
naval  forces  in  the  Gulf.  It  is  desirable  that  the  First  Maine  Cavalry 
and  a squadron  of  Connecticut  cavalry  be  dismounted,  the  men  being 
given  the  option  either  to  be  transferred  to  the  regular  dragoons  or  to 
enlist  in  any  other  arm  of  the  service,  either  volunteers  or  regulars,  or 
be  discharged,  the  officers  mustered  out  of  service,  and  the  horses  taken 
either  to  mount  the  artillery  or  for  the  transport  service. 

It  is  desired  that  Capt.  K.  A.  M.  Dudley,  Tenth  Infantry,  have  leave 
of  absence,  for  the  puri)ose  of  taking  command  of  the  Western  Bay  State 
Eegiment. 

It  is  desired  that  Major  Wallen,  of  the  Seventh  Infantry,  have  leave 
of  absence,  to  take  command  of  the  Eastern  Bay  State  Eegiment.  Also 
that  the  Signal  Officer  of  the  Army  be  permitted  to  detail  a suitable 
force  for  signal  service.  That  Lieutenant  Palfrey,  of  the  Engineers,  be 
directed  to  report  to  the  general  commanding  the  Department  of  the 
Gulf. 

It  is  desirable  that  a Treasury  draft  for  $10,000,  or  $5,000  minimum^ 
be  passed  in  favor  of  the  commanding  general,  on  account  of  army 
contingencies,  and  charged  to  him  as  secret-service  money.  This  money 
is  designed  to  pay  spies  and  purchase  intelligence,  without  which  the 
best  schemes  fail.  So  small  a sum  is  asked  for  because  there  will  be 
frequent  means  of  communication  with  the  War  Department.  It  is 
absolutely  essential. 

It  is  desirable  that  at  least  two  steamers,  small  size  and  of  the  light- 
est possible  draught  that  can  be  got  down  to  the  Gulf,  be  chartered  or 
.purchased,  for  the  inirpose  of  towing  barges  and  surf-boats  into  the 
bayous  and  creeks.  The  FTavy  have  no  such  light-draught  boats.  It 
would  be  better  to  charter,  with  privilege  of  purchase  during  the  charter. 
This  would  throw  the  risk  of  the  sea  voyage  on  the  owners. 

Eespectfully  submitted, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLEE, 

Major-General  Volunteers, 

Memoranda  of  changes  in  General  Butlerh  suggestions. 

Confine  limits  of  proposed  department  to  scene  of  projected  opera- 
tions. 

Strike  out  Fifth  New  York  and  Seventeenth  Massachusetts,  and  sub- 
stitute two  regiments  to  be  determined  hereafter.  Add  at  least  four 
Western  regiments,  making — 


Minimum  force  of  infantry 16, 800 

Cavalry,  three  companies 275 

Two  companies  of  artillery  (to  serve  heavy  guns) 290 

Four  light  batteries 580 


17, 945 

General  Butler  to  furnish  specific  list  of  heavy  ordnance  and  ordnance 
stores  required. 


Ship  Island,  Miss.,  February  13,  1862. 
General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- Generalj  ^Yashington^  JD,  C,: 

Sir  : At  length  the  Constitution  arrived  yesterday,  with  two  regiments 
of  infantry  and  a squadron  of  cavalry.  The  season  is  already  pretty 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


G89 


well  advanced,  and  1 had  begun  to  doubt  wliether  tliere  was  any  defi- 
nite plan  to  the  movement  in  this  quarter,  or,  if  there  was,  whether  it 
had  not  been  abandoned.  A plan  ought  ratlier  to  ])recede  o])erations 
than  follow  them.  What  I am  to  do  with  four  regiments,  witli  sin^h 
means  as  I possess,  is  more  than  I can  conjecture. 

Eecent  rains  have  so  flooded  part  of  the  island  that  two  regiments 
cannot  well  be  maneuvered  upon  it  in  line  without  marching  through 
water. 

The  troops  which  have  just  arrived  have  apparently  suffered  from 
the  long  continuance  of  their  voyage  since  its  first  commencement. 
Two  of  their  number  have  been  carried  to  their  graves  to-day  and 
another  is  reported  as  at  the  point  of  death.  The  mail  which  was  to 
have  been  brought  by  the  Constitution,  but  which  was  put  on  board  the 
Pensacola,  has  not  yet  arrived,  so  that  I am  still  without  any  mihtary 
intelligence  from  the  headquarters  since  our  departure  from  the  Korth. 

I have  to  acknowledge  the  leceipt  of  some  blanks,  but  am  sorry  to 
find  that  they  contain  no  company  muster  rolls  nor  quartermaster’s 
returns.  Another  muster  is  close  at  hand,  and  I have  no  blanks  for  the 
occasion.  There  seems  to  be  a want  of  system  in  furnishing  blanks, 
which  I cannot  comprehend. 

There  are  now  in  position  upon  the  island  twelve  guns,  viz,  ten  0- 
incli  guns  on  navy  carriages  and  two  12  pounder  rifled  brass  pieces, 
besides  several  smaller  guns  for  a field  battery.  I have  found  it  diffi- 
cult to  get  enough  cartridge-bags  for  the  9-inch  guns,  and  am  accord- 
ingly without  a sufficient  number  of  rounds  for  those  guns. 

1 shall  endeavor  to  improve  the  drill  of  the  command  as  much  as 
possible,  as  one  sure  advantage  that  may  be  derived  from  our  condition. 
In  other  respects  six  shallow -draught  boats,  with  a heavy  armament  of 
Sawyer  guns,  might  eriable  us  to  move,  and  perhaps  to  effect  some- 
thing. We  might,  perhaps,  be  called  upon  by  the  people  of  New  Or- 
leans to  assist  them  against  the  conspirators,  though  I have  seen  no 
evidence  of  such  a spirit  yet.  Two  of  their  boats  have  been  reconnoi- 
tering  us  to-day,  and  with  the  usual  timidity  which  they  have  displayed 
on  every  occasion  that  we  have  observed  them.  They  are  doubtless 
aware  of  the  arrival  of  the  Constitution,  and  came  to  see  what  she  had 
brought.  Our  boats  usually  make  towards  them,  and  they  run,  occa- 
sionally firing  a few  ineffectual  rounds. 

I am  mistaken  in  saying  that  I have  received  no  military  intelligence 
from  the  North.  1 have  receiv^ed  one  item,  which  is  the  refusal  of  cer- 
tain staff  officers  for  whom  I applied  several  months  since.  As  Captain 
Butler  learns  that  his  nomination  as  commissary  has  been  rejected  by’’ 
the  Senate,  and  expects  soon  to  retire,  I shall  have  to  supply  his  place 
Tvith  such  persons  as  I can  find.  I say  persons,  because  he  has  been 
doing  the  duty  of  quartermaster  as  well  as  commissary,  and  the  duties 
henceforward  will  be  quite  enough  for  two— quite  enough  for  officers 
of  the  rank  of  captain,  which  I cannot  appoint.  I must  choose  lieuten- 
ants, and  on  comparatively  short  acquaintance.  Had  I been  allowed 
my^  own  choice,  a particular  object  with  me  would  have  been  to  shut 
out  as  far  as  possible  speculations  upon  public  calamities,  which  I shall 
still  endeavor  to  do  as  far  as  I am  able. 

As  a summary  of  our  military  position  I would  state  that  the  island 
is  no  place  for  so  large  a force  as  is  here  collected  (upwards  of  3,500 
men),  and  that  to  talU  up  any  other  position  among  the  exceedingly 
shallow  waters  of  this  coast  peculiar  means  beyond  which  we  possess 
are  necessary’.  Some  of  the  wharves  on  the  other  side,  I am  told,  are 
nearly  a mile  in  length,  with  but  7 feet  of  water  at  the  end.  No  landing 
44  R R VOL  VI 


690  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [CnAP.  XVI. 

could  be  effected  on  these  against  opposition  without  shallow-drauglit 
gunboats,  to  lie  nearer  shore  on  the  ffanks  of  the  lauding  force.  Such, 
I am  told — for  I have  had  no  suitable  boat  to  reconnoiter — is  the  case  at 
Mississippi  City,  Biloxi,  and  Pascagoula.  I have  thought  that  the  Rig- 
olets  would  be  a good  point  to  attack,  but  my  knowledge  of  that  region 
is  limited. 

In  tine,  there  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  any  adaptation  of  means  to 
any  particular  end  in  this  quarter  of  the  country.  Many  of  the  vessels 
are  of  an  inferior  class,  and  their  armament  generally  behind  the  im- 
provements of  the  times.  With  suitable  vessels  Mobile  Harbor  might 
be  entered,  it  seems  to  me,  and  Fort  Morgan  taken  in  reverse. 

I shall  send  by  this  opportunity  estimates  for  clothing  for  the  troo]^s 
here,  to  include  the  entire  year,  and  must  also  suggest  that  one  good 
clerk  would  probably  keep  the  army  supplied  with  all  the  blanks  that 
they  would  require. 

A tug  (the  Beamy)  was  sent  to  this  station  in  the  month  of  December 
by  Colonel  Brown  from  Fort  Pickens.  I kept  her  until  recently,  when, 
as  there  was  not  much  lor  her  to  do  and  as  there  appeared  to  be  no 
prospect  of  more  troops  arriving,  I sent  her  back  to  Fort  Pickens,  with 
instructions,  if  not  wanted  there,  to  go  to  Key  West,  and  if  not  wanted 
there,  to  bring  us  a mail.  She  is  too  small  for  any  considerable  gun, 
carries  none,  and  is  deep  draught  for  her  size.  We  used  her  jiart  of  the 
time  in  towing  down  rafts  of  logs  from  the  upper  end  of  the  island  for 
tire-wood.  The  pay  of  the  crew  is  a considerable  item  of  expense. 

I must  refer  again  to  the  necessity  of  greater  powers  than  are  possessed 
by  any  one  at  the  Gulf  stations.  We  may  have  some  cases  for  general 
court-martial,  and  such  as  would  render  it  convenient  to  have  the  Tor- 
tugas  as  a place  of  continement. 

8ome  cases  of  discharge  and  leaves  of  absence  occur  which  are  be- 
yond any  powers  possessed  in  this  region  that  I am  aware  of.  I have 
felt  compelled  to  transcend  mine  in  the  case  of  Surgeon  Hooker,  of  the 
Twenty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  whom  I have  allowed  permis- 
sion to  go  home  on  sick  leave. 

I will  endeavor  to  make  the  most  of  this  expedition  for  the  service, 
for  it  would  be  sad  to  see  the  energies  and  generous  impulses  of  the 
people  wasted  in  such  movements.  It  would  be  better,  perhaps,  not  to 
use  them  at  all  than  to  use  them  without  a well-detined  object.  It  is  a 
quarter  of  the  country  that  needs  the  attention  of  the  Government, 
though  it  is  a difficult  region  to  operate  in,  as  the  British  movement 
against  Kew  Orleans  will  prow.  There  is  an  iron  English  steamship  in 
harbor,  laden  with  cotton,  which  was  taken  bj^  the  Kavy  near  the  mouth 
•of  the  Rio  Grande.  From  what  I hear,  an  ingenious  question  may  arise 
as  to  whether  she  was  at  the  time  of  capture  in  American  or  Mexican 
waters.  The  flag-officer  is  not  here.  If  I had  control  in  the  case  I 
would  keep  her  until  the  occasion  for  making  an  issue  out  of  her  cap- 
ture should  be  passed,  for  if  we  cannot  settle  our  own  affairs  without  the 
interference  of  foreign  powers,  we  have  lost  not  only  self-government, 
but  also  our  independence. 

Out  of  some  40  mechanics  who  have  been  employed  on  the  island  I 
have  decided  to  send  home  some  17  or  more.  Should  their  services  be 
needed,  their  places  can  be  supplied  by  soldiers. 

I would  suggest  again  that  prompt  communication  between  this  region 
and  the  seat  of  Government  is  necessary,  in  order  to  derive  the  full 
value  from  what  the  Government  has  already  done  here. 

I have  written  more  at  length  than  I proposed,  indulging  in  words  for 
want  of  action. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


691 


February  15,  1802. 

A norther  interferes  with  the  coaling  of  the  Constitution,  so  that 
she  will  not  get  oh*  as  early  as  I wish.  She  is  a rather  expensive  trans- 
port unless  there  is  constant  and  pressing  employment  for  her.  As 
several  vessels  laden  with  coal  have  arrived  here  recently  from  Phila- 
delphia, I have  thought  it  better  for  her  to  coal  here  than  to  stop  at  the 
Havana. 

The  flag-ship  Niagara  has  arrived  at  her  station  to-day,  but  the  mail 
of  tbe  Pensacola  has  not  yet  reached  us. 

In  referring  again  to  the  subject  of  staff  officers,  I would  express  my 
regret  that  those  whom  I selected  were  not  allowed  to  report  to  me. 
They  were  but  two,  whom,  as  aides-de-camp,  I would  have  employed  as 
adjutant-general  and  quartermaster  or  commissary.  In  their  stead  it  is 
not  unreasonable  that  I should  request  the  services  of  one  quartermaster, 
one  commissary,  and  one  adjutant-general.  To  have  such  agents,  how- 
ever, selected  for  an  officer  instead  of  by  him  is  so  contrary  to  the  nature 
of  the  case,  that  I would  prefer  that  my  original  request  might  be  recon- 
sidered. It  will  be  readily  i^erceived  that  at  a station  like  this  the  serv- 
ices of  a quartermaster  are  needed. 

I need  not  say,  i)erhaps,  that  a person  of  questionable  loyalty  would 
be  worse  than  useless — a mere  hinderance  in  the  way  of  business  that  he 
should  advance. 

I shall  send  together  with  this  communication  some  estimates  for 
clothing,  &c.,  among  which  are  requisitions  for  medicines,  made  out  by 
the  surgeons  of  regiments.  There  is  no  brigade  surgeon  present,  and 
the  battery  and  a squadron  of  cavalry,  numbering  some  260  meu,  have 
no  medical  attendance  of  their  own. 

February  17,  1862. 

The  Constitution  is  still  delayed  by  an  extraordinary  storm  of  rain 
and  fog  from  the  southwest.  At  a late  moment  I have  received  from 
among  her  freight  a box  of  blanks,  including  muster  rolls,  which  will  be 
all  that  I shall  need  for  the  present. 

I have  concluded  to  allow  Lieutenant  Salla,  of  the  Fourth  Battery 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  to  go  to  Boston,  such  services  as  he  can 
render  not  being  particularly  required  here.  His  name  was  not  borne 
on  the  original  muster  roll  of  the  battery,  and  he  shows  no  commission. 
I do  not  see  the  necessity  of  such  irregular  appointments. 

The  Constitution  I hope  will  get  to  sea  to-day. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier- Genera  Z,  Comm  anding. 


Washington,  February  15,  1862. 
General  George  B.  McClellan  : 

Hear  General  : Touching  our  conversation  yesterday,  I make  a few 
remarks  suggested  by  further  thought.  As  t6  New  Orleans,  my  estimate 
was  made  before  I had  seen  any  proposition  from  any  quarter  as  to  land 
or  naval  forces.  For  the  former  I think  (using  that  number  there)  20,000 
is  an  ample  number,  and  I would  not  hesitate  to  go  with  15,000,  if  it  was 
difficult  to  supifly  the  greater  number.  Horse  artillery  and  cavalry  in 
very  small  proportions  only.  One  thing  I would  suggest  as  to  the  naval 
preparations,  prompted  by  the  fact  that  Goldsborough  sends  word  he 
has  consumed  his  ammunition  and  cannot  make  another  operation 


G92  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

uutil  he  gets  more.  The  bomhardment  of  Fort  Jachson  will  doubtless 
coiisiiine  ])retty  much  of  the  stock  on  board  ships,  and,  Avhen  taken,  the 
mortar  A^essels  can  do  no  more  in  the  river,  and  a large  part  of  the  fleet 
can  be  spared.  It  should  go  at  once  to  Mobile  and  bom  bard  Fort  Morgan. 
That  work  is  much  like  Fort  Jackson  internally,  and  stands  alone.  Fort 
Gaines  (Dauphin  Island)  is  over  3 miles  off.  (If  we  had  gunboats 
drawing  not  over  9 feet  I cannot  see  what  would  prevent  their  entering 
Mobile  Bay  now  and  occupying  it.) 

For  this  bombardment  a large  surplus  of  shells  and  ships’  ammunition 
should  be  collected  at  Ship  Island.  Forts  Jackson  and  Morgan  taken, 
whether  the  mortar  fleet  should  go  to  Pensacola  (a  place  of  no  impor- 
tance. unless  it  be  to  release  our  fleet  from  blockade  there),  or  to  Charles- 
ton, or  Pulaski  (if  that  has  not  fallen),  would  dei)end  on  the  situation 
at  the  time. 

Now  as  to  Savannah  : If  the  city  is  so  thoroughly  fortified  as  to  require 
a siege,  it  is  not  worth  sieging.  I did  not  know  but  Fort  Jackson  might 
be  intended  by  Sherman,  but  that  is  a A^ery  insignificant  work,  and  ought 
to  be  taken  Avith  a dash,  combined  with  a gunboat  operation,  or  let  alone. 
AVe  liaA^e  the  riA^er  above  Pulaski,  and  haA^e  cut  off  all  its  communications. 
I don’t  see  whj^  the  gunboats  cannot  ascend  to  SaAmnnahj  but  if  they 
cannot,  or  can  only  (lo  it  at  the  expense  of  a siege,  there’s  no  sufficient 
object.  Looking  at  Fort  Pulaski,  I find  it  is  a work  of  interior  area 
about  equal  to  Fort  Jackson  (Mississii)pi),  with  one  casemate  and  one 
barl)ette  tier.  In  the  gorge  are  quarters;  in  iront,  a demi-lune.  There 
is  very  little  fire  up  in  the  faces  of  the  demi-lune  (not  more 'than  ten  or 
tAA^eh^e  barbette  guns  could  be  put  in  each),  being  too  oblique  to  act  in 
positions  where  i ha\"e  masked  ‘^gunboats,”  audit  the  rebels  attempt  to 
mount  any  on  the  gorge,  a battery  on  its  prolongation  would  enfilade  it. 
The  nearest  point  of  Tybee  Island  is  about  a mile ; here  batteries  of 
hea\\y  rifled  cannon  would  operate  principally  on  the  walls  (and  24- 
])ounder  siege  guns  be  good  for  nothing)  and  mortars  behind.  I think 
fifteen  mortars  (i3-inch),  Avith  a feAA^  batteries  of  heaA^y  guns  and  the  co- 
ojieration  of  the  fleet,  would  soon  reduce  Pulaski ; and  I think  it  quite 
likely  the  heavy  ships  of  the  fleet  could,  Avith  the  help  of  their  land 
batteries,  cross  the  southern  (Tybee  Island)  channel  and  co-operate. 
One  thing  is  certain,  the  work  would  soon  use  up  all  its  ammunition,  and 
would  become  a helpless  recipient  of  our  shot  and  shells,  under  the  play 
of  which  it  must  surrender. 

The  capture  of  Pulaski  is  the  capture  of  everything  valuable — the 
])ort,  the  river,  the  city  of  SaAmnnali;  and  I think  the  taking  of  such 
AA'orks  is  calculated  to  exert  a powerful  influence  on  public  opinion 
abroad. 

Woodbury  has  discussed  the  siege  of  Charleston,  or  rather  the  cap- 
ture of  the  works  (Sumter  and  Moultrie).  It  is  a difficult  undertaking, 
would  require  some  preparation,  and  at  least  two  iron  clad  vessels,  sup- 
])osing  Pulaski  taken  and  Burnside  to  have  taken  Fort  Macon  (and  per- 
haps CasAA^ell). 

r Avas  just  about  to  wrife  that  I did  not  approA^e  of  Burnside’s  march 
to  Goldsborough  as  accomplishing  nothing  permanent,  and  running  a 
risk  for  that  nothing,  Avhile  at  Beaufort  and  Wilmington  he  could  effect 
decisiA^e  results,  but  the  neAvs  from  Fort  Donelson  has  come  in,  and  we 
can  march  anywhere,  I take  it.  This  knocks  all  present  calculations  in 
the  head,  and  Ave  must  try  to  do  something  off-hand,  or  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  will  find  the  war  finished  without  its  aid.  Seems  to  me  we 
ought  not  to  lose  a moment  in  siezing  Norfolk,  and  then  we  can  operate 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  G93 

by  the  James,  York,  and  Eappaliannock,  and  be  in  llichmond  in  two 
weeks.  , 

‘‘God  and  Liberty.’^ 

I congratulate  you  with  all  my  heart. 

J.  G.  BAEXAED. 

P.  S. — The  occupation  of  Tennessee,  as  you  indicated  yesterday,  seems 
to  me  judicious.  Nashville  (supplied  by  the  Cumberland),  Memi)liis 
(by  the  Mississippi),  Florence  (by  the  Tennessee,  which  great  artery 
gives  us  control  of  the  whole  State),  and  the  subordinate  imints — Grand 
J auction,  Chattanooga,  Knoxville,  &c. — give  us  a grand  citadel  in  the 
very  heart  of  Secessia,  from  which  we  control  all  the  railroads,  and  are 
able  to  march  at  will  anywhere  through  Mississippi,  Alabama,  Georgia, 
and  South  Carolina,  while  from  the  seaports  (soon  to  be  ours)  we  hold 
all  their  external  communications  and  routes  inward.  Can  we  not  sub- 
jugate them?  I have  always  maintained  that  we  could,  but  hope  the 
sober  second  thought  of  a cruelly  deceived  people  will  render  subjuga- 
tion unnecessary. 

J.  G.  BARNARD, 

Chief  Engineer. 


Ship  Island,  Miss.,  February  21,  18G2. 
General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant-General^  Washington^  D.  C. : 

Sir  : The  steamer  Saxon  arrived  to-day  with  provisions  and  will  return 
to-morrow ; a dispatch  which  I wish  might  be  imitated  by  other  vessels, 
but  their  charters  are  generally  too  much  in  favor  of  the  ship,  her  loss, 
as  I understand  it,  Geing  at  the  risk  of  the  Government,  while  there  is 
not  much  extraordinary  risk  in  sailing  to  and  from  a port  like  this.  The 
want  of  a regular  transmission  of  intelligence  between  this  port  and  the 
North  is  so  great  and  the  failure  in  the  receipt  of  letters  loug  due  is  so 
marked,  that  I must  be  excused  in  referring  to  this  point  again  as  one 
of  particular  importance.  A regular  iiacket,  it  appears  to  me,  ought  to 
ply  once  a fortnight,  say,  between  Old  Point  and  the  Gulf  stations,  and 
the  public  be  informed  of  the  arrangement.  The  mail  service  needs 
regulating  in  this  quarter,  as  a means  of  regulating  and  invigoratiug 
other  branches  of  the  service.  They  are  not  pushed  with  sufficient  vigor 
to  prevent  those  collateral  issues  and  perhaps  speculating  projects,  in 
which  direct  i)urposes  become  lost  and  dissipated. 

Owing  to  recent  rains  the  island  is  so  flooded  that  I should  find  it 
difficult  to  encamj)  more  troops  upon  it.  If  more  arrive  soon  those  noAv 
here  should  be  sent  over  to  the  main-land,  but  I have  not  suitable  means 
for  that  object.  Light-draught  gunboats,  heavily  armed,  of  which  I 
have  often  spoken,  are  necessary.  Lieutenant  Palfrey,  of  the  Engineers, 
has  arrived  to-day,  and  he  will  require  considerable  room  for  his  work- 
men and  material.  What  from  store-houses,  troops,  stores,  and  pools 
of  water  I am  already  too  much  encumbered  for  any  suitable  freedom 
of  movement.  I have  thus  far  had  the  services  of  only  one  staff  officer, 
viz,  Oapt.  A.  J.  Butler,  commissary  and  acting  quartermaster.  The 
Government  will  perhaps  And  it  to  its  advantage  to  send  two  officers 
to  perform  those  duties,  Captain  Butler  soon  expecting  to  leave.  I would 
also  like  to  have  the  services  of  an  experienced  adjutant-general. 

Some  difficulty  is  experienced  for  the  want  of  a tarifl'  of  prices  of  cloth- 
ing, and  I would  be  greatly  obliged  for  one. 


G94  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  fCiiAP.  XYL 

To-morrow  being  the  birthday  of  Washington,  I x^ropose  to  celebrate 
the  occasion  with  a^  national  salute  of  thirty-four  guns,  a i^arade  of  the 
troops,  national  airs,  &c.  Kecent  favorable  news  from  the  valley  of 
the  Mississippi,  brought  from  N^ew  Orleans  by  a cax)tured  steamer,  gives 
ns  i^articular  satisfaction,  and  awakens  new  hopes  of  the  speedy  down- 
fall of  the  conspirators. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  Florida, 

No.  G.  1 Fort  Pickens,  February  22,  1862. 

In  comx)liance  with  the  instructions  of  the  General-in-Ohief  of  the 
Army,  dated  Headquarters  of  the  Army,  Adjutant-GeneraPs  Office,  Wash- 
ington, January  21),  1862  (directing  Col.  Harvey  Brown  to  turn  over  the 
command  of  the  Department  of  Florida  to  Brig.Gren.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 
U.  S.  Volunteers),  the  undersigned  assumes  command  of  the  department. 
/ **#**## 

L.  G.  AENOLD, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Volunteers, 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

asUington,  February  23,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamn  F.  Butler, 

TJ.  8.  Volunteers  : 

General  : You  are  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  land  forces  des- 
tined to  co-operate  with  the  Navy  in  the  attack  upon  New  Orleans. 
You  will  use  every  means  to  keex)  your  destination  a profound  secret, 
even  from  your  staff  officers,  with  the  exception  of  your  chief  of  staff, 
and  Lieutenant  Weitzel,  of  the  Engineers.  The  force  at  your  disposal 
will  consist  of  the  first  thirteen  regiments  named  in  your  memorandum 
handed  to  me  in  x^erson,  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  Fourth  Wisconsin, 
and  Sixth  Michigan  (old  and  good  regiments  from  Baltimore).  The 
Twenty-First  Indiana,  Fourth  Wisconsin,  and  Sixth  Michigan  will  await 
your  orders  at  Fort  Monroe.  Two  companies  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana 
are  well  drilled  at  heavy  artillery.  The  cavalry  force  already  en  route 
for  Ship  Island  will  be  sufficient  for  your  x)nri)oses.  After  full  consul- 
tation with  officers  well  acquainted  with  the  country  in  which  it  is  pro- 
Xiosed  to  operate,  I have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  two  light  batteries, 
fully  equixix)ed,  and  one  without  horses,  will  be  all  that  are  necessary. 
This  will  make  your  force  14,400  infantry,  275  cavalry,  580  artillery — 
total,  15,255  men.  The  commanding  general  of  the  Department  of  Key 
AVest  is  authorized  to  loan  you  temporarily  two  regiments.  Fort  Pick- 
ens can  probably  give  you  another,  which  will  bring  your  force  to  nearly 
18,000. 

The  object  of  your  expedition  is  one  of  vital  importance — the  capture 
of  New  Orleans.  The  route  selected  is  up  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  and 
the  first  obstacle  to  be  encountered  (xierha])S  the  only  one)  is  in  the  re- 
sistance ofiered  by  Forts  Saint  Pliilii)  and  Jackson.  It  is  expected  that 
the  Navy  can  reduce  these  works.  In  that  case  you  will,  after  their 
cax)ture,  leave  a sufficient  gariison  in  them  to  render  them  perfectly 


/ 


CiMP.  XYI.l 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


G95 


secure;  and  it  is  recommended  that  on  the  upward  passage  a few  luhivy 
guns  and  some  troops  be  left  at  the  Pilot  Station  (at  the  forks  of  the 
river),  to  cover  a retreat  in  the  event  of  a disaster.  The  trooi)s  and  guns 
will  of  course  be  removed  as  soon  as  the  forts  are  cai)tured.  Should 
the  Navy  fail  to  reduce  the  works,  you  will  land  your  forces  and  siege 
train,  and  endeavor  to  breach  the  works,  silence  their  guns,  and  carry 
them  by  assault. 

The  next  resistance  will  be  near  the  English  Bend,  where  there  are 
some  earthen  batteries.  Here  it  may  be  necessary  for  you  to  land  your 
troops  to  co-operate  with  the  naval  attack,  although  it  is  more  than 
l^robable  that  the  Navy,  unassisted,  can  accomplish  the  result.  Jf  these 
works  are  taken,  the  city  of  New  Orleans  necessarily  falls.  In  that 
event  it  will  probably  be  best  to  occupy  Algiers  with  the  mass  of  your 
troops ; also  the  eastern  bank  of  the  river  above  the  city.  It  may  be 
necessary  to  place  some  troops  in  the  city  to  i)reserve  order;  but  if  there 
appears  suliicient  Uniou  sentiment  to  control  the  city,  it  may  be  best, 
for  purposes  of  discipline,  to  keep  your  men  out  of  the  city. 

After  obtaining  i)osi?ession  ot  New  Orleans  it  will  be  necessary  to 
reduce  all  the  works  guarding  its  ai)proaches.from  the  east,  and  partic- 
ularly to  gain  the  ManchacPass.  Baton  Bouge,  Berwick  Bay,  and  Fort 
Livingston  will  next  claim  your  attention.  A feint  on  Galveston  may 
facilitate  the  objects  we  have  in  view.  I need  not  call  your  attention  to 
the  necessity  of  gaining  possession  of  all  the  rolling  stock  you  can  on 
the  different  railways  anu  of  obtaining  control  of  the  roads  themselves. 
The  occupation  of  Baton  Bouge  by  a combined  naval  and  land  force 
should  be  accomplished  as  soon  as  possible  after  you  have  gained  New 
Orleans.  Then  endeavor  to  open  your  communication  with  the  northern 
column  by  the  Mississippi,  always  bearing  in  mind  the  necessity  of 
occupying  Jackson,  Miss.,  as  soon  as  you  can  safely  do  so,  either  after 
or  before  you  have  effected  the  junction.  Allow  nothing  to  divert  you 
from  obtaining  lull  possession  ot  all  the  approaches  to  New  Orleans. 
When  that  object  is  accomidished  to  its  fullest  extent  it  will  be  necessary 
to  make  a combined  attack  on  JMobile,  in  order  to  gain  possession  of  the 
harbor  and  works,  as  well  as  to  control  the  railway  terminus  at  the  city. 
In  regard  to  this  I will  send  more  detailed  instructions  as  the  operations 
of  the  northern  column  develop  themselves.  I may  briefly  state  that 
the  general  objects  of  the  expedition  are,  flrst,  the  reduction  of  New 
Orleans  and  all  its  approaches ; then  Mobile  and  its  defenses ; then  Pen- 
sacola, Galveston,  &c. 

It  is  probable  that  by  the  time  New  Orleans  is  reduced  it  will  be  in' 
the  power  of  tff*  Government  to  re-enforce  the  land  forces  sufficiently  to 
accomplish  all  these  objects.  In  the  mean  time  you  will  please  give  all 
the  assistance  in  your  power  to  the  Army  and  Navy  commanders  in 
your  vicinity,  never  losing  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  great  object  to  be 
achieved  is  the  capture  and  firm  retention  of  New  Orleans. 

I am,  very  respectfullv, 

GEO.  B.  McClellan, 
Major-General^  Commanding  in  Chief, 


General  Orders,  \ Headquarters  of  the  Army,  A.  G.  O., 

No.  20.  ) Washiugtonj  Fehruary  23,  1832. 

I.  A new  military  department,  to  be  called  the  Department  of  the 
Gulf,  is  hereby  constituted.  It  will  comprise  all  the  coast  of  the  Gulf 
of  Mexico  west  of  Pensacola  Harbor  and  so  much  of  the  Gulf  States  as 


696  OPERATION'S  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

may  be  occupied  by  the  forces  under  Alaj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Ahd- 
unteers.  The  headquarters  for  the  present  will  be  movable,  wherever 
the  general  commanding  may  be. 

By  command  of  Alaj or- General  AIcClellan : 

L.  THOMAS, 

A d j utaut-  Gt  n eral. 


Ship  Island,  Miss.,  March  9,  18G2. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

Sir:  The  Fourteenth  Alaine,  six  coii1i)anies  of  the  Thirteenth  Maine, 
and  the  Twelfth  Connecticut  arrived  yesterday.  Other  vessels  are  in 
sight  to-day,  and  probably  with  trooj)S.  The  ship  Idaho,  containing  the 
men  of  several  batteries,  has  run  aground,  and  we  are  trying  to  get  her 
off.  The  force  now  liere  is  made  up  as  follows,  viz : The  Twenty-sixth 
Alassachnsetts,  the  Eastern  Bay  State  Kegiment,  the  Ninth  and  Twelfth 
Connecticut,  the  Twelfth  and  Fourteentli  Mairfe,  and  six  companies  of 
tlie  Thirteenth ; Bead’s  Second  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (three  companies), 
and  Alanning’s  battery,  besides  the  troops  on  the  Idaho,  not  yet  landed  5 
in  all,  some  G,5()0  men.  It  is  rather  late  in  the  season  to  assemble  so 
large  a body  of  raw  troops  on  such- a spot  as  this,  and  it  appears  to  me 
desirable  that  suitable  transportation  for  its  transference  to  some  other 
point  should  be  furnished  as  soon  as  possible.  The  British  lorces  in 
their  attack  on  New  Orleans  left  here,  if  I am  not  mistaken,  before  the 
month  of  January. 

Some  days  since  a party  from  this  command  went  over  to  Biloxi  and 
examined  the  ground  there.  It  is  out  of  the  way  and  not  desirable  for 
a military  stati.  >n.  Another  party  went  over  yesterday  to  a ])oint  nea  rer 
Mississippi  City.  The  wharf  there  is  some  3,000  feet  or  more  in  length,  of 
a light  structure,  and  has  been  partly  broken  up.  The  reconnoitering 
party  (about  100  men)  went  but  a short  distance  from  the  wharf,  ami 
were  fired  upon  from  artillery.  Beturning  to  their  boat  (the  steam  gun- 
boat Calhoun,  taken  from  the  enemy)  the  enemy’s  shots  were  replied  to 
by  three  rounds  from  the  boat.  The  number  of  troops  there  is  probably 
not  very  considerable ; the  location  would  be  better  for  a camp  than 
this  is.  There  are  9 fee't  of  water  at  the  end  of  the  wharf.  I wished  to 
send  back  there  to-day  to  make  a farther  examination,  but  both  of  our 
steam  lighters  are  broken  down  and  the  Calhoun  is  employed  in  getting 
off*  the  Idaho. 

It  is  useless  for  a force  to  attempt  to  do  anything  here  without  suita- 
ble transportation,  and  we  need  it  now,  if  for  nothing  more  than  to  pro- 
cure room  for  the  ti  oops.  It  ai)pears  to  me  that  the  enemy  at  this  moment 
ought  to  be  kept  in  a state  of  alarm  throughout  this  entire  approach  by 
the  Bigolets  and  Lake  Borgne  to  New  Orleans,  but  it  is  seldom  that  a 
gunboat  goes  far  in  that  direction.  The  superficies  of  that  i)art  of  the 
island  which  is  occupied  by  the  troops  is  about  one-half  of  a square 
mile,  and  at  times  nearly  one-half  of  that,  if  not  quite,  is  under  water. 
Limits  so  narrow  render  the  desired  military  instruction  impracticable, 
and  yet  without  that  instruction  we  should  be  subject  to  external  in- 
fluences, as  of  the  weather,  the  season,  political  demonstration,  military 
necessity,  &c.,  rather  than  be  free  to  make  our  movements  from  inher- 
ent force.  We  should  be  in  the  dangerous  condition  of  submitting  to 
controlling  influences  ourselves,  as  all  military  bodies  ought  to  do.  To 
be  the  slave  instead  of  the  master  of  circumstances  is  not  to  promise 
much  for  any  kind  of  measures,  and  least  of  all  for  military  measures. 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION,  697 

A step  that  is  taken  from  impulsion  cannot  be  otherwise  than  a stumb- 
ling oue. 

Had  these  troops  arrived  two  months  ago  we  might  have  gained  some 
confidence  and  colierence  by  this  time.  jSTo  efibrt,  however,  shall  be 
spared  to  render  them  efiective.  New  Orleans  aj)pears  to  me  to  be  a 
I)ro[)er  point  to  strike  at.  It  is  the  center  of  the  conspiracy.  The  i)er- 
versity  of  Charleston,  the  pride  of  Jiichmoud,  and  the  honesty  of  the 
l)eopie  along  the  Alleghanies  have  alike  been  made  subordinate  to  the 
combinations  of  the  conspirators  there.  New  Orleans,  the  seat  of  the 
conspiracy,  must  have  less  respect  for  their  work  than  any  other  (juarter 
of  the  country.  A few  gunboats  can  reach  the  city  from  above  by  the 
river,  even  it  we  could  not  from  this  point.  I can  form  no  i)lau,  for  I 
have  no  means  of  executing  one. 


MARCn  11,  18G2. 

The  several  batteries  which  have  arrived  (four  in  all)  have  but  a very 
few  pieces  of  artillery  among  them,  no  harness,  and  hardly  enough 
horses  lor  one  battery.  Yvith  a volunteer  force  like  this  both  arLillery 
and  engineering  are  likely  to  be  necessary,  and  for  the  latter  purpose  we 
have  a wholly  inadecpiate  supply  of  intrenching  tools.  The  Navy  seem 
to  be  making  some  preparations  to  ascend  the  river  towards  New  Or- 
leans, and  if  they  expect  to  be  backed  by  a land  force  in  that  direction, 
as  they  doubtless  will,  such  'tools  will  be  indispensable.  The  forward- 
ness of  the  season,  the  rawness  of  the  troops,  and  the  absence  of  means 
to  render  them  efficient  are  calculated  to  fill  one  with  concern.  The 
fleet  of  mortar  boats  have  been  arriving  to-day  and^will  probably  soon 
proceed  to  their  destination.  A party  of  machinists  have  also  arrived, 
with  a building  and  machinery  for  establishing  a machine-shop,  which 
numerous  breakages  in  our  gunboats  render  necessary.  The  materials 
for  Lieutenant  Palfrey’s  work  on  the  fort  are  also  beginning  to  arrivm. 

I am  sorry  to  state  that  the  Idaho  is  not  yet  got  off,  notwithstanding 
all  the  favoring  efforts  of  steam-tugging,  lightering,  and  extraordinarily 
high  tides.  She  has  t hrown  over  a part  of  her  cargo,  chiefly  provisions, 
of  which  our  supply  is  not  very  considerable.  There  is  something  so 
remarkable  in  her  running  agi  ound  and  in  her  conduct  since,  that  I have 
appointed  a board  of  survey  of  officers  of  rank  to  examine  into  it.  A 
small  lantern  is  kept  burning  in  the  light-house  during  the  night,  v/hich 
may  be  announced,  if  thought  necessary.  The  enemy’s  gunboats  have 
not  made  their  appearance  for  some  time. 

I have  omitted  no  opportunity  to  write  to  you  when  I have  thought 
that  my  communications  might  contain  matters  of  interest.  I have  re- 
ceived no  communications  in  return.  Paymasters  Watson  and  Locke 
have  been  engaged  paying  the  troops  for  some  time.  Thej^  have  prob- 
ably met  with  some  difficulties  in  deciding  upon  several  cases,  but  they 
have  presented  others  which  might  have  been  settled  at  the  seat  of  Gov- 
ernment before  setting  out  on  their  tour.  By  and  with  my  decision 
they  are  paying  the  men  from  the  date  of  enrollment,  and  are  including 
the  28th  day  of  February,  which  I doubt  not  will  be  satisfactoiy  to  the 
Department.  Other  troops  here  cannot  be  paid  at  this  time,  but  I am 
in  hopes  that  funds  will  be  sent  as  soon  after  the  next  muster  as  prac- 
ticable. 

The  Eastern  Bay  State  Kegiment  has  been  brought  together  with 
some  degree  of  irregularity,  and  it  contains  a certain  number  of  men 
who  are  not  physically  qualified  for  the  proper  performance  of  their 
duty.  They  should  be  discharged  from  the  service,  but  I have  neither 
time  nor  authority  to  attend  to  it.  I shall  in  the  mean  time  make  such 


698  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


use  of  them  as  will  render  their  services  available.  I have  appointed 
Lieut.  Charles  S.  Palmer,  Ninth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  acting  assist- 
ant quartermaster,  and  Adjutant  Hall,  of  the  same  regiment,  aide-de- 
camp  and  acting  assistant  adjutant-general. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier- General,  Comm  anding. 


Ship  Island,  Miss.,  March  12,  1862. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant  General,  Washington,  B.  C.  : 

Sir:  Since  closing  my  letter  this  morning  the  Idaho  has  got  off  by 
her  own  efforts ; how  much  of  her  cargo  will  prove  a loss  I have  not  yet 
ascertained.  The  steamer  Constitution  arrived  this  afternoon,  with 
three  regiments  on  board,  under  the  command  of  General  Williams.  A 
rumor  is  current  here  that  since  the  evacuation  of  Columbus  the  rebels 
are  falling  back  upon  New  Orleans,  with  a view  to  its  defense,  and  that 
troops  have  been  called  away  from  Pensacola  for  that  purpose.  If  so, 
and  we  could  get  possession  of  the  mouth  of  Eed  Eiver  and  of  a point 
in  the  line  of  communication  between  the  city  and  Texas,  the  rebel 
forces  would  probably  be  reduced  to  great  straits  tor  the  want  of  pro- 
visions. 

The  inconvenience  attending  a variety  of  calibers  in  our  fire-arms  is 
beginning  to  be  felt.  We  have  some  of  the  caliber  of  .58  and  others  of 
the  caliber  of  .54;  for  the  latter  caliber  there  should  be  a greater  number 
of  rounds  than  we  have  on  hand  here. 

I regret  that  the  elements  of  an  organized  expedition  do  not  appear 
to  be  as  far  advanced  as  they  should  be.  The  Government  party  in 
this  region  must  be  assured  of  a strong,  firm  power  to  back  them  before 
they  will  decide  in  our  favor ; and  it  appears  to  me  to  be  time  to  set  our 
civil  courts  in  operation,  for  they  are  the  only  power  that  can  strike  the 
traitors  with  wholesome  dread.  If  the  law  does  not  assert  its  dignity 
amidst  the  arms  that  are  raised  for  its  defense,  it  will  never  do  so.  All 
our  victories  will  prove  useless  unless  the  law  is  vindicated.  Eebellions 
will  occur  as  often  as  whirlwinds  of  a summePs  day  if  defeats  at  arms 
are  the  only  penalties  to  be  incurred  thereby.  One  execution  at  the 
right  time  and  place  would  do  more  towards  checking  the  rebellion  than 
would  whole  holocausts  upon  the  field  of  battle.  The  law  has  been  dis- 
paraged and  emasculated  for  many  years,  and  if  it  does  not  arise  in  its 
majesty  and  wield  the  sword  before  war  lays  it  down,  it  will  never  wiekl 
it  under  our  present  form  of  government.  A victorious  popular  party 
w'ould  be  prone  to  forget  the  wholesome  severities  of  the  law  in  the  con- 
gratulations of  success  when  their  arms  were  once  laid  down. 

I wmuld  be  permitted  to  state  once  more  that  I have  received  no  com- 
munication from  headquarters  covering  the  period  of  our  stay  here — 
going  on  four  months — and  only  two  of  official  character  from  the  seat  of 
Government.  They  are  from  the  Light-House  Board.  So  far  as  this 
silence  may  imply  confidence  in  me  I shall  strive  to  merit,  but  it  would 
not  be  out  of  place  to  let  an  officer  have  some  knowledge  of  what  he  is 
to  do  or  else  the  means  of  deciding  for  himself. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 


Chat.  XVI.] 


CORKESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


699 


On  Board  Steamer  Mississippi, 

Off  Ullton  Head,  JS.  C.,  March  12,  1802. 
Maj.  Gen.  Georoe  B.  McClellan, 

Commander -in- Chief  U.  8.  Army : 

General:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  the  causes  of  my  detention  at 
this  port,  which  will  be  fully  set  forth  in  the  extracts  from  the  itinerary 
herewith  inclosed. 

It  will  be  seen  that  after  a series  of  most  unparalleled  marine  disas- 
ters I am  at  last  ready  for  sea,  and  shall  sail  as  soon  as  the  weather 
permits. 

I inclose  also  a copy  of  an  order  of  arrest  of  the  master  of  the  steamer, 
by  whose  faults  and  mismanagement  our  misfortunes  have  been  caused. 
A competent  master  and  coast  lulot  have  been  detailed  from  the  naval 
squadron  to  command  the  ship  on  the  rest  of  the  voyage. 

I desire  to  express  ray  deep  sense  of  obligation  both  to  General  Sher- 
man and  officers  of  his  command  for  every  aid  in  our  distressed  condi- 
tion. Thanhs  are  especially  due  to  Commander  Bouteile.  assistant, 
II.  S.  Coast  Survey,  for  the  very  efficient  assistance  given  by  the  steamer 
Bibb,  under  his  command,  and  the  untiring  personal  exertions  in  giving 
his  services  and  those  of  his  officers,  at  my  request,  to  get  this  shi])  in 
a condition  for  sea,  and  also  in  acting  as  pilot  to  get  her  off  a shoal  on 
which  she  had  grounded  in  our  attempt  to  get  to  sea. 

A board  of  survey  of  competent  naval  officers  have  iironounced  the 
ship  fit  for  sea,  and  I have  no  further  fear  of  her,  under  a competent 
commander.  No  serious  casualty  has  occurred  amid  all  these  dangers. 
We  have  lost  two  men  from  diseases  contracted  prior  to  their  enlistment. 
The  health  of  the  command  is  good. 

Of  the  conduct  of  nearly  every  officer  and  man  during  these  perils, 
more  trying  and  disheartening  than  the  perils  of  any  battle  could  be,  I 
cannot  speak  too  highly. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLEE, 

Major-General,  . 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Seminary,  March  22,  1802. 

Eespectfully  forwarded  to  the  Adjutant-General. 

By  command  of  Major-General  McClellan; 

S.  WILLIAMS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

[Inclosure  Xo.  l.J 

Itinerary  Tcept  hy  Joe.  M.  Bell,  major  and  aide-de  eamp,  at  the  order  of 
Major-General  Butler,  TI.  8.  Army. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th  February  the  steamer  Mississippi,  having 
on  board  Major-General  Butler,  with  his  staff*,  and  the  Thirty-first  Eegi- 
ment  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  under  Col.  O.  P.  Gooding,  and  four  com- 
panies of  the  Thirteenth  Eegiment  Maine  Volunteers,  under  Col.  Neal 
How,  lelt  Hampton  Eoads,  with  fair  weather  and  every  prospect  cf  a 
pleasant  voyage,  for  Ship  Island,  with  intent  to  stop  at  Hatteras  Inlet, 
to  take  on  board  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  William's,  assigned  to  General  But- 
ler, and  at  Key  West.  The  run  through  the  night  was  very  pleasant, 
the  motion  of  the  ship  being  scarcely  perceptible,  the  vessel  making  from 
8 to  10  miles  per  hour. 


700  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


The  morning  of  the  26th  broke  beautiful,  with  a smooth  sea.  The 
vessel  ran  very  easily,  and  under  the  regulations  established  by  General 
Butler  the  troops  had  got  into  regular  and  comfortable  position.  The 
weather  warm.  In  the  afternoon  it  began  to  grow  lowering  and  symp- 
toms of  bad  weather  5 the  vessel  was  making  for  Hatteras  Inlet.  When 
about  8 miles  from  the  inlet  the  weatlier  became  such  as  to  make  it 
imprudent  to  attempt  to  proceed  farther  in  that  direction,  and  the  vessel 
was  put  to  sea  ; the  sea  and  wind  steadily  increased  during  the  night, 
with  the  wind  from  southwest,  to  a gale,  the  vessel  behaving  admirably. 

On  the  morning  of  the  27th,  at  about  1 o’clock  a.  m.,  the  wind  shitted 
instantly  to  the  northeast,  blowing  a hurricane.  The  head  of  the  ship 
was  brought  to  the  wind,  during  which  maneuver  she  shipped  several 
seas,  which  brought  into  the  cabin  through  the  sky-light  some  water 
and  some  into  the  engine-room.  The  vessel  behaved  admirably,  there 
being  no  perceptible  strain  or  labor,  though  she  rolled  considerably,  yet 
not  so  much  as  might  have  been  expected. 

The  ship’s  crew  being  found  insufficient  to  work  the  ship,  a gang  of 
sailors  from  Colonel  Down’s  command  was  detailed  to  aid,  and  rendered 
the  most  valuable  assistance.  The  gale  continued  very  severe  through 
the  morning  until  towards  10  o’clock  it  began  to  abate,  and  at  about  11 
o’clock  the  vessel’s  head  was  put  to  the  southward.  At  12  the  sou  was 
out  and  the  captain  took  an  observation,  leporting  to  General  Butler 
the  position  of  the  vessel  to  be  50  miles  east  of  Hatteras.  Ve^el 
bowled  along  merrily,  the  sea  and  wind  constantly  subsiding,  until  even- 
ing, when  no  perceptible  motion  was  apparent  to  the  vessel.  During 
the  night  everything  quiet. 

The  morning  of  the  28th,  at  reveille,  was  dull  and  looked  like  rain,  but 
before  7 o’clock  it  became  bright  and  clear. 

The  vessel  off  Cape  Fear  after  breakfast,  and  about  8.30  o’clock  it  was 
said  she  was  aground. 

Cape  Fear  light  house  had  been  in  sight  for  an  hour  or  more  and  a 
buoy  had  been  observed  for  some  time.  The  vessel  was  moving  about 
for  some  fifteen  minutes,  now  backing,  now  going  forward  slowly,  con- 
stantly striking,  not  very  severely,  the  lead  going.  The  captain  ordered 
the  anchor  thrown  over,  and  it  was  dropped  on  port  bow.  There  was  no 
wind  or  sea;  boats  were  sent  out  to  sound  a passage  off*;  under  Gen- 
eral Butler’s  direction  buoys  were  prepared;  the  vessel  was  sounded  all 
around  and  from  certain  points,  her  bow  and  various  points  on  either 
side  and  from  the  stern ; in  all  directions  soundings  were  made  and 
buoys  set.  The  sailors  and  soldiers  of  the  command  were  all  put  to  use 
and  worked  cheerfully. 

At  about  11  o’clock  a sail  was  seen  from  the  southwest;  the  ensign 
was  set.  Union  down,  and  a signal  gun  fired.  The  vessel  hoisted  Ameri- 
can colors,  but  sent  no  boat  and  did  not  ap]iear  to  be  approaching.  It 
was  supposed  her  colors  might  be  a ruse;  a boat  was  sent  off  to  her;  she 
proved  to  be  the  U.  S.  steamer  Mount  Vernon,  Commander  Glisson. 
He  promised  all  assistance  and  sent  a boat  to  sound,  and  proceeded  to 
wmrk  up  to  the  Mississippi.  He  came  up  to  within  a quarter  of  a mile, 
aud  attempted  to  haul  the  head  round  with  a hawser,  without  success. 

Under  General  Butler’s  direction  various  plans  for  the  immediate 
lightening  of  the  ship  had  been  put  in  progress,  to  be  resorted  to  as  a 
last  necessity. 

The  troops  began  to  be.  transferred  to  the  Mount  Vernon,  Colonel 
Dow’s  command  being  first  sent  forward.  The  tide  in  the  mean  time 
was  rising,  to  become  full  at  about  8.30  o’clock  p.  m.  The  propeller  was 
set  to  work  at  full  speed,  all  the  troops  were  moved  rapidly  from  stern 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


701 


to  stem  and  back  again,  and  at  about  7 o’clock  she  moved  from  ber  posi- 
tion and  passed  slowly  ahead.  At  this  time  about  200  troops  had  been 
and  were  in  the  process  of  being  transferred  to  the  Mount  Vernon.  The 
Mount  Vernon  got  under  weigh  and  ran  along  with  the  vessel  for  a mile 
or  more,  when  she  passed  ahead  to  lead  the  way  to  an  ancliorage.  The 
Mississippi  cast  anchor  to  allow  her  boats  to  come  up  with  tlie  soldiers 
and  then  weighed  and  followed  the  Mount  Vernon.  It  had  been  known 
tliat  she  leaked  badly,  and  it  was  found  that  the  water  Idled  the  lower 
hold  and  fore  hold,  and  that  it  was  fast  coming  in. 

Details  of  soldiers  were  set  to  v/oik  bailing,  and  such  ])umps  as  could 
be  worked  were  set  going,  with  no  apparent  effect  upon  the  leak.  It 
was  supposed  that  she  had  forced  a hole  in  herself  upon  the  anchor. 
All  that  could  work  were  incessantly  occupied  with  the  leak.  At  about 
10  o’clock  anchored  in  Cape  Fear  Eiver,  below  Fort  Caswell  j passed  the 
night,  which  was  clear  and  beautiful,  in  quiet. 

In  the  morning  of  March  1 a survey  was  held  upon  the  vessel,  at  the 
order  of  General  Butler,  by  Colonel  Dow,  11.  L.  Sturgis,  acting  master  of 
the  Mount  Vernon,  who  had  been  left  on  board  of  the  Mississippi  by 
Commander  Glisson,  and  Captain  Conant,  of  the  Thirty-first  Eegiment. 
They  reported  in  favor  of  proceeding  under  convoy  to  Fort  lioyal.  A 
quilted  sail  was  jdaced  under  her  bow  j all  hands  arranged  for  bailing 
and  pum])ing,  and  the  captain  of  the  Mount  Vernon  having  agreed  to 
accompany  and  having  kindly  detailed  Acting  Master  Sturgis  to  pro- 
ceed with  us  to  Ship  Island,  the  vessel — the  chain  having  been  brought 
alt  and  the  gun  amidships — at  about  6 o’clock  set  out  for  Port  Eoyal. 
She  was  very  much  down  by  the  head  and  the  leak  remained  as  before, 
the  water-tight  compartments  preventing  the  water  from  coming  alt  the 
forecastle.  The  night  was  pleasant,  the  sea  smooth,  with  no  wind,  and 
the  vessel  ran  at  aliout  8J  knots  an  hour. 

March  2,  at  8 o’clock  a.  in.,  the  vessel  was  off  Charleston,  S.  C.,  with 
the  Mount  Vernon  about  2 miles  astern 5 weather  delightful.  Three 
blockading  vessels  just  out;  one  ran  down  to  the  Mount  Vernon;  vessel 
kept  steadily  forward,  and  at  about  5 o’clock  arrived  in  harbor  at  Port 
Eoyal  and  anchored;  leak  as  before.  Sent  ashore  for  leave  to  land 
troops  that  evening,  but  could  not  get  it  until  morning. 

Sent  to  Flag-Offi(;er  Boggs,  of  the  Varuna,  for  assistance  and  survey. 
He,  with  Captains  Boutelle  aial  Eenshaw,  came  immediately  on  board; 
promised  all  assistance  in  their  power;  lay  at  anchor  all  night. 

March  3,  proceeded  according  to  orders  to  Skull  Creek,  Seabrook’s 
Landing,  about  7 miles  up  the  river.  In  the  forenoon  landed  the  troops, 
and  under  charge  of  Captain  Boutelle,  of  the  Bibb,  commenced  searching 
for  and  endeavoring  to  stop  the  leak.  A sail  was  bent  over  the  bow,  and 
all  the  pumps  on  board  with  several  obtained  from  the  land  were  set  to 
work.  This  was  continued  from  day  to  day  without  effect  until  on  Fri- 
day, the  7th  of  March,  a mattress  cushion  having  been  substituted  for 
the  sail,  at  evening  the  leak  was  got  under. 

On  Saturday  the  8th,  just  as  the  stoppage  of  the  hole  was  supposed 
to  have  been  effected,  it  burst  out  afresh. 

Sunday,  the  9th,  renewed  attempts  were  made  with  success,  and  the 
hole  was  stopped;  a cushion  of  tarred  oakum  was  wound  around  the 
hole;  several  sheets  of  tarred  canvas  laid  on,  then  a thick  sheet  of  rubber; 
a sheet  of  boiler  iron  was  laid  over  this  and  screwed  down  with  a jack- 
screw,  and  several  barrels  of  heated  rosin  poured  in,  covering  in  to  the 
dei)th  of  8 inches.  This  caused  the  leak  to  nearly  stop,  and  was  pro- 
nounced sufficient  for  safety  by  nautical  men  of  large  experience. 


702  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

On  Monday,  the  10th  of  March,  the  vessel  was  reladen  and  the  troops 
bron^i^ht  on  board — the  Thirtj-first  Massachusetts  Eegiinent. 

Prior  to  this,  on  Saturday,  the  steamer  Matanzas  had  been  employed 
to  take  part  of  the  troops,  in  case  of  necessity,  and  the  Maine  troops 
had  been  put  on  board  her  on  jMonday  forenoon,  and  she  had  dropped 
down  to  Hilton  Head,  with  orders  to  await  the  Mississippi.  At  about 
2.30  p.  m.  the  Mississippi  cast  off  and  began  to  clear  the  wharf  prepara- 
tory to  departure.  In  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  several  nautical  gen- 
tlemen of  skill  the  captain  moved  his  boat  by  the  stern;  she  backed 
against  the  shore,  and,  hitting  the  rudder,  the  tiller-rope  parted  just  as 
she  began  to  move  forward;  it  being  impossible  to  guide  her,  she  ran 
directly  upon  shore  about  a half  mile  below  the  wharf,  and  became  hard 
and  fast.  The  tug-boat  Mercury  was  sent  for  and  the  steamer  Hon- 
duras to  get  her  off*.  At  high  tide  on  the  morning  o.f  11th,  at  about 
2.30  o’clock,  the  ship  having  been  put  under  the  charge  of  Captain 
Bou telle,  of  the  Bibb,  who  had  kindly  volunteered  his  assistance,  an 
attempt  was  made  to  tow  her  off*,  but  unfortunately  the  tide  was  the 
lowest,  with  one  exception,  ever  recorded  in  this  creek. 

Another  attempt  was  made  on  the  tide  in  the  afternoon  with  the 
Mercury,  the  Locust  Point,  and  the  Parkersburg  steamers,  to  tow  her 
off,  without  success.  Another  attempt  was  advised.  On  the  morning 
of  the  12tli,  at  about  4 o’clock,  the  attempt  was  successfully  made,  and 
she  ran  down  to  Hilton  Head,  and  anchored  there  at  about  5.30  o’clock 
a.  m. 

Our  escape  from  this  as  from  the  other  troubles  is  due  to  everybody 
but  the  master  of  our  vessel  and  his  crew.  But  for  our  own  sailors  and 
soldiers  and  the  advice  and  assistance  of  others  our  fate  would  have 
been  a sorry  one. 

Addendum. — I have  learned  since  it  occurred  that  the  vessel  when 
approaching  Hatteras  Inlet  got  among  the  breakers  and  into  less  than 
a ])roper  amount  of  water  for  safety.  The  facts  appear  clearly  in  the 
records  of  the  board  of  inquiry. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

On  Board  Steam  Transport  Mississippi, 
[Captain  Fulton  :J  March  12,  1862. 

Captain:  I transmit  herewith  a copy  of  the  proceedings  and  testi- 
mony of  a board  of  inquiry  ordered  upon  the  causes  of  the  disaster 
which  have  delayed  our  voyage  and  imperiled  our  lives.  The  results 
of  careful  examination  of  the  evidence  are  these: 

1st.  That  off  Cape  Hatteras  we  were  in  the  most  imminent  peril  from 
running  over  the  shoals  within  4 fathoms  water,  and  that,  too,  in  day- 
light. If  we  had  struck  there  in  the  gale  that  followed  every  life  must 
have  been  lost. 

2d.  Could  competent  foresight  and  seamanship  have  brought  us  into 
that  position  % 

I cannot  permit  the  statement  made  by  yourself,  that  you  learned  in 
twelve  or  fifteen  hours  after  leaving  Fort  Monroe  that  the  general  wished 
to  stop  at  Hatteras,  to  be  any  excuse;  it  was  told  you  in  Hampton  Koads 
that  it  was  necessary  to  stop  at  Hatteras  Inlet  to  take  up  General 
Williams.  The  testimony  of  William  A.  Drum,  one  of  the  quartermas- 
ters of  the  ship,  shows  that  it  was  known  at  least  to  him. 

3d.  That  in  smooth  water,  with  a clear  sky,  land  in  full  sight,  with  a 
buoy  and  light-house  in  view,  the  vessel  was  run  ashore  upon  Frying  Pan 
Shoals  in  less  than  3 fathoms  water. 


CiTAP.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  7(T3 

4tli.  That  hemg’  hard  and  fast  aground  in  less  than  3 fathoms  water 
and  falling  tide,  the  port  anchor  was  let  go,  the  ship  lieading  southwest, 
the  wind  westerly,  and  the  fore  main-sail,  spencer,  forestay  sail,  and  jib 
being  set  (see  statement  of  chief  officer),  so  that  the  ship  was  forced 
upon  it,  and  a hole  punched  through  her  bottoih. 

I do  not  feel  mj'self  competent  to  examine  the  courses  and  distances 
had  by  the  ship  by  which  we  were  brought  into  this  position,  having 
only  a landsman’s  acquaintance  with  navigation,  but  the  facts  above 
stated  are  too  prominent  to  escape  the  most  careless  observation.  I 
will  call  attention,  however,  to  some  of  the  discrepancies  of  your  state- 
ment, both  with  itself  and  with  the  direct  testimony  of  others.  You 
say  (page  15)  that  between  5 and  6 o’clock  a.  m.  of  the  28th  February 
you  judged  yourself  on  the  edge  of  the  Gulf  Stream.  You  say  (i)age  17) 
that  the  edge  of  the  Gulf  Stream  is  from  30  to  40  miles  from  Frying  Pan 
Shoals.  You  say  (page  10)  you  were  running  8^  knots  i)er  hour;  that 
at  7 o’clock  a.  m.  you  were  in  sight  of  main-land.  Now  the  eastern  point 
of  Frying  Pan  Shoals  is  shown  by  the  charts  to  be  about  22  miles  from 
the  main  land.  How  could  you  get  in  sight  of  main-land  within  two 
hours,  and,  finding  yourself  so  much  out  of  your  place,  not  heave  the 
lead  until  after  the  ship  struck?  Besides,  you  say  (page  15)  you  did  not 
“turn  out”  till  between  0 and  7 o’clock.  What  means  had  you  of  judg- 
ing where  you  were  between  5 and  6 a.  m.?  You  will  observe  also  that 
your  statement  as  to  the  depth  of  water  off  Hatteras,  when  the  vessel 
was  in  the  breakers,  is  expressly  contradicted  by  at  least  four  persons. 
You  say  there  was  not  less  than  7 fathoms  at  any  time  (page  15),  while 
the  concurrent  testimony  of  at  least  four  witnesses  is  that  the  lead 
show^ed  4 fathoms  less. 

These  are  but  a small  part  of  the  discrepancies,  which  show  to  me  that 
your  mind  is  in  such  a state  of  confusion  as  to  events  that  the  lives  of 
my  men  are  not  safe  under  the  guidance  of  your  nautical  skill.  1 am 
forced  to  the  conclusion,  tlierefoie,  that  through  your  neglect  or  iucom- 
petency  the  lives  of  1,400  men  have  thrice  been  in  ])eril ; that  the  impor- 
tant interests  of  the  Government  in  the  speed  of  this  voyage  have  been 
greatly  injured  and  its  objects  much  delayed,  and  perhaps  thw^arted. 

After  much  detention  we  are  now  at  anchor  in  Port  Poyal  Harbor, 
about  to  again  start  upon  our  voyage.  With  the  convictions  above 
expressed  1 ought  not,  I cannot,  i)ermit  the  voyage  to  proceed  with 
yourself  in  command  of  this  ship. 

It  has  been  found  impossible  to  get  another  to  carrj^  the  troops  within 
any  reasonable  time.  There  is  but  one  course  of  duty  left  to  me,  a 
responsible  and  unpleasant  one.  You  will  therefore  be  placed  under 
arrest,  in  your  state  room,  until  you  can  be  conveniently  transferred  to 
the  Matanzas.  You  will  be  allowed  to  take  from  the  ship  w ith  you  your 
personal  baggage  only.  Everything  else  will  be  left  on  bo^rd  and  a 
receipt  will  be  given  you  for  the  ship,  her  tackle,  equipment,  and  stores 
of  every  description;  you  will  proceed  to  Ship  Island  on  board  the 
Matanzas. 

After  landing  the  troops  there.,  if  I determine  to  terminate  the  char- 
ter-party, the  ship  and  crew  will  be  again  turned  over  to  you,  if  the 
owners  so  desire. 

Copies  of  the  proceedings  of  the  court  of  inquiry  and  of  this  order  of 
arrest  will  be  sent  to  the  owmers,  together  with  a copy  of  the  log  since 
w^e  left  Fortress  Monroe,  with  a report  of  the  vo^^age  from  the  itinerary 
kept  by  my  order. 

I am  grieved  to  be  obliged  to  this  action,  for  our  personal  relations 


704  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


have  been  of  tlie  kindest  cliaracter,  and  I know  yourself  will  believe 
that  only  the  sternest  sense  of  duty  would  compel  me  to  it. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  vour  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-  General^  Commariding, 


Saint  Louis,  March  14,  1862. 

E.  M.  Stanton, 

(Secretary  of  War^  Washington : 

General  Bragg  is  at  Memphis,  and  large  re-enforcements  are  arriving 
from  the  South  by  railroad,  to  sustain  General  A.  S.  Johnston  and  pre- 
vent us  from  reaching  Memphis.  If  an  attack  on  Mobile  is  intended, 
now  is  the  time.  The  capture  of  that  place  would  assist  us  very  much 
here.  Moreover,  gunboats  could  then  ascend  the  Alabama  River  and 
open  its  commerce. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulp, 

1^0.  1.  j Ship  Island,,  March  20,  1862. 

Pursuant  to  General  Orders,  20,  of  February  23,  1862,  from  tlie 
Headquarters  of  the  Army,  Maj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Volunteers, 
assumes  command  of  this  department. 

His  stall  is  announced  as  lollows  : 

Maj.  George  0.  Strong,  assistant  adjutant-general,  ordnance  officer 
and  chief  of  staff. 

Capt.  Jonas  H.  French,  aide-de-cami)  and  inspector-general. 

Capt.  Peter  Haggerty,  aide-de  camp. 

First  Lieut.  J.  W.  Cushing,  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 
acting  chief  quartermaster. 

First  Lieut.  J.  E.  Easterbrook,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 
acting  chief  commissary. 

Capt.  George  A.  Ken  set,  chief  of  artillery. 

First  Lieut.  Godfrey  Weitzel,  chief  engineer. 

First  Lieut.  J.  C.  Palfrey,  assistant  engineer. 

First  Lieut.  C.  N.  Turnbull,  chief  of  topographical  engmeers. 

Surg.  Thomas  H.  Bache,  medical  director. 

Maj.  J.  M.  Bell,  volunteer  aide-de  camp. 

Capt.  R.  S.  Davis,  volunteer  aide-de-cump. 

First  Lieut.  J.  B.  Kinsman,  aide-de-camp. 

Second  Lieut.  H.  C.  Clarke,  aide-de-camp. 

B5^  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STROKG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pichens,  March  22,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  T).  C.: 

General  : I deem  it  proper  to  report  for  the  infornmtion  of  the  Gen- 
eral-in-Chief tliat  the  rebels  at  Pensacola  and  along  their  line  of  defense 
liave  been  stampeded  by  our  glorious  Union  victories  elsewhere.  This 
information  (indefinite,  however)  was  derived  from  two  stupid  white 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


705 


men  and  two  negroes,  who  came  over  a few  days  since  from  Milton  and 
East  Bay,  some  40  miles  from  Pensacola,  but  it  is  ai)i)arent  that  the 
enemy  hold  firm  possession  of  Forts  McRec  and  Barrancas  and  at  least 
five  sand  batteries  lining  the  shore  between  the  former  fort  and  the 
navy-yard.  The  four  refugees  could  furnish  no  information  but  hear- 
say stories  as  to  the  force  of  the  enemy  in  their  forts,  navy-yard,  Pen- 
sacola, on  Bayou  Grande,  Live  Oak  Plantation,  &c.  As  my  ])osition  is 
a defensive  one,  on  an  island,  I am  perfectly  heli)less  for  any  ofiensive 
movement  requiring  water  transportation  for  50  men  without  naval 
. co-operation.  I have  not  under  my  command  a dispatcfii  steamer  or 
sail  vessel,  and  have  scarcely  enough  surf-boats  to  land  stores  for  the 
command. 

I have  made  estimates  on  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  for  a steam- 
boat and  surf-boats,  which  ought  to  be,  and  I am  in  hopes  will  be,  fur- 
nished without  delay.  The  sloop  of  war  Vincennes,  carrying  two  9-iuch 
and  four  8-inch  Dahlgren  guns,  two  rifled  guns — one  20-pounder  and 
one  10-pounder — is  the  only  vessel  of  war  that  has  been  lying  ofl*  Santa 
Eosa  for  the  past  two  weeks.  She  cannot  be  made  available  here  for 
any  successful  movement  against  the  enemy. 

The  General-in-Ohief  can  rely  upon  the  zeal  and  spirit  of  my  com- 
mand. I will  do  everything  in  my  power,  with  my  limited  means,  to 
aid  in  crushing  out  this  senseless  and  wicked  rebellion. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  AENOLD, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Volunteers,  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

NTo.  8.  1 Ship  Island,  March  29,  1802. 

The  following-named  regiments  and  corps  will  embark  to-morrow, 
commencing  at  8 a.  m.,  in  the  following  order,  viz: 

1.  On  board  steamer  Mississippi,  the  commanding  general  and  staff; 
Fourth EegimentWisconsinVolunteers ; Durivage  Cavalry  (dismounted) 
and  Manning’s  battery;  Weitzel  Pioneers. 

2.  On  board  steamer  Matanzas:  Brigadier-General  Williams  and 
staff;  Twenty-first  Eegiment  Indiana  Volunteers. 

3.  On  board  steamer  Lewis:  Ninth  Eegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers. 

4.  On  board  ship  North  America:  Twenty-sixth  Massachusetts  Vol- 
unteers; Everett’s  battery. 

5.  On  board  ship  Wild  Gazelle:  Sixth  Michigan  Volunteers. 

6.  On  board  ship  E.  W.  Earley:  Twelfth  Connecticut  Volunteers. 

Each  regiment  will  take  three  tents,  and  the  detached  companies  of 

cavalry,  artillery,  and  pioneers  one  tent  each.  The  remaining  tents 
will  be  left  standing.  The  troops  will  carry  their  camp  kettles,  mess- 
pans,  cups,  plates,  knives  and  forks,  and  each  soldier  his  knapsack, 
overcoat,  blanket,  one  extra  shirt,  one  extra  pair  of  drawers,  one  extra 
pair  of  shoes,  canteen,  and  in  his  haversack  four  days’  cooked  rations. 
They  will  also  take  all  the  axes,  hatchets,  picks,  shovels,  and  spades 
they  may  have  in  possession. 

Officers’  baggage  will  be  limited  to  bedding  and  one  valise,  bag,  or  , 
knapsack;  no  trunks  in  any  case  to  be  taken.  The  remaining  baggage 
of  officers  and  men  will  be  properly  secured,  as  compactly  as  possible, 
marked,  and  turned  Over  to  the  division  quartermaster. 

Captains  of  companies  will  be  held  responsible  that  every  soldier  has 
in  his  cartridge-box  40  rounds  of  ammunition. 

45  R R — VOL  VI 


706  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

The  troops  will  be  inspected  at  G p.  m.  to-day,  to  see  that  this  order 
has  been  complied  with  as  far  as  may  be  necessary  at  that  hour,  to 
insure  promptness  in  the  embarkation  to-morrow.  One  con-commis- 
sioned officer  for  each  regiment  will  be  left  behind  to  turn  over  the 
baggage,  tents,  &c.,  to  the  chief  quartermaster. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STEONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters,  etc.,  Mareli  30,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  Farragut, 

Commanding  West  Gulf  Squadron : 

Sir  : I am  now  ready  to  put  on  board  ship  six  regiments  and  two 
batteries,  and  will  be  able  to  be  in  the  ‘^passes”  in  twelve  hours.  I am 
still  of  opinion  that  an  effort  be  made  to  land  above  the  fort  as  soon  as  ' 
you  can  get  the  gunboats  by.  Its  moral,  not  to  say  actual,  effect;  would 
aid  the  attack,  if  not  compel  surrender.  If  the  Navy  are  not  to  be  ready 
for  six  or  eight  days  I ought  not  to  sail,  as  my  coal  is  running  short, 
and  I cannot  carry  more  than  eight  days’  for  sailing.  May  I ask  that 
you  send  me  word  so  as  to  reach  me  by  Tuesday  morning,  and  I will  be 
embarked  in  waiting.  If  you  prefer,  I will  be  in  time  to  attempt  the 
landing  off  Isle  Breton.  If  I can  aid  you  in  any  way  please  command 
me.  I shall  wait  your  advices.  If  it  is  of  importance  that  you  advise 
me,  please  do  not  fail. 

I am,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


Organization  of  the  troops  in  Department  of  the  Gulf  Mareh  31, 18G2. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  W.  Phelps. 

9th  Connecticut. 

12th  Connecticut. 

13th  Connecticut. 

8th  New  Hampshire. 

7 th  Vermont. 

8th  Vermont. 

4th  Massachusetts  Battery. 

1st  Vermont  Battery. 

2d  Vermont  Battery. 

2d  Battalion  Massachusetts  Cavalry 
(one  company). 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams. 

21st  Indiana. 

26th  Massachusetts. 

31st  Massachusetts. 

6th  Michigan. 

4th  Wisconsin. 

2d  Massachusetts  Battery. 

6th  Massachusetts  Battery. 

2d  Battalion  Massachusetts  Cavalry 
(one  company). 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  George  F.  Shepley,  Twelfth  Maine  Infantry. 

12th  Maine. 

13th  Maine. 

14th  Maine. 

15th  Maine. 

30th  Massachusetts. 

1st  Maine  Battery. 

2d  Battalion  Massachusetts  Cavalry 
(one  company). 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  707 

Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler, 
U.  S.  Army,  for  March,  1S62. 


Ist  (Phelps’)  Brigade: 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry 

2d  (VTilliains’)  Brigade: 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry 

3d  (Shepley’s)  Brigade: 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry 

Total 


Command. 


Present  for 
duty. 

■*3 

a 

w 

o 

s 

Officers. 

Men. 

a, 

O 

a 

tc 

6) 

U 

tc 

fcX) 

« SI 

bl'w 

O ^ 

u'" 

U 

< 

c 

o 

E 

97 

8 

2,  298 
250 

2,  584 
270 

2,718 

291 

6 

3 

69 

81 

86 

163 

4, 126 
89 

4, 908 
115 

4,  980 
145 

4 

3 

79 

95 

95 

128 

2,  862 
124 

3,619 

141 

3,  872 
143 

5 

6 

3 

65 

80 

82 

414  1 9, 962 

11,893 

12,  412 

1 12 

The  Thirteenth  Connecticut,  Fifteenth  Maine,  and  Seventh  and  Eighth  Vermont  Begiments  of 
Infantry,  and  the  Second  Massachusetts  and  First  Vermont  Batteries  repotted  on  original  as  “not 
arrived.  ’’ 


April  2,  18G2. 

Maj.  Georoe  C.  Strong, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General.,  &c. : 

Major:  Taking  with  you  on  board  the  steamer  Lewis  the  Ninth 
Eegiment  of  Connecticut  Volunteers  and  a section  of  Captain  Everett/s 
battery,  and  acting  in  conjunction  with  the  Navy,  you  will  proceed  to 
Biloxi,  and  demand  and  obtain  an  ample  apology  for  the  firing  into  a 
llag  of  truce  upou  an  errand  of  humanity  under  your  command  upon 
the  1st  instant. 

The  apology  must  be  an  ample  one,  and  you  will  demand  and  obtain 
a guarantee  against  such  occurrences  in  the  future,  signed  by  the  mayor, 
the  principal  inhabitants,  and  the  colonel  commanding  the  forces  there. 

You  will  inform  the  authorities  and  the  citizens  that  no  flag  of  truce 
must  be  hereafter  sent  to  this  island  unless  accompanied  by  a commis- 
sioned ofiicer,  in  full  uniform,  with  proper  credentials;  that  civilians  can- 
not be  received  under  such  flag,  or  if  received  will  be  detained. 

You  will  land  and  compel  any  force  there  to  retire,  and  take  such 
measures  to  secure  and  enforce  the  foregoing  as  you  may  deem  best, 
either  by  seizing  and  bringing  off  the  principal  inhabitants  or  whatever 
else  may  seem  advisable. 

You  will  also  proceed  to  Mississippi  City  and  Pass  Christian,  if  desired 
by  the  Navy,  and  co-operate  with  it  in  any  demonstrations  deemed  advis- 
able against  those  places. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

JOS.  M.  BELL, 

Major  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


Biloxi,  Miss.,  April  3,  1862. 

To  the  Mayor  of  Biloxi  : 

Sir  : I am  directed  by  Major-General  Butler,  commanding  the  De- 
partment of  the  Gulf,  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  on  the  1st 


708  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

instant  a party  of  men  under  my  command,  bearing  a flag  of  truce  and 
on  an  errand  of  mercy,  were  fired  into  in  a most  cowardly  manner  while 
their  schooner  was  aground  and  just  after  they  had  left  your  shore. 

An  apology  was  made  by  a person  claiming  to  be  an  officer  of  the 
Third  Mississippi  Volunteers,  but  General  Butler  has  ordered  that  the 
repetition  of  such  or  similar  outrageous  action  be  the  signal  for  the 
destruction  of  your  town. 

I am  directed,  moreover,  to  inform  you  that  all  persons  in  citizens’ 
dress  who  visit  the  lines  of  the  United  States  forces  on  this  coast  under 
a flag  of  truce  will  be  detained  if  suspected.  All  such  flags,  to  be  re- 
spected, must  be  accompanied  by  a military  officer  in  uniform  and  with 
proper  credentials. 

Eespectfully,  &c., 

GEO.  C.  STEONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  9.  ) Ship  Island^  April  10,  1862. 

The  following-named  regiments  and  corps  will  embark,  commencing 
at m.,  and  in  the  following  order : 

On  board  ship  Great  Eepublic : Twenty-first  Eegiment  Indiana  Vol- 
unteers 5 Fourth  Eegiment  Wisconsin  Volunteers  j Sixth  Eegiment  Mich- 
igan Volunteers. 

On  board  steamer  Mississippi : Twenty-sixth  Eegiment  Massachusetts 
Volunteers ; Thirty-first  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  j Brown’s 
sappers  and  miners ; Everett’s  battery. 

On  board  steamer  Matanzas : Ninth  Eegiment  Connecticut  Volun- 
teers ; Second  Vermont  Battery. 

On  board  ship  North  America : Thirtieth  Eegiment  Massachusetts 
Volunteers 5 Eead’s  cavalry;  Durivage’s  cavalry  ; Manning’s  battery. 

On  board  ship  E.  Wilder  Farley : Twelfth  Eegiment  Connecticut  Vol- 
unteers. 

The  amount  of  provisions,  baggage,  &c.,  to  be  carried  by  the  troops 
will  be  the  same  as  heretofore  designated  in  General  Orders,  No.  8, 
current  series.  No  knapsack  will  be  unslung  during  embarkation  or 
disembarkation  or  on  board  a lighter  in  going  to  or  from  any  transport. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STEONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Skip  Island^  April  13,  1862. 

To  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  safe  arrival  at  Ship  Island  on  the 
21st  of  March,  after  a series  of  casualties  set  forth  in  my  last  report 
from  Port  Eoyal  to  the  General  commanding  the  Army,  but  from  thence 
no  further  accident.  For  three  days  after  my  arrival  a storm  prevented 
a landing  of  either  troops  or  stores.  Upon  consultation  with  Flag- 
Officer  Farragut,  I was  informed  by  him  that  he  would  probably  be  able 
to  move  in  seven  days.  Accordingly,  by  dint  of  most  strenuous  labor 
of  my  troops  day  and  night,  I had  embarked  and  ready  for  embarkation 
6,000  of  my  best  men  to  support  his  operations — a force  judged  to  be 
sufficient  for  the  advance,  to  be  at  once  supported  by  the  remainder  of 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


709 


my  disposable  force.  After  waiting  four  days,  with  troops  on  shipboard, 

I learned  from  the  flag-officer  that  the  storms  and  low  water  at  the  bar 
had  prevented  his  getting  his  ships  into  position.  For  sanitary  reasons 

1 disembarked  the  troops,  and  shall  re-embark  to-morrow,  and  shall  sail 
for  the  Head  of  the  Passes  when  I am  informed  that  the  Navy  will  be 
ready  for  operations. 

I have  pleasure  in  reporting  the  safe  arrival  of  all  the  troo])s  assigned 
to  this  department  (the  last  regiment  from  the  North,  the  Thirteenth 
Connecticut  Volunteers,  arriving  last  night),  except  Nims’  battery,  the 
only  drilled  corps  of  artillery  given  me,  which  has  for  some  unexplained 
reason  been  detained  at  Fortress  Monroe. 

During  my  enforced  delay  by  shipwreck.  General  Phelps  had  sent 
away  both  the  Constitution  and  Fulton  steamers,  so  that  I am  much 
crippled  for  transportation.  But  where  there  is  a will  there  is  a way,’^ 
and  1 shall  be  able  by  means  of  sailing  vessels  under  tow  to  make  my 
way  up  the  Mississippi,  but  for  ulterior  movements  on  the  coast  one  at 
least  of  those  steamers  will  be  of  the  last  necessity,,  as  well  several 
light-draught  steamers,  for  which  I had  made  requisition  upon  the 
Quartermaster-General. 

In  the  mean  time  I have  sent  a regiment  and  section  of  a battery,  un- 
der the  direction  of  Major  Strong,  my  chief  of  staff,  to  co-operate  with 
the  Navy,  to  demand  an  apology  for  an  insult  to  our  flag  of  truce,  sent 
on  an  errand  of  mercy,  with  a shipwrecked  passenger,  as  well  as  to 
destroy  the  position  of  a regiment  of  the  enemy  at  Pass  Christian. 
This  service  was  gallantly  performed;  the  proper  apology  was  made  at 
Biloxi,  the  town  surrendered  into  our  hands,  and  the  rebels  at  Pass 
Christian,  an  equal  force,  with  four  pieces  of  artillery,  driven  from  their 
camp,  which,  with  its  material,  was  burned.  No  lives  were  lost,  and  only 

2 of  our  men  were  wounded.  I trust  my  next  dispatch,  by  the  first  . 
opportunity  of  sending  by  a mail  steamer,  will  give  account  of  larger 
and  as  successful  operations. 

I think  it  due  to  the  good  conduct  of  the  brave  men  of  that  expe- 
dition to  ask  to  have  published  the  general  order  upon  that  subject  in- 
closed. « 

I put  myself  in  communication  with  General  Arnold,  and  have  no 
doubt,  in  conjunction  with  him,  of  the  easy  capture  of  both  Mobile  and 
Pensacola,  were  it  not  that  I felt  bound  as  well  by  my  instructions  as 
my  own  judgment  not  to  hazard  the  success  of  the  main  object  of  the 
demonstration  in  the  Gulf. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major-  General,  Commanding, 


f Inclosure.  ] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  10.  ( Ship  Island,  April  12,  1862. 

The  major-general  commanding  desires  publicly  to  testify  his  admira- 
tion of  the  gallant  courage  and  good  conduct  of  the  Ninth  Regiment  of 
Connecticut  Volunteers,  Colonel  Cahill  commanding,  and  a section  of 
the  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery,  under  Captain  Everett,  in  the  recent 
expedition  to  Biloxi  and  Pass  Christian,  as  exhibited  by  the  report  of 
the  staff  officer  in  command  of  that  expedition. 

Of  their  bravery  in  the  field  he  felt  assured,  but  another  quality  more 
trying  to  the  soldier  claims  his  admiration.  After  having  been  for 
months  subjected  to  the  privations  necessarily  incident  to  camp  life 


710  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

iipoD  this  island,  these  well-disciplined  soldiers,  although  for  many 
hours  in  full  possession  of  two  rebel  villages,  lilled  with  what  to  theui 
were  most  desirable  luxuries,  abstained  from  the  least  unauthorized 
interference  with  private  property  and  all  molestation  of  peaceful 
citizens. 

This  behavior  is  worthy  of  all  praise.  It  robs  war  of  half  its  horrors. 
It  teaches  our  enemies  how  much  they  have  been  misinformed  by  their 
designing  leaders  as  to  the  character  of  our  soldiers  and  the  intention 
of  our  Government.  It  gives  them  a lesson  and  an  example  in  humanity 
and  civilized  warfare  much  needed,  however  little  it  may  be  followed. 

The  general  commanding  commends  the  action  of  the  men  of  this  ex- 
pedition to  every  soldier  in  this  department.  Let  it  be  imitated  by  all 
in  the  towns  and  cities  we  shall  occupy — a living  witness  that  the  United 
States  soldier  lights  only  for  the  Union,  the  Constitution,  and  the  en- 
forcement of  the  laws. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STEONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Off  the  Passes,  Mississippi  Delta,  April  11,  1862. 
To  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I am  now  off  the  passes  with 
eight  regiments  and  three  batteries  of  artillery  of  my  best  troops,  under 
command  of  Brigadier-Generals  Phelps  and  Williams,  ready  to  co-oper- 
ate with  the  fleet,  who  move  to-day  or,  as  I believe,  to-morrow  upon 
Ports  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson.  These  are  all  for  which  I have  possi- 
ble means  of  transportation,  owing  to  the  circumstances  stated  in  my 
dispatch  of  13th  instant,  and  all  that  I believe  will  be  needed  for  the 
present  emergency.  You  may  think  that  we  have  delayed,  but  I beg  to 
assure  you  that,  with  the  storms  and  winds  and  the  means  at  our  dis- 
posal, we  made  every  haste  and  are  ready  as  soon  as  we  are  needed. 

The  health  of  the  command  is  very  good,  and  tlieir  equipments  as  to 
arms  and  provisions  abundant.  It  was  especially  fortunate  that  I made 
so  large  a provision  for  coal,  as  I have  been  enabled  to  spare  the  Navy 
more  than  a thousand  tons,  without  which  they  would  have  been  very 
much  embarrassed.  I have  taken  the  means  to  keep  up  my  own  sup- 
ply, and  now  there  will  be  enough  for  all  for  the  present.  Steamers  are 
much  needed  of  light  draught. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  P.  BUTLEE, 

Major-  General,  Commanding, 


• Headquarters  Defartiment  of  Plorida, 

Fort  Piekens,  April  24, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant-  General  U,  S,  Army  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state  for  the  information  of  the  War 
Department  that  the  relations  between  my  command  and  the  rebels 
have  (to  the  extent  of  my  knowledge)  undergone  very  little  change  since 
my  last  report. 

Their  forts  and  batteries  and  the  navy-yard  opposite  appear  nearly 
as  formidable  as  they  did  three  months  ago.  The  spirit,  discipline,  and 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


711 


instruction  of  ray  troops  liave  improved.  I would  have  attacked  the 
enemy  before  this  if  I had  not  been  sei)arated  from  him  by  a broad  bay 
and  having  no  naval  co-operation  nor  water  transportation  for  anything 
like  an  adequate  force.  1 was  in  hopes  that  General  Butler  would  have 
co-operated  with  mein  attacking  the  rebels  in  their  rear,  by  landing  two 
regiments  of  infantry"  and  a field  battery  on  the  Perdido  and  by  furnish- 
ing me  with  a steam  gunboat  to  attack  them  at  or  above  Pensacola,  thus 
making  a joint  attack;  but  unfortunately  the  necessities  of  the  service 
prevented  this,  as  a copy  of  General  Butler’s  letter,  herewith  inclosed, 
will  explain. 

The  position  of  the  enemy  is  a very  strong  one  from  fortuitous  cir- 
cumstances. Occupying  two  strong  forts  and  a redoubt  and  a line  of 
batteries  for  at  least  3 miles  and  separated  from  us  by  a broad  bay,  and 
being  within  easy  communication  with  Mobile  and  Montgomery  by  rail 
and  telegraph,  he  can  be  re-enforced,  and  having  but  a small  force  to 
oppose  him  with,  not  a naval  vessel  to  co  operate,  nor  water  transporta- 
tion to  aid  our  land  forces — such  is  and  has  been  for  two  months  i)ast 
the  military  status  in  this  department. 

I inclose  copies  of  correspondence  between  Flag-Officers  Farragut  and 
McKean  and  General  Butler  and  myself  on  this  subject. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  AKKOLD, 

Brigadier- General,  If.  8.  Volunteers,  Commanding. 

[Inclosures.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pickens,  March  15,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  D.  G.  Farragut, 

Commanding  Gulf  Squadron  : 

Dear  Sir  : I have  under  my  command  on  this  island  1,200  volun- 
teers and  GOO  regular  soldiers,  but  I am  perfectly  helpless  for  offensive 
movements  without  naval  co-operation,  being  on  an  island,  and  having 
no  water  transportation.  If  you  can  spare  two  or  three  gunboats  to 
run  in  by  the  Swash  Channel,  they,  together  with  the  land  force  that  I 
will  furnish,  can,  I think,  take  Town  Point,  on  Live  Oak  Plantation, 
which  (as  reported  by  some  rebel  deserters)  was  defended  by  five  heavy 
guns  behind  sand  batteries,  supported  by  2,000  men  ; but  subsequent 
information,  derived  from  runaway  negroes,  leads  me  to  believe  that  all 
the  guns  and  men,  except  one  10-inch  columbiad  and  400  men,  have  been 
removed,  probably  to  Mobile. 

The  rebels  have,  and  will  have,  entire  control  of  the  bay  and  inner 
harbor  as  long  as  they  hold  this  point  and  their  line  of  forts  and  batte- 
ries ; but  if  we  can  take  this  point,  your  gunboats  can  iiass  out  of  range 
of  their  heaviest  guns — from  Four  Mile  Point,  on  Santa  Kosa  Island,  to 
Milton,  on  the  main-land,  which  would  enable  you  to  capture  or  destroy 
all  the  rebel  steamers  and  sail  vessels  in  those  waters,  and  more  per- 
fectly blockade  the  harbor  of  Pensacola. 

Town  Point  is  an  initial  and  decisive  point  necessary  to  be  taken  in 
any  future  operations  for  the  recapture  of  the  navy-yard  and  their  line 
of  defensive  works. 

I am  in  hopes  you  will  soon  be  here,  when  we  can  discuss  the  whole 
subject. 

I am,  commodore,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  AENOLD, 

Brigadier  General,  U.  8.  Volunteers,  Commanding, 


712  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

U.  S.  Flag-Ship  Hartford, 
Mississippi  Eiver^  Mead  of  Passes^  April  8,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Arnold, 

Commanding  Fort  Pickens^  Fla. : 

Hear  General  ; Nothing  would  give  me  more  pleasure  than  to  co- 
operate with  you  in  your  designs  against  Pensacola,  but  you  must  be 
aware  that  I am  on  the  eve  of  attacking  New  Orleiins,  and  my  orders 
are  such  that  I cannot  look  at  any  other  place  until  I succeed  or  fail  in 
this. 

If  I succeed,  Pensacola  comes  in  turn,  but  not  the  first ; still  I hope  to 
be  able  to  gratify  your  wishes  soon. 

Until  then  I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  G.  FAKBAGUT, 

Flag-Officer  Western  Gulf  Blockading  Squadron, 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Ship  Island^  April  10,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

Commanding  Department  of  Florida  : 

General:  I regret  that  we  are  unable  to  co-operate  with  you  at 
I)resent  in  the  capture  of  Pensacola,  as  the  presence  of  my  troops  and 
transports  is  necessary,  as  soon  as  possible,  in  the  Mississippi  Eiver. 

Should  you  not  have  taken  that  place  before  my  return  hither  I shall 
take  pleasure  in  sending  you  any  assistance  that  may  be  necessary,  and 
I trust  you  will  not  fail  to  call  upon  me  at  all  times  for  any  aid  I can 
render  you. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BBNJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pickens.,  April  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  Ship  Island : 

General  : I have  just  received  your  note  of  the  10th  instant.  I re- 
gret that  the  “ fortune  of  war  will  not  iiermit  you  to  co-operate  with 
me  in  the  taking  of  Pensacola,  &c.,  at  this  time,  for  I am  convinced  that 
if  the  co-operation  suggested  by  your  assistant  adjutant-general  could 
have  been  afforded  me  the  expedition  would  have  been  entirely  success- 
ful ; and  so  hopeful  was  I,  that  my  orders  have  been  issued  and  arrange- 
ments made  with  that  view. 

I must  thank  you  for  the  patriotic  and  soldierly  tender  of  your  aid 
and  co-operation  at  any  future  time,  as  expressed  in  the  closing  para- 
graph of  your  note,  and  I take  this  occasion  to  reciprocate  the  same  kind 
and  delicate  sentiments,  by  offering  you  anything  that  you  may  require 
within  my  limited  command  that  will  benefit  the  public  service, 
lam,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  ARNOLD, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  Commanding, 

Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pickens,  April  13,  1862, 

Flag-Officer  W.  W.  McKean, 

Commanding  Eastern  Division  U,  S,  Gulf  Squadron : 

Dear  Sir:  Our  recent  victories  in  Tennessee,  North  Carolina,  &c., 
having  caused  the  rebels  to  remove  the  most  of  their  best  troops  from  the 


Chap.  XVI.  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


7l3 


uavy-yard  and  tlieir  whole  defensive  line  from  Fort  McRee  to  Pensacola, 
I am  confident  (although  they  apparently  present  a bold  front  as  res])ects 
their  forts  and  batteries)  that  if  you  will  eo-operate  with  me,  by  furnish- 
ing one  or  two  gunboats,  I can  land  a sufiicient  force,  with  your  aid,  to 
retake  Pensacola,  the  navy -yard,  and  their  entire  line  of  forts  and  bat- 
teries. Moreover,  you  can  capture  four  of  their  steamers  and  several 
schooners. 

I have  under  my  command  from  1,800  to  2,000  available  troops  on  this 
island,  but  I am  ijerfectly  helpless  for  any  offensive  movement  off  the 
island  without  naval  co-operation  and  water  transportation. 

Flag-Ofiicer  Farragut  writes  to  me  that  he  cannot  assist  me  against 
Pensacola  till  he  has  taken  NTew  Orleans.  Then  the  opportune  moment 
may  have  passed. 

I am  in  hopes  you  will  come  here  immediately  and  bring  one  or  two 
gunboats,  for  I would  be  most  hapiiy  to  co-operate  with  Flag-Oflicer 
McKean. 

The  Kavy  has  not  a single  vessel  off  Pensacola  Harbor. 

I am,  commodore,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  ARKOLD, 

Brigadier-General^  U,  S.  Volunteers^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Steamer  Mississippi^  April  24,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  Farragut, 

Commanding  Western  Gulf  Squadron: 

Sir  : Allow  me  to  congratulate  you  and  your  command  upon  the  bold, 
daring,  brilliant,  and  successful  passage  of  the  forts  by  your  fleet  this 
morning.  A more  gallant  exploit  it  has  never  fallen  to  the  lot  of  man 
to  witness. 

Captain  Porter,  with  whom  I have  had  a conference,  agrees  that  it  was 
best  we  should  at  once  proceed  to  carry  out  the  plan  agreed  upon  by  your- 
self and  me,  to  wit,  that  1 should  immediately  land  troops  to  co-oiierate 
with  you  at  the  quarantine  station  and  so  hem  in  the  forts. 

When  I left  the  mortar  fleet,  at  about  8 o’clock  this  morning,  the  rebel 
flag  was  still  flying  upon  the  forts ; the  ram  had  floated  down  on  fire 
and  was  consumed  j another  rebel  steamer  was  burning.  A signal  had 
been  made  to  cease  firing  by  Captain  Porter;  the  Portsmouth  had 
returned  to  her  anchorage  unhurt;  the  Winona  had  been  badly  crippled, 
a shot  through  her  boilers  and  several  in  her  hull,  making  water  fast; 
the  Itasca  had  been  badly  used,  but  had  lost  no  men,  and  was  in  an 
effective  condition — all  other  men  unhurt  save  trifling  casualties;  the 
* Harriet  Lane  had  but  one  killed  and  wounded,  beside,  in  all,  so  far  as  I 
could  learn. 

Captain  Porter  will  forward  you  ammunition  and  supplies  through 
the  quarantine  station  should  you  desire.  I will  be  able  to  aid  you  from 
the  same  point  immediately.  Please  send  directions  as  to  your  wishes 
by  the  bearer  or  otherwise. 

I send  this  by  Captain  Conant,  of  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Regi- 
ment, Avho  goes  to  communicate  with  you.  He  is  the  gentleman  of  whom 
I spoke  to  you  as  having  made  a reconnaissance  in  the  rear  of  Lieutenant 
Philips  night  before  last.  He  knows  the  contents  of  this  dispatch,  for  fear 
of  accident,  and  may  be  most  implicitly  relied  upon  and  trusted.  I hope 
he  may  be  able  to  report  to  me  oft*  Point  Salle,  when  I will  immediately 
communicate  with  Captain  Porter.  If  in  danger,  Captain  Conant  has 


714  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chai*.  xyt. 

been  ordered  to  destroy  this  and  remember  its  contents,  and  will  do  the 
same  with  any  dispatches  you  may  give  him. 

If  you  design  proceeding  up  the  river,  will  you  leave,  say,  two  gun- 
boats at  the  quarantine  station  to  protect  our  landing  ? 

Eespectfully,  yours, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLEE, 
Major-  General^  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  14.  j Head  of  Mississippi  Passes,  April  24,  18(i2. 

The  transports  Mississippi,  Matanzas,  Lewis,  Saxon,  and  Great  Ee- 
public,  with  all  the  troops  now  on  board,  will  proceed,  under  convoy  of 
G.  S.  steamers  Miami  and  Sachem,  and  without  delay,  to  Sable  Island, 
with  a view  to  reaching  quarantine  station  in  rear  of  Fort  St.  Philip. 
All  of  the  above-named  troops  will  be  under  the  command  of  Brigadier- 
General  Williams  until  further  orders. 

II.  Brigadier-General  Phelps  will  remain  in  command  of  all  the  troops 
on  board  transport  ships  North  America  and  E.  W.  Eartey,  and  hold 
himself  in  readiness  to  occupy  the  forts  as  soon  as  they  shall  have  been 
reduced. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STEONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Off  Fort  Saint  Philip,  on  G-ulf  Side,  April  26,  1862. 
Actg.  Brig.  Gen.  George  E.  Shepley, 

General,  Commanding  at  Ship  Island: 

General  : The  fleet  passed  by  the  forts  on  the  morning  of  the  24th 
instant  with  but  little  loss,  leaving  the  mortar  fleet  and  a few  gunboats 
below,  without  reducing  the  forts.  They  have  substantially  cleared  the 
river  of  boats  above  the  forts,  but  have  left  the  ram  and  two  rebel  boats 
under  the  cover  of  the  forts.  These  are  proving  troublesome  to  the 
remnant  of  our  fleet  below  in  the  river. 

The  flag-ofScer  has  gone  up  with  twelve  vessels  of  his  fleet  to  New 
Orleans,  leaving  us  to  reduce  the  forts. 

I am  endeavoring  to  effect  a landing  on  the  Gulf  side,  at  the  quaran- 
tine grounds.  I am  sadly  in  want  of  means  of  light  transportation. 

The  Lewis  is  broken  down  for  want  of  coal.  She  very  foolishly  came 
away  with  only  five  days’  coal,  having  lain  alongside  the  Idaho  while 
mending  her  smoke-stacks  without  taking  any.  I must  have  soft  coal. 
I suppose  the  coal,  or  a large  portion  of  it,  from  the  Idaho  is  now  in  a 
schooner.  If  so,  send  her  at  once,  either  under  tow  of  the  Saxon  or 
under  sail,  or  both,  but  send  the  coal  at  all  events;  make  every  possible 
dispatch.  Send  also  all  the  light  draught  schooners  you  have  there  not 
drawing  more  than  4 feet,  say  four;  the  little  one  I used  to  have,  the 
Gipsey,  if  repaired,  and  all  the  boats  possible;  all  are  needed  at  once. 
Have  the  Parliament  ready  to  sail  at  a moment’s  notice,  with  every- 
thing on  board  for  thirty  days’  provision  for  us,  with  plenty  of  rice.  Send 
fresh  meat  if  any  has  arrived.  Do  not  send  the  Parliament  until  further 
orders.  You  may  send  beef  at  once. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  —UNION. 


715 


If  the  Washington  or  Butler  has  a large  quantity  of  lumber  on  board, 
send  her  at  once.  Dispatch  is  of  the  first  moment.  If  you  liave  a light- 
draught  steamer,  send  her  by  all  means.  The  devil  is  in  the  Saxon  and 
he  is  trying  to  break  her  down.  Ilave  her  sent  down  here  under  sail  if 
she  does  break  down,  so  that  I may  get  the  Government  properly  out  of 
her. 

Very  respectfullv,  &c., 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major -General,  Commanding. 

Send  on  board  one  of  the  schooners  a large  supply  of  medical  and  sur- 
gical stores  suitable  for  wounded  men. 

Ho  great  haste  required  as  regards  this. 

By  order : 

GEO.  C.  STROHG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Florida, 

Fort  Pielcens,  Fla.,  April  28,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  0.  Meios, 

Quartermaster -General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C.: 

General  : I feel  it  my  duty  to  report  to  you  (that  the  evil  complained 
of  may  be  remedied  as  soon  as  possible)  the  great  injustice  that  has  been 
done  my  command,  about  2,000  strong,  by  being  located  on  an  island 
without  having  suitable  boats  to  transport  at  one  time  100  men  off  of  it 
for  any  offensive  movement  against  the  enemy,  and  without  a steamer 
or  sail  vessel  belonging  to  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  at  my  con- 
trol to  keep  open  communications  with  the  army  stationed  at  other 
points  in  the  Gulf,  to  convey  or  bring  any  intelligence  of  the  movements 
of  our  own  troops  or  of  the  rebels,  to  tow  flats  loaded  with  troops  and 
munitions  for  any  military  operation  of  this  island.  A requisition  was 
made  by  my  order  on  your  department  in  February  last  for  a steamer 
of  200  or  300  tons  burden,  as  a dispatch  boat,  twelve  surf-boats,  30  feet 
long,  and  100  oars,  to  which  no  reply  has  yet  been  received. 

The  condition  of  military  aftairs  within  the  limits  of  my  command  for 
the  past  two  months  can  be  summed  up  in  brief  as  follows  : 2,000  men 
have  been  stationed  on  an  island  without  sufficient  or  suitable  means 
to  get  off  of  it,  with  scarcely  enough  surf-boats,  &c.,  to  land  stores  for 
the  command,  without  a steamer  or  sail  vessel  belonging  to  the  Quarter- 
master’s Department  to  communicate  with  other  j^osts  in  the  Gulf,  receiv- 
ing a mail  about  once  a month  or  six  weeks,  and,  I will  add,  almost  aban- 
doned by  the  Havy,  as  no  vessel  of  war  has  been  off  this  harbor  for  the 
major  part  of  that  time ; this  notwithstanding  I have  applied  to  Flag- 
Officers  Farragut  and  McKean  to  co-operate  with  me  in  attacking  the 
rebels  opposite.  They  were  compelled  to  decline  for  the  time  being,  as 
they  were  employing  every  available  vessel  in  their  squadrons  in  the 
grand  attack  on  Hew  Orleans  and  in  blockading. 

I have  been  thus  particular  in  stating  the  condition  of  things  here  to 
impress  you  with  the  importance  and  necessity  of  immediately  furnish- 
ing my  chief  quartermaster  with  the  boats,  &c.,  called  for  in  the  requisi- 
tion referred  to. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  ARHOLD, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Volunteers,  Commanding. 


716  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Quarantine  Station,  La.,  April  30,  1862. 

Col.  E.  F.  Jones, 

Twenty-sixth  Mass.  Volunteers,  U.  S.  Army, 

Commanding  Forts  Jaclcson  and  Saint  Philip,  La. : 

Sir:  You  will,  as  soon  as  possible,  place  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint 
Philip  in  a proper  state  of  police  and  defense. 

In  addition  to  the  general  regulations  of  the  Army  relating  to  the 
care  of  fortifications  and  their  armament,  you  will  be  guided  by  the  fol- 
lowing instructions : 

At  both  works  all  frame  buildings  and  everything  combustible  must 
at  once  be  removed  to  the  outside  of  the  main  work  or  be  placed  under 
bomb-proof  cover  j the  ammunition,  carefully  assorted,  placed  in  the 
magazine  nearest  to  the  batteries  to  which  such  ammunition  belongs, 
and  the  magazine  kept  well  ventilated,  dry,  and  bomb-proof.  The 
serviceable  guns  left  at  the  works  will  be  arranged  in  position  mostly 
for  up-river  defense.  All  the  provisions  will  be  carefully  stored  in  as 
dry  places  as  possible.  Temporary  bridges  will  be  constructed  only 
at  the  main  entrance.  The  damage  to  the  earthwork  at  Fort  Jack- 
son  will  be  repaired  as  much  as  possible.  The  ruins  of  the  citadel  will 
be  removed  to  the  outside  of  the  work,  and  the  material  used  for  walks 
wherever  uecessary.  Colonel  Jones  will  establish  a strict  quarantine 
at  this  station,  allow  no  vessel  to  pass  (save  ships  of  war  of  the  United 
States)  until  the  strictest  surgical  examination,  and  with  a clean  bill  of 
health.  NTo  communication  will  be  had  with  vessels  by  any  person  of 
his  command  without  his  express  order  and  after  the  examination  of  the 
surgeon. 

BVm.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

April  30,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Shepley, 

Ship  Lsland: 

General  : I send  you  the  Tennessee  for  a transport.  You  will  at 
once  take  so  many  troops  as  she  can  carry  and  proceed  to  Fort  Saint 
Philip,  there  delivering  the  camp  equipage  of  Colonel  Jones,  and  then 
proceed  to  Hew  Orleans,  or  wherever  I may  be,  and  report  to  me.  I 
want  three  regiments — Eighth  Vermont,  Twelfth  Maine,  and  Thirteenth 
Connecticut.  Leave  the  ablest  colonel  you  have  in  charge  at  the 
island.  Have  provisions  for  us  all  for  thirty  days.  I send  Quarter- 
master Monroe  for  all  the  camp  equipage  of  the  regiments  here  and 
reasonable  baggage.  Send  all  baggage  and  horses  for  self  and  staff,  so 
far  as  they  have  distinctive  horses.  If  any  accommodation,  bring  Mrs. 
Butler  with  you;  if  not,  take  the  Saxon.  I send  the  Great  Republic  for 
horses,  all  she  can  take,  and  Thompson’s  battery,  with  ammunition. 
She  can  take  one  of  the  regiments.  Do  not  put  her  below  15  feet,  or  6 
inches  more,  if  possible ; she  cannot  get  over  the  bar.  Get  a tow  for 
her. 

Organize  a number  of  men,  say  250,  with  provisions  for  sixty  days, 
and  a competent  commander,  to  take  possession  of  Fort  Wood.  Lieu- 
tenant Reed,  in  the  naval  force  at  the  island,  will  convey  the  expedi- 
tion. I have  very  direct  information  from  thence  of  the  evacuation,  but 
not  official.  Send  Geo.  Washington  or  some  other  shij)  with  forage  sut- 


Chap.  XYI.l 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


717 


ficient  for  present  need  at  least,  and  as  miicli  as  possible.  Bring  an  in- 
voice of  the  supplies  at  Ship  Island,  and  take  all  the  unissued  clothing 
not  absolutely  needed  at  the  island.  Let  the  brig  Yankee  Blade  sail 
at  once,  without  unloading  j bring  her  invoice.  Let  the  i)OStinaster 
transfer  himself  to  near  New  Orleans. 

"Everything  is  so  far  successful  and  everything  requires  dispatch. 

2 p.  M. 

I am  now  at  the  passes.  I find  the  Great  Eepublic  ashore  there,  hors 
de  combat.  I am  tired  of  waiting  for  her  any  longer.  Take  the  Ocean 
Pearl,  or  any  other  ship  that  does  not  draw  more  than  15  feet,  for  the 
horses  5 use  your  own  discretion  ; the  river  is  now  open  and  free. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLER, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Abstract  from  rehirn  of  the  Western  District,  Department  of  the  South,  Brig.  Gen.  Lewis 
G.  Arnold,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding,  for  April,  18G2. 


Present  for 
duty. 

-tj 

a 

Z 

Garrisons. 

Troops. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Pi 

O 

"cJ 

to 

fcJO 

<< 

Santa  Eosa  Island,  Fla. : 

Fort  Pickens 

Detachments  1st  and  2d  Artillery  and 
3d  Infantry 

6th  New  York  Infantry 

18 

527 

640 

Camp  Lincoln 

22 

449 

676 

Camp  Sewarrl  

75th  New  York  Infantry 

26 

655 

803 

• 

Total 

66 

1,  631 

2,119 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  15.  ) Neio  Orleans May  1,  1862. 

I.  In  anticipation  of  the  immediate  disembarkation  of  the  troops  of 
this  command,  amid  the  temptations  and  inducements  of  a large  city,  all 
plundering  of  public  or  private  property,  by  any  person  or  i^ersous,  is 
hereby  forbidden,  under  the  severest  penalties. 

II.  No  officer  or  soldier  will  absent  himself  from  his  station  without 
arms  or  alone  under  any  pretext  whatever. 

III.  The  commanders  of  regiments  and  companies  will  be  held  respon- 
sible for  the  strict  execution  of  these  orders  and  that  the  offenders  are 
brought  to  punishment. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


PROCLAMATION. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans.,  May  1,  1862. 

The  city  of  New  Orleans  and  its  environs,  with  all  its  interior  and  ex- 
terior defenses,  having  been  surrendered  to  the  combined  naval  and  land 


718  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

forces  of  the  United  States,  and  having  been  evacuated  by  the  rebel  forces 
in  whose  possession  they  lately  were,  and  being  now  in  occupation  of 
the  forces  of  the  United  States,  who  have  come  to  restore  order,  main- 
tain public  tranquillity,  enforce  peace  and  quiet  under  the  laws  and  Con- 
stitution of  the  United  States,  the  major-general  commanding  the  forces 
of  the  United  States  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  hereby  makes  known 
and  proclaims  the  object  and  purposes  of  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  in  thus  taking  possession  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans  and  the  State 
of  Louisiana,  and  the  rules  and  regulations  by  which  the  laws  of  the 
United  States  will  be  for  the  present  and  during  a state  of  war  enforced 
and  maintained,  for  the  plain  guidance  of  all  good  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  as  well  as  others  who  may  heretofore  have  been  in  rebellion 
against  their  authority. 

Thrice  before  has  the  city  of  New  Orleans  been  rescued  from  the  hand 
of  a foreign  government,  and  still  more  calamitous  domestic  insurrection, 
by  the  money  and  arms  of  the  United  States.  It  has  of  late  been  under 
the  military  control  of  the  rebel  forces,  claiming  to  be  the  peculiar  friends 
of  its  citizens  5 and  at  each  time,  in  the  judgment  of  the  commander  of 
the  military  forces  holding  it,  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  preserve 
order  and  maintain  quiet  by  the  administration  of  law  martial.  Even 
during  the  interim  from  its  evacuation  by  the  rebel  soldiers  and  its 
actual  possession  by  the  soldiers  of  the  United  States,  the  civil  authori- 
ties of  the  city  have  found  it  necessary  to  call  for  the  intervention  of  an 
armed  body  known  as  the  European  Legion,  to  preserve  public  tran- 
quillity. The  commanding  general,  therefore,  will  cause  the  city  to  be 
governed,  until  the  restoration  of  municipal  authority  and  his  further 
orders,  by  the  law  martial,  a measure  for  which  it  would  seem  the  prev- 
ious recital  furnishes  sufficient  precedents. 

All  persons  in  arms  against  the  United  States  are  required  to  sur- 
render themselves,  with  their  arms,  equipments,  and  munitions  of  war. 
The  body  known  as  the  European  Legion,  not  being  understood  to  be  , 
in  arms  against  the  United  States,  but  organized  to  protect  the  lives  and 
property  of  the  citizens,  are  invited  still  to  co-operate  with  the  forces  of 
the  United  Statess  to  that  end,  and,  so  acting,  will  not  be  included  in 
the  terms  of  this  order,  but  will  report  to  these  headquarters. 

All  flags,  ensigns,  and  devices  tending  to  uphold  any  authority  what- 
ever, save  the  flag  of  the  United  States  and  the  flags  of  foreign  con- 
sulates, must  not  be  exhibited,  but  suppressed.  The  American  ensign, 
the  eml3lem  of  the  United  States,  must  be  treated  with  the  utmost  defer- 
ence and  respect  by  all  persons,  under  pain  of  severe  punishment. 

All  persons  well  disposed  towards  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
who  shall  renew  their  oath  of  allegiance  will  receive  the  safeguard  and 
protection,  in  their  persons  and  property,  of  the  armies  of  the  United 
States,  the  violation  of  which  by  any  person  is  punishable  with  death. 
All  persons  still  holding  allegiance  to  the  Confederate  States  will  be 
deemed  rebels  against  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  and  re- 
garded and  treated  as  enemies  thereof. 

All  foreigners  not  naturalized  and  claiming  allegiance  to  their  respect- 
ive governments,  and  not  having  made  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  sup- 
posed Government  of  the  Confederate  States,  will  be  protected  in  their 
persons  and  property  as  heretofore  under  the  laws  of  the  United  States. 

All  persons  who  may  heretofore  have  given  their  adherence  to  the 
supposed  Government  of  the  Confederate  States  or  have  been  in  their 
service,  who  shall  laydown  and  deliver  up  their  arms  and  return  to 
peaceful  occupations  and  preserve  quiet  and  order,  holding  no  further 
correspondence  nor  giving  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemies  of  the  United 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


719 


States,  will  not  be  disturbed  either  in  person  or  property,  except  so  far, 
under  the  orders  of  the  commanding  general,  as  the  exigencies  of  the 
public  service  may  render  necessary. 

The  keepers  of  all  public  property,  whether  State,  National,  or  Confed- 
erate, such  as  collections  of  art,  libraries,  museums,  as  well  as  public 
buildings,  all  munitions  of  war,  and  armed  vessels,  will  at  once  make 
full  returns  thereof  to  these  headquarters.  All  manufacturers  of  arms 
and  munitions  of  war  will  report  to  these  headquarters  their  kind  and 
places  of  business. 

All  rights  of  juoperty,  of  whatever  kind,  will  be  held  inviolate,  sub- 
ject only  to  the  laws  of  the  United  States. 

All  inhabitants  are  enjoined  to  pursue  their  usual  avocations ; all  shops 
and  places  of  business  are  to  be  kept  open  in  the  accustomed  manner, 
and  services  to  be  had  in  the  churches  and  religious  houses  as  in  times 
of  profound  peace. 

Keepers  of  all  public  houses,  cotfee  houses,  and  drinking  saloons  are 
to  report  their  names  and  numbers  to  the  office  of  the  provost-marshal ; 
will  there  receive  license,  and  be  held  responsible  for  all  disorders  and 
disturbance  of  the  peace  arising  in  their  respective  places. 

A sufficient  force  will  be  kept  in  the  city  to  preserve  order  and  main- 
tain the  laws. 

The  killing  of  an  American  soldier  by  any  disorderly  person  or  mob  is 
sim|)ly  assassination  and  murder  and  not  war,  and  will  be  so  regarded  and 
punished.  The  owner  of  any  house  or  building  in  or  from  which  such 
murder  shall  be  committed  will  be  held  responsible  therefor,  and  the 
house  will  be  liable  to  be  destroyed  by  the  military  authority. 

All  disorders  and  disturbances  of  the  peace,  done  by  combinations 
and  numbers  and  crimes  of  an  aggravated  nature,  interfering  with  the 
forces  or  laws  of  the  United  States,  will  be  referred  to  a military  court 
for  trial  and  punishment ; other  misdemeanors  will  be  subject  to  the 
municipal  authority,  if  it  chooses  to  act.  Civil  causes  between  party  and 
party  will  be  referred  to  the  ordinary  tribunals.  The  levy  and  collec- 
tion of  all  taxes,  save  those  imposed  by  the  laws  of  the  United  States, 
are  suppressed,  exceptthosefor  keeping  in  repair  and  lighting  the  streets 
and  for  sanitary  purposes.  Those  are  to  be  collected  in  the  usual  manner. 

The  circulation  of  Confederate  bonds,  evidences  of  debt,  except  notes 
in  the  similitude  of  bank  notes  issued  by  the  Confederate  States,  or 
scrip,  or  any  trade  in  the  same,  is  strictly  forbidden.  It  having  been 
represented  to  the  commanding  general  by  the  city  authorities  that 
these  Confederate  notes  in  the  form  of  bank  notes  are  in  a great 
measure  the  only  substitute  for  money  which  the  people  have  been 
allowed  to  have,  and  that  great  distress  would  ensue  among  the  poorer 
classes  if  the  circulation  of  such  notes  were  suppressed,  such  circulation 
will  be  permitted  so  long  as  any  one  may  be  inconsiderate  enough  to 
receive  them  till  further  orders. 

No  publication,  either  by  newspaper,  pamphlet,  or  handbill,  giving 
accounts  of  the  movement  of  soldiers  of  the  United  States  within  this 
department,  reflecting  in  any  way  upon  the  United  States  or  its  officers. 
Or  tending  in  any  way  to  influence  the  public  mind  against  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  will  be  permitted,  and  all  articles  of  war 
news,  or  editorial  comments  or  correspondence  making  comments  upon 
the  movement  of  the  armies  of  the  United  States  or  the  rebels,  must  be 
submitted  to  the  examination  of  an  officer  who  will  be  detailed  for  that 
purpose  from  these  headquarters.  The  transmission  of  all  communica- 
tions by  telegraph  will  be  under  charge  of  an  officer  from  these  head- 
quarters. 


720  OPERATIONS  IN  \V.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

The  armies  of  the  United  States  came  here  not  to  destroy  but  to  make 
good,  to  restore* order  out  of  chaos,  and  the  government  of  laws  in  place 
of  the  passions  of  men  ; to  this  end,  therefore,  the  efforts  of  all  well-dis- 
posed persons  are  invited  to  have  every  species  of  disorder  quelled ; 
and  if  any  soldier  of  the  United  States  should  so  far  forget  his  duty 
or  his  flag  as  to  commit  any  outrage  upon  any  person  or  property,  the 
commanding  general  requests  that  liis  name  be  instantly  reported  to 
the  provost  guard,  so  that  he  may  be  punished  and  his  wrongful  act 
redressed. 

The  municipal  authority,  so  far  as  the  police  of  the  city  and  crim^  are 
concerned,  to  the  extent  before  indicated,  is  hereby  suspended. 

All  assemblages  of  persons  in  the  street,  either  by  day  dr  night,  tend 
to  disorder,  and  are  forbidden. 

The  various  companies  composing  the  fire  department  in  New  Orleans 
will  be  permitted  to  retain  their  organizations,  and  are  to  report  to  the 
office  of  the  provost-marshal,  so  that  they  maybe  known  and  not  inter- 
fered with  in  their  duties. 

And,  finally,  it  may  be  sufficient  to  add,  without  further  enumeration, 
that  all  the  requirements  of  martial  law  will  be  imposed  so  long  as,  in 
the  judgment  of  the  United  States  authorities,  it  may  be  necessary.  And 
while  it  is  the  desire  of  these  authorities  to  exercise  this  government 
mildly  and  after  the  usages  of  the  past,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  it 
will  not  be  vigorously  and  firmly  administered  as  occasion  calls. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STEONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Chief  of  Staff. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  19.  f J^ew  Orleans^  May  3,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  of  this  department  has  been  informed  that 
there  is  now  at  Mobile  a stock  of  flour,  purchased  by  the  city  of  New 
Orleans  for  the  subsistence  of  its  citizens.  The  suffering  condition  of 
the  poor  of  this  city  for  the  want  of  this  flour  appeals  to  the  humanity 
of  those  having  authority  on  either  side. 

For  the  purpose  of  the  safe  transmission  of  this  flour  to  this  city  the 
commanding  general  orders  and  directs  that  a safe-conduct  be  afforded 
to  a steamboat  to  be  laden  with  the  same  to  this  iflace.  This  safe-con- 
duct shall  extend  to  the  entire  protection  of  this  boat  in  coming,  reason- 
able delay  for  discharge,  and  return  to  Mobile.  The  boat  will  take  no 
passengers  save  the  owners  and  keepers  of  the  flour,  and  will  be  subject 
to  the  strict  inspection  of  the  harbor  master  detailed  from  these  head- 
quarters, to  whom  its  master  will  report  its  arrival. 

The  faith  of  the  city  is  pledged  for  the  faithful  performance  of  the 
requirements  of  this  order  on  the  part  of  the  agent  of  the  city  authori- 
ties, who  will  be  allowed  to  pass  each  way  with  the  boat,  he  giving  no 
intelligence  or  aid  to  Confederates. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  20.  f Neic  Orleans,  May  3,  1862. 

The  president,  directors,  &c.,  of  the  Opelousas  Railroad  are  author- 
ized and  required  to  run  their  cars  over  the  road  for  the  purpose  of 


Chap.  XVI. 


721 


COKliESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

bringing  to  the  city  of  ISTew  Orleans  provisions,  marketing,  and  sup- 
plies of  food  which  may  bo  offered  in  order  to  su])ply  the  wants  of  the 
<‘ity. 

No  passengers,  other  than  those  having  the  care  of  such  supplies  as 
owners  or  keepers,  are  to  be  permitted  to  come  into  the  city  and  none 
others  are  to  leave  the  city.  All  other  supplies  are  prohibited  trans- 
portation over  the  road  either  way,  except  cotton  and  sugar,  which  may 
be  safely  brought  over  the  road,  and  will  be  purchased  at  the  fair  market 
value  by  the  United  States  in  specie.  The  transmission  of  live  stock  is 
especially  enjoined.  An  agent  of  the  city  government  will  be  allowed 
to  pass  oyer  the  road  either  way,  stopping  at  all  points,  on  the  faith  of  a 
pledge  of  such  government  agent  that  he  transmits  no  intelligence  and 
affords  no  aid  to  the  Confederates. 

The  officer  commanding  the  post  having  the  terminus  of  such  road 
within  his  pickets  will  cause  a thorough  inspection  of  the  cars  and 
boats  for  the  purpose  of  furthering  this  order,  and  will  offer  no  further 
hinderance,  so  long  as  this  order  is  in  good  faith  complied  with. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler  : 

GEO.  G.  STKOISTG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

hTo.  21.  j New  Orleans^  May  4,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  has  been  in- 
formed that  live  stock,  flour,  and  provisions,  purchased  for  subsistence 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  of,  Kew  Orleans,  are  now  at  the  junction 
of  the  Bed  and  Mississippi  Eivers.  The  suffering  condition  of  the  poor 
of  the  city  for  want  of  these  sui^plies  appeals  to  the  humanity  of  those 
having  authority  on  either  side.  For  the  i)urpose,  therefore,  of  the  safe 
transmission  of  these  supplies  to  the  city,  the  commanding  general  orders 
and  directs  that  a safe-conduct  be  afforded  for  two  steamers,  to  be  laden 
with  provisions,  cattle,  and  supplies  of  food,  either  alive  or  slaughtered, 
each  day,  if  so  many  choose  to  come. 

This  safe-conduct  shall  extend  to  their  entire  protection  by  the  forces 
of  the  United  States  during  their  coming,  reasonable  delay  for  discharge 
not  exceeding  six  days,  unless  in  case  of  accident  to  their  machinery, 
and  in  returning  to  or  near  the  junction  of  the  Bed  and  Mississippi 
Bivers. 

And  safe-conduct  is  further  granted  to  boats  laden  as  beforesaid  with 
provisions  for  B’ew  Orleans  from  any  point  above  the  junction  of  such 
rivers,  if  at  any  time  during  which  these  supplies  are  needed  the  forces 
of  the  United  States  should  be  at  or  above  said  junction. 

The  boats  will  take  no  passengers  save  the  owners  and  keepers  of  the 
freight  aforesaid,  and  will  be  subject  to  strict  inspection  by  the  harbor 
master  detailed  from  these  headquarters,  to  whom  they  will  rei)ort  their 
arrival. 

The  faith  of  the  city  is  pledged  for  the  faithful  execution  of  the 
requirements  of  this  order  on  the  part  of  the  agent  of  the  city  authori- 
ties, who  will  be  allowed  to  pass  the  boats  either  way,  he  giving  no 
intelligence  or  aid  to  the  Confederates. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STBOIS^G, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Chief  of  Staff, 


46  R R — VOL  VI 


722  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  22.  ) New  Orleans^  May  4,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  of  the  department  having,  been  informed 
that  rebellious,  lying,  and  desperate  men  have  represented,  and  are 
now  representing,  to  honest  planters  and  good  people  of  the  State  of 
Louisiana  that  the  United  States  Government,  by  its  forces,  have  come 
here  to  confiscate  and  destroy  their  crops  of  cotton  and  sugar,  it  is 
hereby  ordered  to  be  made  known,  by  publication  in  all  the  newspapers 
of  this  city,  that  all  cargoes  of  cotton  and  sugar  shall  receive  the  safe 
conduct  of  the  forces  of  the  United  States  5 and  the  boats  bringing  them 
from  beyond  the  lines  of  the  United  States  forces  may  be  allowed  to 
return  in  safety,  after  a reasonable  delay,  if  their  owners ' so  desire, 
provided  they  bring  no  passengers  except  the  owners  and  managers  of 
said  boat  and  of  the  property  so  conveyed,  and  no  other  merchandise 
except  provisions,  of  which  such  boats  are  requested  to  bring  a full 
supply  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor  of  this  city. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler; 

GEO.  C.  STEONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  23.  j New  Orleans^  May  6,  1862. 

A military  commission,  of  not  less  than  five  commissioned  officers  of 
and  above  the  rank  of  captain,  with  a recorder  and  legal  adviser,  is 
constituted  and  appointed,  for  the  trial  of  all  high  crimes  and  misde- 
meanors which  by  the  laws  of  any  State  in  the  Union,  or  the  United 
States,  or  the  laws  martial,  are  punishable  with  death  or  imprisonment 
for  a long  term  of  years. 

The  sentence  of  such  courts  will  be  assimilated  to  those  provided  by 
such  laws,  due  regard  being  had  to  the  necessity  of  severity  and  for 
prompt  punishment  incident  to  the  crimes  and  disorders  arising  from  a 
state  of  war. 

The  commission  will  sit  at  all  convenient  hours  for  the  dispatch  of 
business,  will  be  attended  by  the  provost-marshal  or  his  assistants,  all 
its  orders  respected  and  obeyed,  and  its  summonses  complied  with. 

As  the  motives  of  men  make  so  largely  the  element  of  the  crimes  cog- 
nizable by  this  commission,  the  rules  of  evidence  of  the  English  common 
law  may  be  so  far  relaxed  as  to  allow  the  accused  to  be  questioned  in  pres- 
ence of  the  commission,  always  leaving  it  to  his  free  choice  to  respond 
or  not  to  the  questions  proposed. 

The  accusation  will  be  substantially  in  the  form  used  in  courts-martial, . 
excepting  that  it  should  fully  set  forth  a description  of  the  accused,  his 
residence  and  business,  whether  or  not  he  has  been  a loyal  citizen,  his 
antecedents,  character,  and  acts  in  that  regard,  so  far  as  known,  which 
portion  of  the  accusation  may  be  put  in  controversy  at  the  trials,  pro- 
vided the  accused  be  not  a soldier  of  the  United  States. 

All  proceedings,  findings,  and  sentences  of  this  commission  are  to  be 
subjected  to  the  approval  of  the  commanding  general,  and  will  be  carried 
into  effect  upon  his  order. 

The  following-named  officers  are  detailed  for  and  will  constitute  such 
commission : 

1.  Col.  Henry  0.  Demin g.  Twelfth  Eegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers. 

2.  Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volun- 
teers. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  723 

3.  Lieut.  Col.  C.  M.  Whelden,  Thirty-first  Kegiment  Massachusetts 
Volunteers. 

4.  Maj.  F.  A.  Boardman,  Fourth  Eegiment  Wisconsin  Volunteers. 

5.  Capt.  Peter  Haggerty,  aide-de-camp. 

Maj.  J.  M.  Bell,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  recorder  and  legal  adviser. 
By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 

Acting  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

N'ew  Orleans^  May  8,  1862. 


Wm.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I write  this  note  simply  as  a remembrance  of  your 
kindness  and  support  to  the  expedition  which  has  accomplished  sucli 
fortunate  results. 

I find  that  the  British  consul  here  has  complicated  himself  and  his 
fellow-countrymen  with  the  rebels  in  every  form.  The  precise  contrary 
course,  I believe,  has  been  taken  by  the  French  consul.  The  British 
Guard,  now  all  claiming  protection  as  British  subjects,  having  organ- 
ized themselves  into  a company  on  the  night  of  the  occupation  of  the 
city  by  our  troops,  voted  to  send  their  arms  and  uniforms  to  Beauregard, 
and  a portion  of  them  were  sent. 

For  this  violation  of  neutrality  I have  ordered  every  man  who  cannot 
produce  his  arms  and  uniform  to  leave  the  city  in  twenty-four  hours. 

Allow  me  to  suggest  for  your  consideration  whether  the  port  of  New 
Orleans  might  now  be  opened. 

Most  truly,  your  frieud, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans^  May  8,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Phelps: 

Sir:  I am  direct^  by  the  major-general  commanding  the  depart- 
ment to  ask  if  you  have  seized  the  Carrollton  and  Lake  Railroad  j if  you 
have  not,  that  he  desires  it  to  be  done,  and  that  pickets  be  thrown  out 
the  shore  of  the  lake,  so  that  schooners  and  other  means  are  not  used 
to  carry  or  send  people  away  in  that  direction. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  HAGGERTY, 
Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans^  May  9,  1862. 

To  the  Mayor  and  Common  Council  of  tJw  City  of  New  Orleans : 

Messrs.  : I desire  to  call  your  attention  to  the  sanitary  condition  of 
your  streets.  Having  assumed,  by  the  choice  of  your  fellow-citizens  and 
the  permission  of  the  United  States  authorities,  the  care  of  the  city  of 
New  Orleans  in  this  behalf,  that  trust  must  be  faithfully  administered. 
Resolutions  and  inaction  will  not  do.  Active,  energetic  measures,  fully 
and  promptly  executed,  are  imperatively  demanded  by  the  exigencies  of 
the  occasion.  Specially  the  present  suspension  of  labor  furnishes  ami3le 


724  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

sui)plies  of  starving  men  who  can  be  profitablj^  employed  to  this  end. 
A little  of  the  labor  and  effort  spent  upon  the  streets  and  public  squares 
which  was  uselessly  and  inanely  wasted  upon  idle  fortifications,  like 
that  about  the  United  States  mint,  will  place  the  city  in  a condition  to 
insure  the  health  of  its  inhabitants.  It  will  not  do  to  shift  the  respon- 
sibility from  yourselves  to  the  street  commissioners,  from  them  to  the 
contractors,  and  then  to  the  sub -con tractors  through  all  the  grades  of 
civic  idleness  and  neglect  of  duty.  y 

Three  days  since  I called  the  attention  of  Mr.  Mayor  to  this  subject, 
and  nothing  has  been  done. 

Eespectfully, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
3Iajor-  Genera  I,  Commanding, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  24.  I New  Orlea7is^  May  10,  1862. 

Acting  Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  Shepley,  Colonel  Twelfth  Maine  Yolun- 
teers,  is  hereby  appointed  military  commandant  of  New  Orleans. 

All  officers  on  duty  in  this  city  or  in  Algiers,  except  officers  of  the  divis- 
ion staff,  will  report  to  him. 

Bv  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  0.  STEONG, 
Assistant  A djuta^it-  Genera  1. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  25.  f Neto  Orleans^  May  9,  1862. 

The  deplorable  state  of  destitution  and  hunger  of  the  mechanics  and 
working  classes  of  this  city  has  been  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
commanding  general.  He  has  yielded  to  every  suggestion  made  by  the 
(Ity  government,  and  ordered  every  method  of  furnishing  food  to  the 
l)eople  of  New  Orleans  that  government  desired.  No  relief  by  those 
officials  has  yet  been  afforded.  This  hunger  does  not  pinch  the  wealthy 
and  influential,  the  leaders  of  the  rebellion,  who  have  gotten  up  this 
war,  and  are  now  endeavoring  to  prosecute  it  without  regard  to  the 
starving  i:>oor,  the  workingman,  his  wife  and  child.  Unmindful  of  their 
suffering  fellow-citizens  at  home,  they  have  caused  or  suffered  provis- 
ions to  be  carried  out  of  the  city  for  Confederate  service  since  the  occu- 
pation by  the  United  States  forces. 

Lafayette  Square,  their  home  of  affluence,  was  made  the  depot  of 
stores  and  munitions  of  war  for  the  rebel  armies,  and  not  of  provisions 
for  their  poor  neighbors.  Striking  with  the  vile,  the  gambler,  the  idler, 
and  the  ruffian,  they  have  destroyed  the  sugar  and  cotton  which  might 
have  been  exchanged  for  food  for  the  industrious  and  good,  and  regrated 
the  price  of  that  which  is  left  by  discrediting  the  very  currency  they  had 
furnished  while  they  eloped  with  the  specie ; as  well  that  stolen  from 
the  United  States  as  the  banks,  the  proper!}^  of  the  good  people  of  New 
Orleans,  thus  leaving  them  to  ruin  and  starvation.  Fugitives  from  jus- 
tice many  of  them,  and  others  their  associates,  staying  because  too 
l)uerile  and  insignificant  to  be  objects  of  punishments  by  the  clement 
Government  of  the  United  States.  They  have  betrayed  their  country; 
they  have  been  false  to  every  trust;  they  have  sliown  themselves  inca- 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  725 

])able  of  (lefendiug  tlie  State  they  had  seized  iipoii,  although  they  liave 
forced  every  poor  man’s  child  into  their  service  as  soldiers  for  that  i)ur- 
pose,  while  they  made  their  sons  and  nephews  otlicers. 

They  cannot  protect  those  whom  they  have  rained,  hut  have  left  them 
to  the  mercies  and  assassinations  of  a chronic  mob.  They  will  not  feed 
those  whom  they  are  starving.  Mostly  without  ])roi)erty  themselves, 
they  have  x>hindered,  stolen,  and  destroyed  the  means  of  those  who  had 
property,  leaving  children  penniless  and  old  age  hopeless. 

Men  of  Louisiana,  workingmen,  property-holders,  merchipits,  and 
citizens  of  the  United  States,  of  whatever  nation  you  may  have  had 
birth,  how  long  will  you  uphold  these  flagrant  wrongs,  and  by  inaction 
sutler  yourselves  to  be  made  the  serfs  of  these  leaders? 

The  United  States  have  sent  land  and  naval  forces  here  to  fight  and 
subdue  rebellious  armies  in  array  against  her  authority.  We  find  sub- 
stantially only  fugitive  masses,  runaway  xiroperty-burners,  a whisky- 
drinking mob,  and  starving  citizens,  with  their  wives  and  children.  It 
is  our  duty  to  call  back  the  first,  to  punish  the  second,  root  out  the  third, 
feed  and  protect  the  last. 

Ready  only  for  war,  we  had  not  prepared  ourselves  to  feed  the  hun- 
gry and  relieve  the  distressed  with  provisions.  But  to  the  extent  ])os- 
sible  within  the  power  of  the  commanding  general  it  shall  be  done. 

He  has  captured  a quantity  of  beef  and  sugar  intended  for  the  rebels 
in  the  field.  A thousand  barrels  of  these  stores  will  be  distributed 
among  the  deserving  poor  of  this  city,  from  whom  tlie  rebels  had  plun- 
dered it,  even  although  some  of  the  food  will  go  to  sujiply  the  craving 
wants  of  the  wives  and  children  of  those  now  herding  at  Camp  IMoore 
and  elsewhere  in  arms  against  the  United  States. 

Capt.  John  Clark,  acting  chief  commissary  of  subsistence,  will  be 
charged  with  the  execution  of  this  order,  and  will  give  public  notice  of 
the  place  and  manner  of  distribution,  which  will  be  arranged  as  far  as 
possible  so  that  the  unworthy  and  dissolute  will  not  share  its  benefits. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Chief  of  Staff. 

/ 


COREESJPONEENCE,  ETC. 

Abstract  from  field  return  of  troops  of  the  Coufedei'ate  States  near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  com- 
manded by  Brig.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  the  1st  day  of  September,  1861. 


Troops. 


Ist  (Chalmers’)  Brigade . 

2d  (Wood’s)  Brigade 

3d  (Tyler’s)  Brigade 

4th  (Jackson’s)  Brigade  . 
Alabama  Mounted  Rifles 
Walton  Guards 

Total 


Present  for 
duty. 

m 

o 

.2 

c 

O 

76 

1,314 

81 

1,272 

81 

1,487 

52 

892 

2 

72 

4 

51 

296 

5,  088 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent.  I 

1,761 

1,  895 

2,  004 

2,177 

1,  804 

1,922 

1,  096 

1,126 

84 

101 

55 

55 

6,  804 

7,  276 

726  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVX 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond^  September  2,  1861. 

Capt.  S.  H.  Lockett, 

Corps  of  Engineers^  Fort  Gaines^  Mobile^  Ala. : 

Sir  : Five  coliimbiads  and  rifled  guns  have  been  ordered  for  arming 
Fort  Gaines  and  thirteen  for  Fort  Morgan.  Two  of  those  for  Fort 
Gaines  and  some  of  those  for  Fort  Morgan  have  been  forwarded.  Please 
inform  me  how  many  of  the  latter  have  come  to  hand.  The  order  for 
armament  of  Fort  Morgan  consists  of  five  guns,  of  the  size  and  form  of 
the  8-inch  columbiad,  bored  as  24-pounders  and  rifled.  The  shot  has 
about  the  weight  of  an  8 inch  shot,  with  greater  range,  accuracy,  and 
power  5 one  10-inch  gun,  bored  to  a 32-pounder  caliber  and  rifled ; the 
remainder  smooth-bore  10-inch.  At  Fort  Gaines  you  are  to  have  two 
8-inch  guns  rifled  as  a 32.  These  guns  are  not  yet  made,  but  will  be 
forwarded  one  or  two  at  a time  as  fafet  as  finished.  Their  carriages  will 
be  made  here.  It  is  said  that  four  flank  casemate  guns  and  carriages 
have  been  sent  forward  to  Fort  Gaines,  and  had  strayed  from  the  road. 
They  have  been  found  and  ordered  on  to  Mobile.  The  remainder  of 
these  flank  guns  are  being  made  at  Lynchburg. 

The  Secretary  informs  me  that  he  has  ordered  from  l!lorth  Carolina 
to  Mobile  thirty  32-pounders.  For  these  the  carriages  must  be  made  at 
Mobile.  The  elevating  screws,  male  and  female,  will  be  made  here  and 
sent  on.  As  the  32-pounders  differ  in  size,  it  will  not  be  well  to  put  to- 
gether any  one  of  their  upper  carriages  until  the  gun  for  it  shall  have 
come  to  hand.  It  is  expected  that  your  armament  will  be  improved  by 
rifling  the  32-pounders  on  hand,  and  these  improved  guns  should  be 
iffaced  where  they  are  most  needed.  For  example,  one  should  be  added 
to  the  armament  at  Grant’s  Pass  as  soon  as  possible.  These  guns  should 
unquestionably  be  reinforced  with  wrought-iron  bands,  so  as  to  make 
up  one  an  inch  and  a half  thick  and  8 or  10  inches  wide.  The  gun  should 
be  perfectly  clean,  and  the  band  be  shrunk  on  at  a light  heat.  The  pre- 
ponderance of  the  breech  does  no  great  harm.  The  shells  ought  not  to 
be  longer  than  two  calibers  probably,  nor  to  weigh  more  than  40  or  45 
pounds.  The  charge  of  powder  will  not  exceed  5 pounds.  I will  send 
to  Messrs.  Skates  a sketch  showing  the  mode  of  rifling  adopted  here  and 
the  form  of  the  shell  most  approved.  There  are  many  varieties.  The 
heavy  guns  bored  with  small  calibers  carry  heavier  shot  and  higher 
charges.  There  are  some  old  guns  lying  at  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines. 
You  are  authorized  to  have  them  rebored,  and  to  build  carriages  for 
[hem  if  found  fit  for  service,  such  as  firing  round  or  grape  shot  for  the 
defense  of  redoubts  or  of  the  city. 

I have  prevailed  on  the  Ordnaffce  Bureau  to  order  of  Messrs.  Skates 
& Co.  four  batteries  of  field  guns,  with  harnesses.  These  may  help  in 
your  defensive  arrangements  for  the  city.  For  additional  means  of  de- 
fense you  will  proceed  to  construct  the  following : Drive  a row  of  piles, 
beginning  at  the  west  bank  and  running  over  to  the  point  of  Dauphin 
Island  Spit,  as  shown  in  the  sketch  herewith.  The  piles  should  be  as 
large  as  those  at  the  Fort  Morgan  wharf,  be  driven  as  deep  as  possible, 
10  feet  apart,  and  cut  off  2 or  3 feet  under  water.  The  piles  should  be 
lashed  together  with  chain  cables.  By  beginning  at  the  west  bank  and 
working  westerly  the  enemy  will  be  pushed  towards  Fort  Gaines  in 
proportion  as  the  work  progresses.  It  is  expected  that  the  armament 
of  Fort  Morgan  will  be  such  as  to  take  care  of  the  main  ship  channel. 
You  can  build  two  redoubts  on  the  peninsula  in  advance  of  Fort  Morgan. 
You  will  also  build  a battery  to  mount  four  or  five  guns  on  piles  driven 


€hap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  727 

at  the  point  (a)  on  the  Southeast  Spit  of  Pinto’s  Island.  This  may  be 
done  mostly  by  contract  (say  with  Mr.  John  King  or  Mr.  Gregg). 

Ou  Dauphin  Island  you  will  want  some  batteries,  and  shouhl  consult 
the  commanding  officer  as  to  their  dispositions.  One  or  two  rifled  32- 
pounders  opposite  Pelican  Island,  another  of  the  same  kind  half  way 
thence  to  the  point  of  woods,  and  a strong  battery  across  the  island  at 
that  point,  would  seem  advisable.  For  the  armament  of  all  these  redoubts 
and  batteries  you  have  available  fourteen  32-pounders  at  Fort  Morgan, 
and  thirty  to  be  sent  from  North  Carolina — 44. 

You  will  want  for  the  advanced  redoubts  at  Fort  Morgan,  say,  12  guns, 
including  several  rifled  batteries  j on  Dauphin,  12;  at  Grant’s  Pass, 
rifled,  7 ; at  Fort  Gaines  2 additional  on  each  curtain — 10 ; at  battery 
near  Choctaw  Point,  rifled,  4 ; in  all  required,  39.  The  remaining  5, 
together  with  the  old  guns  rebored,  should  be  mounted  on  siege  carriages, 
and  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  city  troops,  to  serve  as  batteries  of 
position  for  defense  of  the  city.  These,  with  the  light  artillery  disposa- 
ble there,  would  be  sufficiently  formidable.  You  will  go  on  with  Fort 
Gaines  as  rapidly  as  possible,  finish  the  bastions  and  curtains,  with  the 
privy,  and  the  opening  there  should  be  closed  at  once.  Make  the  ram- 
part, the  parapet,  and  the  breast-height  wall  continuous.  The  breast- 
height  of  the  covered  way  will  be  revetted  with  planks,  and  the  glacis 
should  be  brought  essentially  to  its  proper  height  and  shape  as  well  as 
the  covered  way.  Above  all,  make  carriages  and  mount  guns  (green 
heart  pine  will  answer  very  well),  say,  the  traverse  circles  at  the  flank 
casemi^es. 

It  has  proved  impossible  to  get  funds,  probably  because  of  the  sick- 
ness of  the  President.  They  will  be  sent  at  the  earliest  possible  moment. 
Dp  to  the  end  of  August  it  will  be  best  to  pay  in  my  name,  and  I will 
sign  and  certify  the  accounts  here. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  LEADBETTEE, 

Major  Engineers^  Acting  Chief  of  Bureau, 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Eiehmontf  Fa.,  September  4,  1861. 

Capt.  S.  H.  Looeett, 

Corps  of  Engineers^  Mobile,  Ala.^  Fort  Caines: 

SfR : I have  now  every  prospect  of  getting  all  the  irons  for  32-pounder 
gun-carriages  made  here,  and  I propose,  therefore,  to  send  them  on  to 
you.  You  should  go  on  in  the  shortest  possible  time  to  have  the  timber 
sawed  and  all  the  sticks  got  out  of  the  proper  sizes,  the  chassis  made, 
and  for  the  upper  carriages  everything  done  but  the  assembljng,  for  the 
guns  on  the  carriages  can  be  furnished.  The  Department  is  now  very 
anxious  to  push  forward  the  rifling  of  guns,  and  1 am  sure  you  will  see 
that  there  is  no  delay  in  that  of  our  32-pounders.  A few  of  those  not 
yet  mounted  should  be  sent  first  to  Mr.  Skates,  and  as  soon  as  one  is 
finished  let  it  be  returned  and  substituted  on  the  carriage  of  a smooth- 
bore and  try  it.  This  matter  should  go  on  night  and  day,  Sundays  and 
week  days,  cheap  or  costly. 

Presuming  that  you  are  to  have  the  32-pounders  from  North  Carolina, 
(30),  14  on  hand,  and,  say,  6 old  guns,  you  will  have  50  in  all.  You 
have  on  hand  a few  carriages,  but  how  many  I don’t  know.  Telegraph 
me  the  number  of  carriages  for  which  you  want  me  to  provide  irons. 
The  columbiad  carriages  lately  received  do  not  fit  the  guns.  Let  all  of 


728  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA\,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 


them  be  made  to  fit,  and  this  without  delay,  for  j ou  will  get  no  carri- 
ages in  lien  of  them.* 

Very  truly,  yours, 

D.  LEADBETTER, 

Major  Engineers^  Acting  Chief  of  Bureau. 


JSTavy  Department,  Confederate  States, 

Richmond^  Fa.,  September  6,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond^  Va.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  Oapt.  George  N.  Hollins,  com- 
manding naval  station  at  l^ew  Orleans,  may  be  supplied  as  early  a& 
practicable  with  100,000  pounds  of  cannon  and  1,500  pounds  of  musket 
powder,  required  for  the  defense  of  New  Orleans. 

With  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  MALLOEY, 

Secretary  of  the  JSFavy. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  September  6,  1861. 
Hon.  L.  P.  Walker,  . • 

t Secretary  of  War,  Richmond^  Ya.: 

Sir  : Ship  Island  is  now  in  the  best  condition  for  defense  that  my 
means  allow.  Ool.  J.  K.  Duncan,  with  four  officers  of  the  Regiment  of 
Louisiana  Artillery  as  instructors,  has  been  detailed  for  temporary  duty 
on  the  island.  I beg  leave  again  to  remind  the  Department  that  I have 
not  one  officer  of  any  army  experience  at  my  disposal. 

I do  not  wish  to  appear  pettish  or  to  be  importunate  in  the  matter  of 
powder,  but  if  it  cannot  be  obtained  the  sad  spectacle  will  be  presented 
to  the  Confederacy  of  the  Mississippi  Valley  falling  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy  because  of  the  lack  of  ammunition.  There  is  not  in  my  mind  the 
slightest  doubt  that  this  city  will  be  attacked  early  in  the  autumn.  One 
company  of  Louisiana  troops  has  been  moved  to  the  Grand  Caillou,  and 
another  will  be  sent  to-morrow.  If  I had  ammunition  I would  order  a 
gun  to  be  sent  with  these  companies. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  * 

D.  E.  TWIGGS, 

Major- Ge7ieral^  (7.  S.  Army. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  September  II,  1861. 

H.  B.  Warren,  Esq., 

Fort  Gaines^  Mobile^  Ala. : 

Sir  : Captain  Lockett  was  long  ago  ordered  to  relieve  me  at  Mobile, 
and  I have  taken  it  for  granted  that  he  was  there;  but  hearing  nothing 
from  him,  I conclude  that  he  has  been  delayed  by  some  cause.  You  were 
telegraphed  on  the  5th  instant  to  open  the  letters  of  this  bureau  to  Cap- 
tain Lockett,  and  to  act  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  to  him  as 
far  as  possible. 


Some  matters  of  detail  omitted. 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  721^ 

The  most  urgent  matter  is  first  to  liave  the32-i)oim(lers  rilled  and  jmt 
in  i^osition,  with  shells  fit  for  their  use.  I have  written  to  iMr.  Skates 
to  hurry  up  tliis  business.  NText  get  cement  from  Xew  Orleans,  and 
finish  the  bastions  and  close  up  the  north  curtain.  The  i)OStern  arch  at 
the  main  entrance  and  other  interior  masonry  are  of  comparatively  small 
account.  Lay  the  traverse  rails  in  the  flank  casemates  as  they  are  lai<l 
at  Fort  Morgan.  Make  the  rampart  and  parapet  as  nearly  continuous 
as  possible,  revetting  the  breast-height  of  tlie  latter  with  planks,  as  in 
case  of  the  covered  way,  if  cement  is  not  to  be  had. 

At  Fort  Morgan  the  walls  of  the  addition  to  the  citadel  (wliich  was 
intended  by  me  as  a privy  in  cdse  of  siege)  should  be  strengtliened  by 
an  additional  thickness  of  masonry  at  the  northeast  end  and  at  the  i)ar- 
tition  walls.  A barrier  gate  of  iron  bars  should  be  hung  inside  of  the 
south  postern  gate,  lest  the  existing  gate  there  be  blown  in.  The  outer 
end  of  the  passage  leading  under  the  glacis  coupe  into  the  open  field 
should  be  bricked  up  just  inside  the  gate  by  a 6-foot  wall. 

Of  course  many  last  things  remain  to  be  done — protecting  the  maga- 
zines with  sand  bags : substituting  these  for  the  board  revetment  of 
bomb-proof  of  citadelj  and  having  arrangements  for  i)lenty  of  water  to 
drink,  and  everywhere  in  vessels  to  extinguish  fire.  In  the  casemates 
the  quartermaster’s  stores  should  not  be  piled  against  the  scarp  walk 
Leave  a free  passage  for  defense  of  embrasures  and  loop-holes. 

General  Withers  takes  command.  Show  this  to  him,  or  at  least  to 
Captain  Lockett. 

Very  truly,  yours,  D.  LEADBETTEE, 

Major  Engmeers^  Acting  Chief  of  Bureau,^ 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  September  12,  1861. 

Hon.  S.  E.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  copy  of  a letter  just 
received  at  this  Department: 

Richmond,  September  11,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : The  thirty  guns  (SS-pounders)  cannot  be  had  elsewhere  than  from  the  Ports- 
mouth navy-yard.  May  I request  that  you  will  procure  an  order  from  the  Secretary 
of  the  Navy  directing  the  officer  in  charge  to  forward  to  my  address  at  Mobile,  Ala.^ 
the  thirty  guns  of  the  caliber  named,  or,  if  those  cannot  be  had,  then  such  others 
as  may  be  designated  by  me  and  not  necessary  for  the  Norfolk  defenses, 

J.  M.  WITHERS, 
Brigadier-General,  ^'C. 


Tour  compliance  with  this  requisition  would  oblige. 

Very  respectfully, 

L.  P.  WALKEE, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  Eo.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

Neic  Orleans^  La.^  September  12,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond,  Va. : 

Sir:  Mr.  Ford,  a citizen  of  Memphis,  informs  me  that  he  met  in 
Louisville  a few  days  ago  Mr.  Walworth,  son  of  Chancellor  Walworth, 


730  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

recently  from  Washington,  and  learned  from  him  that  he  had  been  told 
by  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  that  a person  near  General  Dahlgren,  at 
Pass  Christian,  was  in  close  communication  with  the  powers  at  Wash- 
ington, had  given  them  all  the  information  that  they  wished,  and  had 
told  them  of  our  want  of  guns  and  ammunition  in  and  near  New  Orleans. 
From  the  same  source  Mr.  Walworth  knew  that  extensive  preparations 
were  making  to  invade  Louisiana  early  this  fall.  General  Dahlgren  is 
in  command  of  a camp  of  Mississippi  troops  at  Pass  Christian,  and  has 
a brother  in  Washington,  an  officer  in  the  Black  Eepublican  Navy. 
The  Secretary  of  the  Navy  seemed  well  aware  of  our  position  on  Ship 
Island. 

Col.  J.  K.  Duncan,  whom  I sent  to  Ship  Island  in  the  absence  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Allen,  has  made  a lengthy  report  upon  the  impor- 
tance and  capabilities  of  the  island,  and  declares  the  place  wholly  un- 
tenable. His  report,  together  with  the  opinion  of  Maj.  M.  L.  Smith, 
ehief  of  engineers,  is  transmitted  herewith.  * 

I hope  to  have  in  operation  within  two  or  three  weeks  a powder-mill, 
now  erecting  at  the  barracks.  This  is  my  only  real  dependence  for 
powder,  and  yet  its  success  hangs  upon  an  uncertain  promise  of  a sup- 
ply of  saltpeter.  I have  but  120  rounds  for  each  gun  on  Ship  Island; 
at  the  other  fortifications  not  more  than  40  rounds.  To  send  this  sup- 
ply I have  almost  emptied  the  magazine.  If  I can  obtain  ammunition 
I have  no  doubts  of  the  result  of  an  invasion  in  this  quarter.  I would 
respectfully  suggest,  in  view  of  a very  probable  necessity,  that  a camp 
be  established  near  this  city  as  a rendezvous  for  troops.  The  assem- 
bling of  men  from  their  homes  is  a work  of  much  time. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  E.  TWIGGS, 

Major- General^  G,  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  September  12,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herein  a report  by  Col.  J.  K.  Duncan 
upon  the  defenses  of  Ship  Island,  together  with  the  opinion  of  Maj.  M. 
L.  Smith,  Engineers.  I have  never  been  on  the  island,  but  every  intel- 
ligent person  whom  I meet,  acquainted  with  the  locality,  concurs  with 
the  views  of  Colonel  Duncan,  that  there  are  several  other  entrances 
to  the  sound  besides  Ship  Island  Channel,  and  that  small  steamers  and 
gunboats  can  pass  through  them  without  difficulty.  I shall  hold  the 
island  until  ordered  to  relinquish  it. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  E.  TWIGGS, 
Major-General,  C.  S.  Army. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

New  Orleans,  La.,  September  9,  1861. 
Second  Lieut.  J.  G.  Devereux, 

Louisiana  Regt.  Art,  A.  A.  A.  G.,  New  Orleans,  La.: 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  82,  dated  Headquarters 
Department  No.  1,  New  Orleans,  September  3, 1861, 1 proceeded  to  Ship 
Island,  to  take  temporary  command  of  that  post,  accompanied  by  four 
officers  of  the  Louisiana  Eegiment  of  Artillery,  to  take  charge  of  the 


See  inclosures  to  letter  following. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  731 

drills  at  tlie  lieavy  guns,  as  called  for  by  Si)ecial  Orders,  No.  81,  from 
the  same  headquarters. 

After  a thorough  examination  of  the  island  and  tlie  fortifications  com- 
menced at  its  westerly  extremity,  its  capabilities  for  defense,  character 
of  the  guns,  imidements,  equipments,  and  ammunition,  together  with 
the  condition  and  discipline  of  the  troops  conq)osing  the  command,  I 
have  the  honor  to  report  thereon  as  folloAvs,  viz  : 

1st.  The  fortification  is  a half  circle,  or  liorseshoe,  closed  at  the  gorge 
Avith  a half-bastion  front,  as  a flanking  arrangement  for  land  defense. 
It  was  originally  intended  to  carry  up  the  walls  sufficiently  high  for 
one  tier  of  casemate  and  one  tier  of  barbette  guns,  and  to  have  a moat, 
Avitli  a glacis  without,  to  protect  the  masonry. 

The  brick  work  generally  was  only  found  to  be  carried  up  as  high  as 
the  soles  of  the  embrasures,  however,  and  in  this  unfinished  state  it  has 
been  attempted  to  complete  the  work  for  temiiorary  defense. 

This  has  been  done  by  carrying  up  the  piers  between  the  embrasures 
by  brick  work  in  offsets  from  the  outside,  which  is  to  be  protected  by 
sand  bags.  To  complete  the  covering  over  the  guns  brick  piers  are 
being  built  within  the  work,  and  heavy  timbers  thrown  thence  to  the 
walls,  to  be  covered  by  3-inch  jilanking  and  sand  bags.  Hence,  from 
CA^ery  direction  in  which  a shot  or  shell  can  reach  the  interior  of  the 
fort,  they  Avill  be  almost  certain  to  strike  one  of  the  piers  in  question, 
and  chances  are  that  they  will  be  brought  down,  together  with  the  tim- 
ber and  sand  bags  over  them,  burying  the  guns  and  increasing  the 
number  of  casualties  from  the  splinters  and  scattering  brick  work. 

To  have  much  strength,  or  to  be  able  to  maintain  anything  like  a 
determined  attack,  this  fort  must  be  completed  after  its  original  plans. 
If  progressed  with  after  the  present  method  of  temporarily  completing 
it,  a few  heavy  men-of-war  will  pelt  it  to  ruins  in  a very  short  space  of 
time.  I regard  it  as  affording  the  least  possible  protection  to  the  men 
and  guns,  and  totally  incapable  of  resisting  any  formidable  force. 

If  the  island  must  be  fortified,  and  if  possible  be  held  at  all  hazards, 
I would  earnestly  suggest  that  Fort  Twiggs  and  all  work  upon  it  be 
abandoned  at  once,  and  that  the  only  attempt  made  at  fortification  be 
the  ordinary  resort  to  sand-bag  batteries.  The  embrasures  of  the  lat- 
ter can  be  carefully  revetted  with  sand  bags  and  the  parapets  carried 
up  above  the  height  of  the  tallest  men.  Bomb-proof  shelters,  built 
close  up  to  the  parapets,  will  afford  ample  protection  to  the  reliefs  and 
to  the  men  not  employed  at  the  guns,  who  can  crawl  into  them  for  pro- 
tection and  shelter  during  an  actual  engagement.  Such  a work  can  be 
constructed  at  one-tenth  of  the  cost  of  the  present  work,  can  be  com- 
pleted within  a very  few  days  comparatively,  and  will  afford  ten  times 
the  resistance  of  the  unfinished  brick  fort.  All  the  labor  can  be  done 
by  the  command,  and  the  material  is  all  ready  to  hand,  excepting  a few 
more  sand  bags. 

2d.  The  present  armament  is  composed  of  two  24-pounders  in* posi- 
tion on  the  fianking  front  and  one  8 -inch  shell  gun  completely  exposed 
on  the  same  front ; eight  32-pounders  within  the  circular  work  and  one 
32  pounder  and  one  9-inch  Dahlgren  shell  gun  without  the  fort  and 
behind  a sand-bag  parapet.  The  fire  of  the  two  latter  is  partially  masked 
by  the  masonry  of  the  fort,  as  is  shown,  together  with  the  positions  of 
all  of  the  guns,  by  the  following  diagram.* 

The  guns  are  all  good  enough  of  their  several  classes,  but  the  32- 
pounders,  being  mounted  upon  barbette  gun-carriages  on  casemate 


Omitted,  as  of  uo  present  importance. 


732  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chav.  XYI. 

chassis,  the  barbette  wheels  strike  against  the  scarp  walls,  and  mate- 
rially interfere  with  pointing  the  guns,  and  intercei)t  their  full  elevation 
in  consequence. 

But  taking  the  9-inch  Dahlgren  gun,  however,  the  best  gun,  with  full 
charge  and  elevation,  its  extreme  range  falls  short  of  Cat  Island  about 
a mile  and  a half.  Within  this  mile  and  a half  of  the  channel,  I am 
informed  by  pilots  familiar  with  the  sound,  there  is  18  feet  of  water. 
Hence,  admitting  that  the  fortification  is  completely  defensible  within 
itself  and  mounted  with  the  best  guns,  yet  nevertheless  it  could  not 
prevent  the  passage  of  large-class  ships  through  the  very  channel  which 
it  is  built  to  guard.  This,  however,  is  but  one  passage  leading  into  the 
sound. 

Between  Ship  and  Horn  Islands  there  is  another,  with  a depth  of  14 
feet  of  water,  and  between  the  eastern  end  of  Horn  Island  and  Petit 
Bois  still  a third,  which  several  j)ilots  agree  in  stating  had  deepened  to 
18  feet  during  the  heavy  storms  of  last  year. 

JS'ow,  the  coast  line  is  about  15  miles  distant  from  these  island  keys, 
which  ]3artly  lock  and  protect  the  main-land.  About  midway  between 
them,  a line  drawn  from  east  to  west  and  generally  parallel  with  the 
coast,  will  represent  the  13-foot  line  of  water,  and  from  this  line  to  the 
main-land  the  water  shoals  very  rapidly,  becoming  extremely  shallow 
as  the  coast  line  is  approached. 

It  is  hence  evident  that  gunboats  of  light  draught  can  alone  be  used 
by  the  enemy  against  the  coast.  Upon  this  coast  there  are  only  two 
l)oints  of  so  much  consequence  as  to  require  a vigilant  guard.  These 
are,  1st,  New  Orleans,  through  the  Eigolets,  and,  2d,  Mobile,  through 
Hog  and  Pascagoula  Pivers;  for,  if  the  war  is  to  be  prosecuted  by  the 
enemy  regardless  of  all  the  rules  governing  civilized  communities,  it  will 
be  utterly  impracticable  without  a navy  to  protect  all  the  watering  places 
and  residences  along  the  sound,  and  indemnity  must  be  looked  for  either 
by  the  confiscation  of  Northern  property  within  our  borders  or  by  a 
like  retaliation  across  them. 

But  with  the  cities  mentioned  the  case  is  different,  as  their  possession 
by  the  enemy  may  change  the  destinies  of  the  war.  Through  Dog  and 
Pascagoula  Eivers  light  transports  and  gunboats  can  pass  to  within  20 
or  25  miles  of  Mobile,  thus  throwing  men  and  material  to  within  a single 
day^s  march  of  that  city,  with  fair  roads  leading  thence  through  an  open 
pine  country.  A few  batteries  erected  at  suitable  points  on  those  rivers 
can  prevent  this,  and  the  guns  used  need  only  be  of  the  caliber  of  24 
or  32  pounders. 

In  a like  manner  Fort  Pike,  on  the  Eigolets,  can  be  strengthened  and 
one  or  two  other  points  fortified,  which  will  prevent  an  entrance  into 
Lake  Pontchartrain.  If  the  enemy  obtains  possession  of  Fort  Pike, 
and  thus  a foothold  on  the  lake,  by  operating  thence  as  a base  with  the 
boats  and  material  to  be  collected  upon  its  shores,  the  capture  of  New 
Orleans  becomes  almost  certain  in  time,  and  consequently  Forts  Jackson 
and  Saint  Philip  and  the  control  of  the  entire  mouth  of  the  Mississippi 
Eiver,  by  starving  those  forts  into  capitulation. 

The  occupation  of  Ship  Island  even  by  the  most  powerful  fortifica- 
tions, fully  capable  of  resisting  a combined  land  and  naval  attack,  does 
not  benefit  either  of  the  two  important  points  mentioned,  nor  yet  pro- 
tect them  in  the  least.  Neither  does  it  protect  the  sound  coast,  as  gun- 
boats can  pass  between  Ship  Island  and  the  main-land  with  impunity, 
passing  thereto  through  any  of  the  channels  in  and  around  the  islands. 

Nothing,  for  instance,  would  be  more  easy  for  the  enemy  than  the 
capture  of  the  small  steamers  and  other  craft  now  ])lyiiig  in  the  sound 


CIIAI*.  XVI. J 


C 0 K li K fSPOX  DICNCE , ETC. C ONEE DER AT E . 


735 


by  iiiorely  i)assiii^>’  between  any  of  the  ehannels  around  tlie  islands  and 
heading*  them  olf  with  two  or  more  gunboats.  Again,  it  is  ])erfectly 
practicable  ior  the  few  liostile  gunboats  to  lie  otf  of  Shii)  Island,  and 
merely  by  preventing  the  landing  of  stores  and  material  to  starve  them 
into  capitulation  without  firing  a single  gun.  Its  i)resent  condition 
certainly  makes  it  a temptation  to  a bold  and  active  enemy  where  the 
l)rize  is  thirteen  guns,  seven  companies,  and  the  glory  and  eclat  of  the 
achievement. 

If,  however,  our  inferior  gunboats  liad  Fort  Pike  on  the  one  hand  and 
the  forts  proposed  upon  Dog  and  Pascagoula  Fivers  ui)on  the  other  to 
act  upon  as  bases,  they  would  always  have  strong  points  upon  which  to 
retreat,  aud  whence,  working  by  combined  movements,  the  sound  might 
be  kept  comparatively  free  from  the  enemy’s  gunboats,  which  alone  can 
operate  there,  if,  indeed,  maii}^  of  these  boats  could  not  be  cax)tured. 

At  all  events.  Ship  Island  affords  no  protection  to  those  boats  now, 
their  only  jioint  of  refuge  now  being  behind  Fort  Pike;  but  the  fort  on 
Shi])  Island  is  wholly  incapable  of  resisting  a combined  land  and  water 
attack  like  that  which  the  enemy  threatens.  The  two  detachments  of 
regulars  are  more  than  sufficient  to  man  all  of  the  guns  and  afford  the 
necessary  reliefs.  The  other  five  companies  should  be  deployed  in  open 
order  without  the  fort  and  behind  the  line  of  sand  hills,  at  from  300  to 
400  yards  from  it,  where  they  would  be  within  good  sui)porting  distance 
of  the  regulars  in  the  fort.  Being  in  open  order,  they  would  be  less 
liable  to  casualties  from  the  enemy’s  shells,  and  whence,  from  under 
cover,  a heavy  rifle  fire  could  be  opened  upon  a landing  party  above  or 
they  could  form  and  charge  from  behind  the  sand  hills,  as  occasion 
might  require.  This  would  probably  be  the  best  plan  of  resisting  an 
attack  from  an  insignificant  force.  Should  the  enemy  land  4,000  or 
8,000  men  beyond  the  range  of  the  fort  guns,  however,  and  thence 
attack  simultaneously  with  the  bombardment  of  a considerable  fleet, 
with  the  guns  on  every  ship  equal  to  the  two  best  in  the  fort  aud  su- 
])erior  to  all  of  the  rest,  the  result  of  the  engagement  would  not  differ 
materially  from  that  at  Cape  Hatteras,  and  would  not,  in  my  opinion, 
last  an  hour. 

In  short,  I consider  the  works  now  on  Ship  Island  totally  incapable 
of  formidable  defense,  and  feel  confident  that  they  cannot  be  made  so 
within  any  reasonable  period  of  time.  Furthermore,  I am  satisfied  that, 
however  much  they  may  be  strengthened,  they  can  still  be  starved  into 
submission  without  firing  a single  shot. 

The  occupation  of  the  island  is  objectless,  as  there  is  no  control  over 
any  channel  nor  of  the  sounds  at  best.  Hence  great  expense  is  un- 
necessarily incurred,  besides  the  risk  of  the  men  and  material  now  there 
in  a shameful  and  humiliating  manner,  and  all  without  even  intimidat- 
ing the  enemy  or  of  being  productive  of  one  particle  of  good  in  any 
direction. 

Strongly  advocating  the  superiority  of  land  batteries  over  superior 
naval  attacks,  I cannot,  nevertheless,  without  a strong  protest,  stand 
by  and  encourage  an  impracticable  project,  which  has  not  a single 
object  of  importance  to  recommend  it.  Such  an  impracticability,  aim- 
less and  objectless,  is  now  being  i)rojected  at  Ship  Island,  aud,  if  prose- 
(uited  to  the  end,  I predict  for  it  disgrace,  from  starvation  on  the  one 
band  or  butchery  and  capture  on  the  other,  in  case  of  any  considerable 
combined  attack. 

I would,  therefore,  most  seriously  and  earnestly  urge  the  immediate 
abandonment  of  the  island.  The  troops,  guns,  and  important  material 


734  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  Chap.  XVI. 

can  be  removed  in  a single  night,  as  the  present  enemy  would  probably 
prevent  their  removal  in  the  day-time. 

Instead  of  the  useless  occupation  of  this  island,  I would  respectfully 
recommend  that  the  smaller  guns  be  taken  and  placed  in  intrenchments 
to  be  thrown  up  near  the  mouths  of  Dog  and  Pascagoula  Eivers  and 
the  heavier  ones  to  strengthen  Fort  Pike,  for  the  reasons  before  given. 
These  points  are  important  and  there  is  an  object  in  holding  them, 
whereas  Ship  Island  has  no  object  or  importance,  and  its  occupation 
is  more  likely  to  prove  highly  disastrous  than  to  be  productive  of  good. 

I found  at  the  island  only  about  15  rounds  to  each  gun,  but  powder 
and  cartridge-bags  sufficient  to  increase  the  number  to  each  gun  to  about 
120  rounds.  Lieutenant  Devereux,  an  active  and  skillful  officer,  was 
appointed  ordnance  officer,  and  details  were  made  from  the  several 
companies  to  assist  him  in  making  cartridges,  lining  the  magazine, 
keeping  the  guns  in  order,  and  to  look  after  the  imx>lements  and  equip- 
ments. The  men  of  the  several  companies  were  drilled  at  the  heavy 
guns  by  the  officers  of  the  Louisiana  Artillery  who  accompanied  me,  and 
among  them  were  found  a number  of  detachments  sufficiently  well 
drilled  to  man  the  guns  j besides,  the  regular  detachments  there  are  in 
command  of  Lieutenants  Semmes  and  Barnes,  from  West  Point,  and  as 
they  requested  permission  to  drill  their  own  companies  at  the  heavy  guns 
I of  course  granted  it,  these  officers  being  fully  competent  to  the  task. 
These  two  companies  alone  can  furnish  all  the  necessary  reliefs  and  gun 
detachments  to  man  and  fight  the  battery  at  any  time.  In  view  of  this 
I have  directed  the  officers  of  the  Louisiana  Artillery  mentioned  to  re- 
pair to  their  several  posts,  and  they  consequently  accompanied  me  to 
town  this  evening.  They  are  of  much  less  use  at  Ship  Island  than  at 
Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 

The  sand-bag  revetting  in  front  of  the  five  32-pounder  guns  was  car- 
ried up  to  the  top  of  the  wall,  with  proper  embrasures  left,  the  masonry 
and  wood  work  not  being  quite  ready  for  the  sand  bags  at  other  points. 
The  planking  over  the  guns  I directed  to  be  parapeted  around  with  sand 
bags  and  then  the  interior  space  to  be  filled  with  loose  sand. 

Colonel  Barrow  had  improved  the  discipline  on  the  island  for  the  few 
days  he  was  there  before  my  arrival,  and  I am  satisfied  that  he  would 
get  along  very  well  shortly  and  as  satisfactorily  as  circumstances  admit 
of.  He  ran  a sand-bag  traverse  in  rear  of  the  five  32-pounders  looking 
to  the  westward  on  the  line  ah  of  great  importance.  Similar  traverses 
will  have  to  be  thrown  in  the  rear  of  all  the  guns  for  their  protection. 
Both  of  the  shell  guns  are  very  much  exposed  to  be  dismounted  by  the 
enemy^s  fire,  but  especially  the  8-inch  gun,  which  is  wholly  unprotected. 
Trusting  that  the  island  will  be  speedily  abandoned  and  the  men  and 
material  moved  elsewhere,  I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

J.  K.  DDIS^OAIS^,  • 
Colonel^  C.  S.  Army. 

[Inclosure  No  2.] 

Engineer's  Office, 

New  Orleans^  September  11,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  David  E.  Twiggs, 

Comdg.  Military  Department  No.  J , New  Orleans.^  La. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  reference  to  this  office  of 
the  report  of  Colonel  Duncan  uiion  the  defenses  on  Ship  Island,  and 
return  it  with  the  following  remarks: 

The  report  discusses  the  defenses  from  two  points  of  view : First,  the 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  735 

particular  manner  of  fortifying  the  island ; second,  the  policy  of  occu- 
pying it  at  all. 

On  the  first  point  the  views  expressed  in  the  report  are  not  concurred  in. 

First,  I see  no  reason  for  abandoning  a position  inclosed  by  the  heavy 
scarp  wall  of  a regular  fort  and  building  up  the  same  height  of  wall  of 
sand  bags,  the  embrasures  in  both  instances  to  be  made  alike.  'Again, 
it  is  not  apparent  to  me  that  the  labor  required  to  protect  a gun  placed 
behind  a wall  capable  of  resisting  shot  can  be  less  than  if  the  same  gTiii 
is  placed  on  the  open  ground;  hence,  that  a new  work  can  be  com- 
menced as  suggested  and  sooner  finished  than  the  present  one.  Tlie 
timber  bomb-proofs  rest  upon  low  piers  built  upon  the  scarp  wall,  q)ro- 
tected  on  the  outside  by  sand  bags,  and  upon  piers  run  up  from  the 
ground  in  rear  of  the  gun  carriages.  It  but  remains  to  inclose  the  rear 
of  these  timber  casemates,  as  they  may  be  termed,  by  piling  up  sand 
bagsd^o  the  height  of  the  brick  piers,  and  we  have  not  only  a perfect 
bomb  proof,  but  a comfortable  place  for  the  soldiers,  inasmuch  as  the 
roof  above  has  designedly  been  made  water-tight. 

In  regard  to  the  use  of  sand  bags,  it  may  be  remarked  that  their  effi- 
ciency is  of  a temporary  character,  five  and  six  weeks  being  sufficient  for 
them  to  become  so  decayed  as  to  admit  of  little  or  no  strain  being  juit 
upon  them. 

But  it  is  proper  to  remark  here  that  the  work  at  Shi})  Island  has  pro- 
gressed unusually  slowly,  and  that  much  remains  to  be  done.  The  engi- 
neer office  here  has  not  from  the  first  had  one  single  dollar  at  its  disposal 
to  expend  there,  and  has  not  up  to  this  day  ever  been  able  to  get  any 
funds.  The  few  bills  and  laborers  that  have  been  paid  the  quartermas- 
ter department  has  provided  for. 

Owing  to  the  impossibility  of  my  being  at  the  island  after  the  first 
week  of  the  occupancy,  and  there  being  no  engineer  officer  to  send,  con- 
siderable work  has  been  done  having  no  special  bearing  upon  the  proper 
defense  of  the  fort.  This,  under  the  circumstances,  was  doubtless  una- 
voidable. The  two  guns  remaining  outside  are  the  two  rapidly  pushed 
ashore  under  fire  and  mounted  on  our  first  arrival  at  the  island,  and 
bear  so  handsomely  upon  the  entrance  and  sound  that  it  has  not  been 
thought  desirable  to  attempt  their  removal  to  the  inside  untH  more  im- 
portant work  is  finished. 

In  regard  to  the  armament  of  the  fort,  I have  but  to  remark  that  every 
available  gun  of  any  size  has  been  sent  there. 

In  respect,  then,  to  the  defense  of  Ship  Island,  if  it  is  to  be  held,  my 
opinion  is  decidedly  in  favor  of  continuing  the  occupation  of  the  work, 
incomplete  as  it  is,  and  for  perfecting  its  interior  arrangements.  I 
believe  the  garrison  can  be  more  readily  sheltered  there  than  elsewhere. 
The  work  is,  to  a certain  extent,  ready  for  an  attack  at  any  moment, 
and  I regard  it  as  less  liable  to  be  taken  by  an  assaulting  force,  conse- 
quently stronger  than  a work  of  the  same  size  as  suggested  in  Colonel 
Duncan’s  report. 

As  to  the  policy  of  attempting  to  hold  Ship  Island  at  all,  my  views 
were  officially  given  m a communication  dated  May  16,  1861,  and  for- 
warded to  Montgomery  by  the  commanding  officer  of  this  department. 
In  a subsequent  one,  dated  May  25,  a course  to  be  pursued  to  defend 
Mississippi  Sound  was  recommended,  and  this  also  forwarded. 

I have  nothing  to  add  to-day  to  the  reasoning  and  conclusions  of  those 
reports,  which  were  essentially  the  same  as  those  now  submitted  by 
Colonel  Duncan,  and  should  the  enemy  appear  in  force  at  any  time 
within  the  next  three  weeks  the  relative  positions  of  the  combatants  will 
be  as  there  indicated.  But  notwithstanding  the  views  then  expressed, 


736  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

the  occupation  of  Ship  Island  was  understood  to  have  been  directed  by 
the  President  of  the  Confederate  States.  The  necessity  that  existed 
then  for  its  occupation  exists,  as  far  as  I am  aware  of,  now,  and  I do  not 
])erceive  how,  under  this  condition  of  things,  its  abandonment  can  be 
determined  upon  without  the  express  authority  of  the  President  himself. 
Should  it  be  decided  to  vacate  the  island,  then  the  proper  defense  of  the 
sound  is  a question  to  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  gunboat  force 
tiiat  is  or  will  be  available. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 
Major  of  Engineers, 


Hdqrs.  First  Div.  Louisiana  Volunteer  Infantry, 

New  Orleans,  La,,,  September  12,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  David  E.  Twigos, 

Commanding  Department  No.  1,  G.  S.  Army : 

General  : In  accordance  with  the  wish  expressed  by  you  verbally, 
on  the  9th  instant  (the  day  I visited  you  at  your  house),  that  I should 
proceed  to  Berwick  Bay  and  examine  the  fortifications  and  other  means 
of  defense  that  could  be  made  available  in  the  event  of  an  attack  upon 
that  place,  I proceeded  thither  the  next  morning,  accompanied  by  three 
of  my  staff.  Majors  Parish,  Hyllested,  and  Fago.  During  my  journey 
on  the  Opelousas  Bailroad  I had  every  possible  assistance  from  the  gen- 
tlemen in  the  employment  of  the  company,  and,  upon  arriving  at  my 
destination,  each  seemed  to  vie  with  the  other  in  the  desire  to  afford  me 
information.  To  Captain  Carr  my  thanks  are  particularly  due-  for  the 
handsome  and  generous  manner  in  which  he  placed  not  only  his  steamer, 
the  Sigle,  but  his  own  valuable  services  as  a pilot,  at  my  disposal. 

Immediately  after  my  arrival  I proceeded  to  inspect  Forts  Berwick 
and  Ohene.  Fort  Berwick  is  situated  about  4 miles  from  Brashear  City, 
at  the  junction  of  Wax  Bayou  and  the  Atchafalaya  Eiver.  The  depth 
of  water  on  the  bar  of  Wax  Bayou,  as  I was  informed,  is  about  7 feet. 
The  fort  is  a common  earthen  one,  quadrangular  in  shape,  with  earthen 
parapets  5 feet  high  on  three  sides,  the  rear  being  protected  only  by 
palisades  about  7 feet  high,  loop-holed  for  musketry,  the  whole  sur- 
rounded by  a moat  about  6 feet  wide  in  front  aud  3 feet  in  the  rear. 
On  the  front  face  two  24-pounder  pivot  guns  are  mounted,  which  com- 
mand the  outlet  of  Wax  Bayou,  where  boats  of  only  very  light  draught 
can  be  used,  but  which  woidd  be  of  little  avail  in  protecting  the  Atch- 
afalaya. 

To  render  Fort  Berwick  capable  of  resisting  only  a moderate  force 
the  parapets  would  require  strengthening.  The  magazine  also  requires 
protection,  which  can  be  done  by  covering  the  same  with  earth  to  the 
thickness  of  several  feet.  I would  recommend  three  additional  guns 
being  sent  to  Fort  Berwick,  to  arm  the  right  and  left  parapets,  which 
are  at  present  defenseless ; also  a light  gun  (9  or  12  pounder)  to  aid  in 
protecting  the  rear,  which  is  open  to  attack  by  a land  force. 

The  ammunition  consists  of  21  24-pounder  cartridges,  200  shot,  and 
4,000  musket-ball  cartridges.  Eammers,  port-fires*,  primers,  and  flannel 
for  cartridges  and  swabs  are  much  needed ; but  I do  not  enter  into  the. 
particulars,  as  I am  assured  a list  has  already  been  furnished  by  the 
officer  in  command.  The  garrison  consists  of  two  companies,  one  of 
infantry  and  one  of  sappers  and  miners. 

Fort  Chene  is  in  all  respects  a counterpart  of  Fort  Berwick,  situated 


Chap.  XVI.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  To 7 

at  a point  commanding'  two  bayons,  admitting  only  vessels  of  light 
draught  of  water,  and  consequently  of  much  less  imi)ortance  than  Port 
Berwick.  The  armament  is  two  24-])Ounder  i)ivot  guns.  Tlie  ammuni- 
tion consists  of  90  24-i)ounder  cartridges,  193  shot,  30  cTiarges  ot  (canis- 
ter, and  3,000  musket  cartridges.  The  garrison  consists  of  one  (company 
of  infantry. 

My  next  visit  was  to  Shell  Island,  which  is  15  miles  from  Brasiiear 
City,  and  is  at  the  Junction  of  the  main  channel  of  tlie  Atchaf  ilaya  Itiver 
and  Shell  Island  Bayou.  The  depth,  as  I was  informed,  of  the  former 
is  9 feet  on  the  bar  at  high  water  and  never  less  than  7 feet;  and  of 
the  latter  0 feet  on  the  bar  at  high  water  and  never  less  than  4 feet. 

Shell  Island,  as  its  name  would  indicate,  is  (composed  of  shells,  but 
only  in  part,  raised  about  2 to  3 feet  above  high-water  mark.  In  the 
rear  is  an  impenetrable  marsh,  but  on  its  front,  and  facing  Atchafalaya 
Eiver  and  Shell  Bayou,  is  a shell  bank,  extending  400  yards  in  length 
by  60  in  depth. 

I am  of  opinion  that  a strong  fort  ought  as  soon  as  possible  to  be 
constructed  upon  Shell  Island,  commanding,  as  it  does,  the  most  impor- 
tant channel  to  Berwick  Bay,  the  main  channel  of  the  Atchafalaya  Biver 
at  this  point  being  only  about  one-quarter  of  a mile  wide,  and  conse- 
quently easily  commanded  by  a battery.  lu  urging  tlie  establishment 
of  a fort  on  Shell  Island  for  the  protection  of  Berwick  Bay  I do  not 
think  I overestimate  the  value  of  the  position,  while  it  will  render  it  un- 
necessary to  maintain  Fort  Chene,  the  garrison  and  armament  of  wliich 
could  be  removed  to  Shell  Island. 

A fort‘situated  upon  Shell  Island  ought  not  to  contain  less  than  ten 
guns,  some  of  heavy  caliber.  I am  informed  that  the  planters  in  this 
section  of  country  will  furnish  any  number  of  hands  for  works  of  de- 
fense. 

I would  also  call  your  attention  to  the  companies  composing  the  gar- 
risons of  Forts  Berwick  and  Chene.  They  are  infantry,  some  of  which, 
especially  in  Fort  Berwick,  are  but  imperfectly  acquainted  with  the 
musket  exercise,  while  all,  both  officers  and  men,  are  entirely  ignorant 
of  the  management  of  heavy  artillery.  A competent  instructor  of  artil- 
lery is  a most  pressing  necessity. 

The  great  number  of  fishermen,  or  men  of  doubtful  ayocations,  who 
reside  in  the  numerous  bayous,  quite  out  of  reach  of  the  forts,  renders 
a coast  guard  necessary.  The  steamer  Mobile,  which  is  now  being  altered 
into  a gunboat,  will  not  be  ready.for  two  weeks,  and  I would  recommend 
the  employment  in  the  mean  time  of  Captain  Carr’s  steamer,  the  Teazer, 
and  which,  being  of  light  draught  of  water,  could  act  as  a tender  to  the 
Mobile,  and  render  efiective  service  in  clearing  the  bayous  of  all  such 
as  may  be  rendering  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy.  I would  also  urge 
the  employment  of  Captain  Carr  upon  this  service,  for  which  his  inti- 
mate knowledge  of  Berwick  Bay  and  its  bayous  make  him  so  well  fitted. 

The  commanders  of  the  forts  have  represented  to  me  the  necessity,  to 
the  proper  carrying  out  of  their  duty  in  preventing  the  passage  of  small 
craft,  that  they  each  be  supplied  with  a 6 or  8 oared  barge,  the  small 
boats  they  are  at  present  using  being  loaned  them  by  citizens. 

In  laying  before  you  the  foregoing  result  of  my  examination  of  the 
means  of  defense  at  Berwick  Bay,  permit  me  to  again  call  your  attention 
to  the  serious  results  that  would  arise  from  this  point  falling  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  We  should  be  completely  cut  ofi*  from  the  valua- 
ble sur)ply  of  cattle  from  Texas,  while  60,000  barrels  of  coal,  'which  is  an 
article  of  almost  incalculable  adva,ntage  to  the  enemy’s  shipping,  would 
47  R R VOL  vi 


738 


OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 


be  sacrificed.  NTo  time  or  means  ought,  therefore,  to  be  lost  in  properly 
defending  a ])oint  of  so  much  importance. 

Kespectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  L.  LEWIS, 

Major-  General^  Comdg.  First  Fiv.  La.  Volunteer  Infantry. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

NTo.  151.  i Richmond^  Fu.,  September  12,  1861. 

#***##* 

18.  The  State  of  Alabama  and  that  portion  of  Mississippi  east  of  the 
Pascagoula  Eiver  will  hereafter  constitute  a separate  command,  which 
is  assigned  to  the  charge  of  Brig.  Gen.  Jones  M.  Withers,  Provisional 
Army. 

# * * , * # * # 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Eichmond,  September  13,  1861. 

General  David  E.  Twiggs, 

JVeic  Orleans^  La. : 

Take  immediate  measures  to  evacuate  Ship  Island,  and  cause  the 
guns  to  be  removed  at  once. 


S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

New  Orleans j September  16,  1861. 

The  Hon.  Secretary  of  War, 

Richmond^  Va. : 

Sir  : There  will  no  doubt  be  an  invasion  of  this  place  by  the  Black 
Eepublicans  early  in  the  fall.  I respectfully  ask  that  two  brigadier- 
generals  be  ordered  to  report  to  me  at  as  early  a day  as  possible.  The 
works  around  the  city  are  extensive,  and  it  is*  impossible  for  one  person 
to  attend  to  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  service.* 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  E.  TWIGGS, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 


Mobile,  September  16,  1861. 

Hon.  L.  P.  Walker, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : In  view^  of  the  opposition  manifested  here  to  the  assignment  of 
Brigadier-General  Withers  to  the  command  at  Mobile,  I deem  it  proper 
to  state  that  in  my  opinion  the  public  good  will  be  x^romoted  by  the 
order  which  it  is  understood  the  Dei^artment  has  given  to  that  effect. 

I have  just  returned  from  a visit  to  General  Twiggs  at  New  Orleans. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


739 


I received  official  confirmation  of  an  iin])ortant  fact,  report  of  which  had 
previously  reached  me;  that  is,  that  there  are  less  than  50  rounds  of 
powder  at  the  three  forts  at  the  mouth  of  this  bay.  Two  hours  of  active 
fighting  will  exhaust  the  sux>ply,  and  then  the  repetition  of  the  contre- 
temps at  Hatteras  is  open,  and  Mobile  is  at  the  mercy  of  a naval  power 
holding  these  forts  and  commanding  the  bay. 

General  Moore  is  here,  and  I at  once  advised  him  of  the  fact.  He 
appeared  surprised.  New  Orleans  is  equally  destitute  of  powder.  If  it 
be  possible  I trust  that  these  works  will  be  supplied  at  once. 

Pardon  me  for  expressing  the  opinion  that  the  five  regiments  consti- 
tuting the  garrison  at  Ship  Island  may  be  cut  off  whenever  the  enemy 
commanding  the  sea  wills  it.  The  waters  of  the  Mississippi  Sound  can 
only  be  defended  by  guns  afloat,  and  without  them  the  Ship  Island 
forces  are  at  the  mercy  of  the  Black  Republican  fleet.  That  garrison 
cannot  command  the  Ship  Island  Pass.  If  it  could,  there  are  several 
others  by  which  gunboats  may  enter.  I am  aware  of  the  presumj)tion 
of  my  opinion.  A sense  of  duty  prompts  it,  for  after  the  misfortune 
shall  have  befallen  us  I should  reproach  myself  if  I remained  silent. 

I am  greatly  indebted  to  the  Government  for  the  presence  and  instruc- 
tions of  Captain  Lockett.  I am  doing  all  in  my  power  to  aid  him  in 
carrying  his  plans  into  execution. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  FORSYTH,  Mayor. 


New  Orleans,  September  17,  1861. 

Secretary  of  War: 

Ship  Island  is  evacuated.  Two  heavy  frigates,  two  steamers,  a brig, 
and  two  tenders  were  8 miles  off  Ship  Island  at  dark  yesterday.  As 
the  last  boat  departed  the  steamers  were  bearing  down  upon  the  island. 

D.  E.  TWIGGS. 


Mobile,  September  17,  1861. 

Hon.  Secretary  of  War: 

I am  just  informed  that  there  is  very  little  powder  at  Forts  Gaines 
and  Morgan,  Ala.  Have  but  little.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that 
cannon  powder  be  sent  immediately  to  these  forts. 

A.  B.  MOORE. 


Richmond,  September  18,  1861. 

His  Excellency  A.  B.  Moore, 

Governor  Alabama: 

Supplies  of  powder  will  be  sent  to  the  forts  designated  as  soon  as 
possible. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


New  Orleans,  September  18,  1861. 

Secretary  of  War: 

The  enemy’s  fleet  did  considerable  shelling  yesterday  at,  as  they  sup- 
posed, a masked  battery  on  Ship  Island. 

D.  E.  TWIGGS, 

Major-General. 


740  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond,  Va.,  September  19,  1861. 

General  Jones  M.  Withers, 

Mobile,  Ala.: 

General  : At  the  last  moment  the  Ordnance  Department  has  laid 
hands  on  our  hig  rifled  gan  and  sent  it  to  Memphis.  The  programme 
is  that  we  are  to  have  the  next  one.  We  are  able,  therefore,  to  send 
only  a 10-inch  smooth  bore,  with  its  appurtenances,  carriage,  imple- 
ments, and  a few  shot  and  shells.  Our  main  reliance  for  the  present 
must  be  the  seven  columbiads  at  the  two  forts  and  the  rifled  32 -pounders. 
I am  satisfied  that  these  last  will  prove  to  be  formidable  guns.  They 
weigh  7,000  pounds  each,  I think,  and  with  a shell  of  about  50  pounds 
weight  each  of  those  guns  should  be  better  (more  effective)  than  a 
10-inch  columbiad.  Sights  should  be  adapted  to  them.  I had  hoped 
to  send  some  friction-primers,  but  they  are  not  ready,  and  must  be  sent 
by  express. 

Lieutenant  Withers  has  a list  of  the  articles  which  you  have  asked 
for,  with  a note  of  the  establishment  from  which  they  have  been  ordered 
by  the  Ordnance  Department.  Lieutenant  Withers  has  been  very  active 
in  his  efforts  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  public  service. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  LEADBETTEE, 

Major  Engineers,  Acting  Chief  of  Bureau, 


Headquarters  Louisiana  Militia, 

Neio  Orleans,  September  20,  1861. 

Hon.  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  Confederate  States : 

Dear  Sir:  I am  now  endeavoring  to  organize  the  militia  of  my 
State,  in  order  that  we  may  be  in  some  state  of  preparation  for  an 
attack.  The  generals  and  some  of  their  subordinates,  at  a recent  meet- 
ing to  concert  measures  to  this  end,  adopted  the  following  resolution, 
which  at  their  request  I forward  to  you : 

Besolved,  That  the  governor  of  this  State  he  requested  respectfully  to  write  immedi- 
ately to  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States  and  ask  his  excellency  to  appoint  and 
send  to  New  Orleans  two  competent  superior  officers,  one  of  the  Corps  of  Engineers 
and  one  of  the  Artillery,  to  form  with  General  Twiggs  a board  of  defense. 

Without  sanctioning  the  request  contained  in  the  last  part  of  the 
resolution  concerning  the  board  of  defense,  which  appears  to  me  not 
consonant  to  military  usage  or  propriety,  I have  already  represented 
to  you  the  necessity  of  having  an  officer  here  who,  with  youth,  energy, 
and  military  ability,  would  inluse  some  activity  in  our  preparations 
and  some  confidence  in  our  people.  I hope  ere  this  General  Van  Dorn 
has  acquainted  you  with  my  views,  which  from  motives  of  delicacy  I 
preferred  to  deliver  to  hiui  verbally  in  a confidential  conversation. 

The  generals  of  my  militia  have  designated  the  corps  from  which  the 
officers  to  be  sent  here  should  be  selected.  I leave  that  to  your  good 
judgment,  asking  only  that  this  city,  the  most  important  to  be  preserved 
of  any  in  the  Confederacy,  and  our  coast,  the  most  exposed  of  all  the 
States,  be  no  longer  neglected. 

I. am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THO.  O.  MOOEE. 


Ch.vp.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONEEDEIUTE. 


741 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  September  21,  1861. 

Hon.  John  Forsyth, 

Mayor  of  Mobile,  Ala.: 

Sir:  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  IGtli  instant  I am  directed  by  the 
Secretary  of  War  to  say  that  the  Government  is  aware  of  the  dehciency 
of  iiowder  at  the  forts  below  Mobile,  and  is  using  every  effort  to  supply 
it  as  promptly  as  possible. 

The  garrison  at  Ship  Island  has  been  withdrawn,  to  prevent  the  pos- 
sibility of  its  being  cut  off‘  by  the  enemy. 

This  Department  will  be  pleased  to  receive  your  suggestions  on  all 
occasions. 

Eespectfully,  A.  T.  BLEDSOE, 

Chief  of  Bureau  of  War. 


Headquarters  Louisiana  Militia, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  September  21,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis, 

And  the  other  Field  Officers  of  the 

First  Division  of  Militia  of  Louisiana  : 

Gentlemen  : I have  examined  the  proceedings  of  your  meeting  held 
on  the  19th  instant,  of  which  a copy  was  presented  to  me  by  your 
committee.  I immediately  addressed  a letter  to  President  Davis,  and 
inserted  the  resolution  of  request  for  the  appointment  of  an  additional 
engineer  and  artillery  officer  at  ]Srew  Orleans. 

1 must  decline  complying  with  the  request  contained  in  your  first 
resolution.  Passing  by  the  consideration  of  the  question  of  my  power 
or  right  to  declare  martial  law,  I cannot  perceive,  in  the  iiresent  state 
of  imblic  affairs,  any  justification  for  the  adoption  of  so  stringent  a 
measure.  Martial  law  suspends  the  functions  of  the  civil  magistrate, 
and  makes  the  will  of  him  who  declares  it  the  suxireme  and  only  law. 
If  he  has  the  power — the  military  force — to  comiiel  subjection  to  his  will, 
no  one  can  question  the  x)roi)riety  or  necessity  of  any  of  his  orders.  It 
is  true  it  may  be  restricted  in  its  oi)erations  as  to  locality,  but  it  cannot 
be  modified  as  to  character.  It  may  be  declared  in  a district  or  iiortion 
of  country,  and  has  in  some  ‘instances  been  accompanied  with  qualifi- 
cations of  its  oxieration  j but  these  qualifications  may  be  altered  or  dis- 
liensed  Avith  at  the  jileasure  of  tlie  iierson  ACho  has  the  supreme  power. 
It  is  therefore  the  substitution  of  tlie  uncontrolled  rule  of  one  man  for 
the  government  of  law  as  administered  by  ciAul  officers.  I do  not  think 
the  exigencies  of  the  State  and  its  iieoide  at  the  x>resent  moment 
demand  or  require  the  assumption  and  exercise  of  such  x^ower.  I have 
in  contemx)lation  issuing  general  orders  for  the  enrolling  and  organiza- 
tion of  the  militia,  in  the  enforcement  of  which  I shall  exxiect,  and  know 
I will  receiA'e,  your  active  co-oxieration. 

I am,  A^eiy  resxiectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THO.  O.  MOOEE, 

Governor  of  Louisiana. 


ISTew  Orleans,  September  22,  1861. 

J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

Dear  Sir  ; * * * i ain  looking  anxiously  for  the  officers  you  prom- 
ised to  send  us.  A gentleman  by  the  name  of  Smith,  I believe  from  Eew 


742 


OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S,  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


York,  is  much  desired  here,  or  Captain  Boggs,  at  Pensacola.  I have 
felt  considerable  anxiety  (but  never  have  mentioned  it  except  to  Moise) 
about  assistance  here  when  it  should  be  required.  You  are  no^^  in  a 
situation  not  to  send  off  a man  from  Virginia,  Kentucky,  or  Missouri. 
What  should  we  do  in  Louisiana  if  we  should  be  attacked  by  even  30,000 
men  when  all  are  gone  and  arms  too  ? Our  fortifications  are  very  back- 
ward. We  have  but  one  engineer  here  (Major  Smith),  and  he  is  not  an 
active  one,  according  to  my  judgment.  I am  not  satisfied  with  our  situa- 
tion— not  at  all ; and,  should  we  be  attacked  by  any  strong  force,  I am 
fearful  of  the  result.  My  arms  have  all  been  given  out  and  all  gone. 
We  could  get  the  men,  but  they  w^ould  be  of  no  use.  I sent  to  Cuba  for 
guns  long  since  and  made  a failure.  I have  now  1,800  there  if  I could 
get  them ; besides  I have  sent  a considerable  amount  to  another  jjoint, 
but  whether  I shall  ever  get  them  or  not  I do  not  know,  and  as  for  our 
reliance  on  the  assistance  of  any  volunteers  now  in  those  States  wdiere 
hostilities  exist,  whether  from  our  State  or  others,  it  is  very  poor. 

It  is  high  time  ample  provision  was  made  for  the  reception  of  our 
enemies.  If  they  cannot  raise  soldiers  rapidly,  they  can,  it  is  said,  raise 
any  number  of  sailors  and  marines.  Dr.  Mackie  writes  from  Nashville 
(just  arrived  there  from  the  North)  that  gigantic  measures  are  being 
adopted  at  the  North  for  a move  on  Louisiana,  and  no  secret  in  the  mat- 
ter, and  that  he  believes  it  will  be  made  soon.  Now,  my  dear  sir,  do  at 
once  what  may  be  necessary  for  our  State.  I can’t  say  any  more,  as  my 
office  is  filled  with  talkers. 

I am  anxious  for  saltpeter.  I am  alarmed  to  death  for  want  of  pow- 
der. Aid  us  in  these  materials,  as  we  could  fight  but  a short  time  with 
present  supply. 

By  the  very  earnest  solicitations  of  General  Polk,  General  Twiggs  has 
consented  to  send  the  Third  Eegiment  to  him,  so  you  can,  if  agreeable, 
leave  the  Fourth  here ; but  if  it  remains  across  the  lake  it  w^ould  do  no 
good  for  the  defense  of  the  city. 

General  Dahlgren  is  over  the  lake  with  1,500  or  2,000  men.  Is  that 
force  not  sufficient  ? I desire  to  write  you  relative  to  the  gentleman 
above  and  may  do  so.  If  I do  not,  another  will.* 

Yours,  very  truly, 

THO.  O.  MOOEE. 


• New  Orleans,  La.,  September  22,  1861. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  , 

Richmond,  Va.j 

Letters  of  the  16th  received.  Third  Eegiment  ordered  to  Columbus. 
Cannot  the  Fourth  remain  ? Send  officers  at  once.  I dispatched  yoh 
for  saltpeter.  None  yet  received. 

THO.  O.  MOOEE. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  September  23,  1861. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans,  La,: 

I shall  not  move  the  Fourth  Eegiment  from  Louisiana  without  the 
most  urgent  necessity.  Shall  send  one  or  two  brigadier-generals  to  New 


'Some  matters  of  detail  omitted. 


Chap.  XVI.]  ^ CORKE«PONDENCE,  ETC. CGIS’ EE J)EK ATE.  743 

Orleans  this  week.  Two  tons  of  saltpeter  were  ordered  from  Augusta 
to  New  Orleans  on  the  lOtli  instant. 

J.  r.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


New  Orleans,  September  2J,  1801. 

Secretary  of  War: 

I have  countermanded  the  movement  of  the  Third  Eegiment  to  Gen- 
eral Polk  at  the  wish  and  with  the  concurrence  of  Governor  Moore. 

D.  E.  TWIGGS. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond^  Wi.,  September  23,  1801. 

Hon.  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : The  defensive  works  for  the  protection  of  Mobile  Bay  and  city 
consist  of  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines,  a battery  at  Grant’s  Bass,  and 
other  batteries  now  under  construction  in  the  immediate  neighborhooil 
of  the  city.  Fort  Morgan  has  five  10-inch  columbiads,  two  of  them 
known  to  be  mounted;  two  others  probably  so;  the  fifth  on  the  way, 
not  arrived.  Some  ten  other  heavy  guns  (rifled)  and  columbiads  ordered 
by  Mr.  Secretary  Walker  are  anxiously  expected,  and  are  believed  to  be 
under  fabrication  in  this  city.  There  are  also  about  thirty-eight  32- 
pounders  mounted  on  the  work,  which  are  now  being  rifled,  bh’om  these 
last  we  cannot  expect  the  full  range  and  power  of  guns  made  for  rifling, 
but  when  the  full  armament  shall  have  been  received  it  will  be  formida- 
ble. Two  redoubts  are  under  construction  on  the  land  side  in  advance 
of  Fort  Morgan.  Present  garrison,  one  regiment. 

Fort  Gaines  is  opposite  Fort  Morgan,  3J  miles  distant,  and  tbe  two 
are  required  to  protect  the  intervening  channel.  This  work  was  intended 
to  mount  one  columbiad  in  each  bastion  (five  of  them)  and  fifty  32  pound- 
ers in  barbette  on  the  curtains.  It  has  two  10-inch  columbiads,  ])roba- 
bly  not  yet  mounted,  as  their  carriages  (new  iron)  do  not  fit  the  old  and 
usual  form  of  traverse  circle.  The  alteration  is  being  made.  Two  rifled 
guns  and  one  8-inch  smooth  bore  are  required  there,  and  will  be  made 
in  this  city.  Ten  32-pounders  are  mounted  on  the  curtains.  Four  of  its 
flanking  guns  have  been  received,  and  are  probably  mounted.  Sixteen 
more  of  the  last-named  guns  (howitzers)  are  required,  and  are  being 
made  at  Florence,  Ala.  The  present  garrison  of  Fort  Gaines  is  siqiposed 
to  be  three  companies. 

Fort  Morgan  and  Fort  Gaines  are  permanent  works,  with  walls  of 
brick  masonry.  The  battery  at  Grant’s  Pass  mounts  three  32-pounders, 
which  will  soon  be  rifled ; garrison,  one  company.  Near  the  city,  in 
the  neighborhood  of  Choctaw  Pass,  a battery  is  being  built  in  the  water 
to  command  the  channel  in  case  small  vessels  should  run  i)ast  the  forts 
or  armed  launches  be  hauled  across  the  peninsula  of  Mobile  Point.  Some 
batteries  are  being  thrown  ui)  on  the  land  front  of  the  city,  for  which 
guns  were  ordered  by  Mr.  Secretary  Walker.  The  labor  for  this  last 
work  is  understood  to  be  furnished  gratuitously  by  the  citizens. 

The  great  want  of  Mobile  Bay  is  an  armed  steamer,  to  cope  with  any 
armed  small  craft  which  might  steal  into  the  bay  at  night  or  be  hauled 
over  land,  as  already  mentioned.  A single  armed  launch  could  cut  off 
communication  between  the  city  and  the  forts,  for  theie  is  literally 
nothing  in  which  to  make  head  against  such  an  invader.  A steamer 


744  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chai-.  XVI. 

like  tlie  Mirauioii  should  he  immediately  bought  for  that  service,  and  be 
armed  with  one  or  two  heavy  guns. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  LEADBETTER, 

Major  of  Engineers^  Acting  Chief  of  Bureuu. 


Richmond,  Septemher  23,  1861. 

General  David  E.  Twiggs: 

Will  send  you  an  active  and  competent  brigadier-general  this  week. 
Will  send  you  powder  as  fast  as  we  can  procure  it. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  Septemher  25,  1861. 

John  Forsyth, 

^ Mayor ^ Mobile^  Ala. : 

1 have  ordered  50  barrels  of  cannon  powder  sent  from  INashville  to 
Mobile,  also  100  barrels  to  New  Orleans,  also  12  tons  ot  saltpeter  to  New 
Orleans  for  immediate  manufacture.  Further  supplies  wdl  be  sent  at 
the  earliest  jiossible  moment. 

JT.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Troops  Confederate  States, 

Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  Septemher  25,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. : 

Sir  : You  will  pardon  me  for  the  freedom  of  addressing  you,  but  the 
subject  is  of  vital  importance,  and  requires  promx^t  attention.  For  some 
time  a growing  dissatisfaction  has  existed  here  among  the  regular  offi- 
cers of  the  Army  from  the  old  United  States  service,  which  has  culmi- 
nated in  a number  of  resignations.  They  have  seen  themselves  over- 
looked by  their  Government,  while  their  juniors  in  years  and  service, 
and  I think  their  inferiors  in  many  cases,  were  put  over  them  in  rank 
in  other  armies.  To  this  they  submitted  without  a murmur,  and  labored 
incessantly,  doing  what  their  superiors  in  rank  here  could  not  do,  but 
for  which  they  were  receiving  the  credit.  The  last  feather,  however, 
has  broken  the  camePs  back.  The  Department,  jnst  before  your 
entrance  on  its  duties,  came  into  their  midst,  and  selected  one  of  the  very 
youngest  of  their  number  for  the  grade  of  colonel.  Lieutenant  (Colonel) 
AYheeler  is  a very  excellent  officer,  and  none  envy  him  his  good  fortune, 
but  they  cannot  see  the  justice  of  the  apparent  reflection  on  them- 
selves. The  jealousy  with  which  professional  soldiers  look  Tqion  mili- 
tary ranlv;  is  second  only,  my  dear  sir,  to  that  of  honor.  For  whatever 
success  I ha\'e  attained  in  my  eflbrts  for  tlie  organization  and  instruc- 
tion of  tliis  army  I am  indebted  to  these  officers.  You  can  see,  then, 
how  keenly  I may  share  the  mortification  which  has  been  inflicted  on 
them,  and  1 sincerely  trust  the  Department  will  be  able  to  assist  me  in 
averting  the  calamity  which  threatens,  for  they  clearly  see  that  my  per- 
sonal influence  heretofore  exerted  has  availed  them  nothing. 

1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


Chap.  XVI.J 


745 


CORRESrOXDE^X'E,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

lliciiMOND^  September  25,  1801. 

Oeiieral  David  E.  Twiggs, 

Neic  Orleans  : 

I cannot  spare  any  rilled  cannon  for  New  Orleans.  You  have  one 
transferred  from  Ilollins.  Uave  the  others  rilled  as  fast  as  ])ossil)le  at 
the  New  Orleans  fonnderies.  There  are  but  rwo  large-sized  rilled  guns 
received  at  Savannah  and  twelve  rilled  held  pieces.  The  coast  of 
Georgia  will  be  attacked  in  a few  days,  and  1 cannot  withdraw  guns. 
1 have  appointed  Mansheld  Lovell  a brigadier-general,  and  ordered  him 
to  New  Orleans.  lie  will  be  Avith  you  this  week,  llave  ordered  10 
more  tons  of  saltpeter  from  Augusta  to  New  Orleans,  and  100  barrels  of 
cannon  i)owder  from  Nashville  to  New  Orleans  and  50  barrels  to 
Mobile. 

J.  P.  LENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Neay  Orleans,  La.,  September  25,  18G1. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Richmond^  Ya. : 

General  Twiggs  requests  me  to  seize  all  the  pork  in  the  city,  about 
2,500  barrels.  Shall  I do  it  ? \ 

THO.  O.  MOOBE. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  September  25,  1801. 

Goa\  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans.,  La. : 

I know  of  no  necessitv  for  seizing  the  pork.  Do  you  see  auv  need 
of  it? 


J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond.,  September  20,  1801. 

Secretara^  of  War  : 

The  letter  of  Hon.  F.  B.  Shepard,  under  date  of  September  4,*  has 
been  referred  to  this  office  for  information.  At  that  date  the  condition 
of  Fort  Gaines  in  the  matter  of  armament  and  munitions  Avas  A^ery  un- 
satisfactorjA  The  fort  itself  was  scarcely  defensible  Avith  any  arma- 
ment, though  all  the  guns  aA^ailable  had  been  mounted.  Two  10-inch 
guns  had  been  received,  but  not  mounted  for  Avant  of  carriages.  These 
liaAX  been  siqAplied,  and  it  is  hoped  that  these  guns  are  noAv  mounted. 
The  bastions  are  now  finished,  their  traA^erse  circles  laid  for  a columbiad 
in  each ; the  scarp  wall  by  this  time  must  be  everywhere  to  its  proper 
height;  the  magazines  are  undoubtedly  available;  the  rampart  and 
parapet  are  rapidly  approaching  entire  continuity,  and  the  glacis  wants 
but  little  to  give  efficient  cover  to  the  masonry.  There  are  still  wanted 
three  heavy  guns  for  the  three  bastions  now  unarmed  and  sixteen  flank- 
ing howitzers.  These  guns  haA^e  been  ordered  by  the  Hon.  Secretary 
of  War,  and  are  supposed  to  be  under  fabrication.  They  are  urgently 
needed,  as  well  as  others,  at  Fort  Morgan.  The  lack  of  munitions  and 
implements  at  Fort  Gaines  lies  between  the  commander  of  the  post  and 


Not  found. 


746  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  xri. 

that  of  Fort  Morgan.  The  latter  place,  though  insufficiently  supplied 
for  the  exigencies  of  war,  can  well  spare  more  largely  to  the  other.  Most 
likely  General  Withers,  now  in  command,  has  corrected  the  unequal 
ratio  of  distribution.  At  Fort  Gaines  the  guns  are  supplied  with  fric- 
tion-primers. There  are  six  32-i)ounders  bearing  favorably  on  the  land. 
The  Fort  Gaines  channel  is  from  9 to  10  feet  deep. 

D.  LEADBETTER, 

Major  Engineers^  Acting  Chief  of  Bureau, 


New  Orleans,  September  26,  1861. 

To  Secretary  of  War  : 

We  are  ready  to  make  powder  at  once  if  we  get  saltpeter. 

D.  E.  TWIGGS, 

Major- General, 


Richmond,  Va.,  September  26,  1861. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

Louisiana : 

Sir  : Yours  of  the  20th  instant,  containing  a copy  of  a resolution 
which  you  informed  me  was  adopted  by  the  generals  and  some  of  the 
subordinates  of  the  militia  of  Louisiana,  has  been  received.  I concur 
in  your  objection  to  a proposition  for  a board  of  defense  j and  in  rela- 
tion to  the  other  point  would  say  that  long  since  one  of  the  best  officers 
in  the  Engineer  Corps,  and  of  superior  rank  (Maj.  M.  L.  Smith),  was  sent 
to  Louisiana  to  iierform  the  duties  of  chief  engineer  there.  If  from  any 
cause  he  has  been  found  incompetent,  I regret  that  the  evidence  was 
not  laid  before  me,  so  that  he  might  have  been  removed. 

General  Van  Dorn  has  not  communicated  to  me  the  views  which  you 
intrusted  to  him  to  be  orally  delivered ; but  from  various  sources  I have 
learned  that  General  Twiggs  has  proven  unequal  to  his  command.  As 
in  his  selection  I yielded  much  to  the  solicitation  of  the  people  of  New 
Orleans,  I think  they  should  sooner  have  informed  me  of  the  mistake 
they  had  made.  Your  own  recent  letter  was  the  first  information  re- 
ceived by  me.  I have,  however,  directed  Mansfield  Lovell,  who  is  no 
doubt  known  to  you  by  reputation,  to  be  appointed  a brigadier-general, 
and  assigned  to  duty  in  connection  with  the  defenses  of  New  Orleans 
and  the  adjacent  coast.  It  is  some  weeks  since  I met  a committee  from 
your  city,  charged  with  propositions  for  the  defenses  of  New  Orleans, 
and  had  hoped  the  needful  wmrks  for  defense  were  under  construction 
and  repair.  In  the  mean  time  I have  endeavored  to  provide  the  neces- 
sary armament  and  munitions. 

Should  your  worst  apprehensions  be  realized — which  I cannot  bring 
myself  to  believe  when  I remember  how  much  has  been  done  for  the 
defense  of  New  Orleans  since  1815,  both  in  the  construction  of  works 
and  facilities  for  transportation — I hope  a discriminating  public  will 
acquit  this  Government  of  having  neglected  the  defenses  of  your  coast 
and  approaches  to  New  Orleans. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  747 

Montgomery,  September  27,  1801. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

There  is  misapprehension  as  to  my  requisition  for  troops.  It  was  for 
three  regiments,  independent  of  Mobile  organizations,  which  were  only 
considered  for  an  emergency.  If  governor  of  Alabama  cannot  furnish 
the  three,  have  I authority  to  accept  deficiency  from  Mississippi  if  ten- 
dered Answer  to  Mobile. 

J.  M.  WITHERS, 

Brigad ier- Genera  I. 


New  Orleans,  September  27,  1861. 

To  Secretary  of  War: 

Mississippi  troops  on  lake  shore  will  muster  in  for  eleven  months  only. 
Hollins  has  orders  from  Secretary  of  Navy  not  to  turn  over  the  guns  to 
me.  Can  Colonel  Duncan  be  appointed  brigadier-general,  to  report  to 
me  % 

D.  E.  TWIGGS. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  September  27,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Richmond^  Va. : 

No  pork  here  except  amount  mentioned.  What  are  we  to  do  for  our 
volunteers  here  ? Answer. 

THO.  O.  MOORE. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  September  28,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Richmond^  Ya.  : 

My  guns  are  gone — are  all  distributed.  Can  any  be  had  ? I tele- 
graphed you  about  pork  I seized.  Answer. 

THO.  O.  MOORE. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  September  28,  1861. 

His  Excellency  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

Governor  of  Louisiana^  Neiv  Orleans : 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  22d  instant  I am  directed  by  the 
Secretary  of  War  to  say  that  12  tons  of  saltpeter  and  100  kegs  of  pow- 
der have  been  ordered  to  New  Orleans,  in  compliance  with  your  request 
for  those  articles.  The  President  has  written  to  you  relative  to  the 
other  points  touched  upon  in  your  letter.* 

Respectfully,  A.  T.  BLEDSOE, 

Chief  of  Bureau  of  Y^ar. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  September  29,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

My  Dear  Sir:  I have  about  3,500  men  in  camp,  organized  into  com- 
panies, and  three  regiments  formed,  including  the  Thirteenth,  Colonel 


^-Mr.  Davis’  letter  not  found. 


748  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 


Gibson’s,  and  have  not  arms  for  them  all.  I am  now  sorry  that  I ever 
sent  off  so  many,  as  they,  with  the  volunteers  who  took  them  off',  are 
so  occupied  I fear  I shall  not  get  them  back  when  needed.  It  seems 
that  all  will  be  wanted  that  are  in  Virginia,  Tennessee,  Kentucky,  and 
Missouri,  where  they  are  •,  if  so,  we  are  here  certainly  in  rather  an  un- 
pleasant situation,  for  if  we  could  raise  the  men  we  could  not  arm  them. 
Oiir  fortifications  have  progressed  slowly,  it  having  rained  almost  every 
day  since  they  were  commenced,  but  now  we  are  getting  on  more  rap- 
idly, the  weather  improved,  and  more  force  put  on  the  works.  We  are 
much  in  need  of  engineers  and  other  officers,  as  I before  wrote  you.  I 
see  the  necessity  for  them  daily.  General  Twiggs’  age  precludes  the 
possibility  of  his  doing  the  labor  necessary  to  a command  of  the  magni- 
tude and  importance  of  this,  and  an  officer  here  should  be  able  to  visit 
and  inspect  every  place.  Even  were  I possessed  of  the  military  quali- 
fications, with  my  present  official  duties  I could  do  nothing  in  that  way. 
The  raft  was  placed  across  the  river  at  the  forts  on  yesterday,  I think ; 
it  was  all  ready,  and  the  engineer  went  down  to  place  it  three  days 
since,  so  I trust  nothing  can  pass  the  forts. 

We  have  not  heard  of  the  fleet  that  has  left  with  the  20,000  men,  but 
I have  no  doubt,  and  that  is  the  impression  generally,  that  it  is  destined 
to  other  points  besides  Brunswick.  We  can  be  greatly  harassed  here 
on  our  entire  coast,  and  no  doubt  will  be,  and  1 am  kept  constantly 
distressed  at  the  incompetency,  as  I consider,  of  our  commander.  If 
anything  is  to  be  done  here  you  must  send  us  officers  and  more  arms. 
The  Fourth  Eegiment,  I trust,  will  not  be  sent  off',  but  that  it  will  be 
brought  over.  Cannot  General  Dahlgren  take  care  of  the  lake  coast 
I fear  he  is  not  the  man  that  should  be  there. 

I am  now  waiting  for  the  saltpeter,  as  I am  informed  the  mill  is 
ready,  but  everything  by  rail  moves  so  slow,  so  slow.  I have  had  Major 
Eamsey  to  dispatch  the  whole  line  to  forward  it  as  fast  as  possible.  The 
amount  of  powder  here  is  very  small  compared  to  what  is  necessary,  and 
a knowledge  of  that  fact  keeps  up  a constant  excitement  among  our 
people. 

I,  uotwithstandiug  your  advice  to  the  contrary,  seized  the  pork  in  the 
eity,  and  telegraphed  you  (but  have  had  no  reply),  and  shall  hold  it, 
unless  requested  by  you  to  act  otherwise,  as  I see  no  way  to  feed  our 
troops  without  it,  but  hope  you  do,  as  your  advice  was  to  that  eff'ect. 
Write  me  fully  on  that  point. 

Is  the  Government  doing  anything  to  clothe  and  shoe  our  troops  ? I 
do  not  learn  that  it  is.  I have  sent  a suit  of  clothes  and  underclothes, 
blankets,  and  shoes  to  our  regiment  in  Missouri,  and  blankets  for  our 
entire  force  in  Virginia,  and  clothing  for  the  First  and  Second  Eegi- 
ments,  with  shoes  also  for  the  whole  force,  but  provision  ought  to  be 
made  for  another  pair  of  shoes,  as  some  of  those  I sent  I fear  will  not 
last  very  well,  but  they  were  the  best  to  be  had. 

Have  arrangements  been  made  by  the  Government  for  arms  in  Eu- 
rope ? Certainly  arms  ought  to  have  been  procured  before  this.  I have 
about  1,(100  in  Havana,  and  have  $150,000  in  England  to  purchase  more. 
The  only  trouble  is  to  get  them  here.  Caunot  Mr.  Slidell,  who  leaves 
soon,  give  some  aid  and  advice  in  the  matter?  He  knows  the  parties 
acting  for  me.  I expect  something  done,  indeed  everything  that  is  nec- 
essary for  us,  for  I have  tried  to  do  so  for  the  Confederacy.  I hardly 
know  what  I have  written,  I am  so  constant! 3"  troubled  by  visitors  on 
business. 

Yours,  truly. 


THO.  O.  MOOEE. 


749 


Chap.  XYL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

New  Orleans,  La.,  September  20,  1801. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Ben.tamin, 

Richmond^  Va. : 

I seized  pork  against  your  advice.  Will  release  it  not  want(‘d.  Gen- 
erals not  arrived.  Have  not  arms  for  volunteers  in  camj).  Have  you 
any?  Wbat  am  I to  do?  Answer. 

THO.  O.  MOORE. 


Richmond,  Va.,  September  30,  1861. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

I can  conceive  no  possible  reason  for  seizing  pork  and  cannot  ai>- 
prove  it.  There  is  an  abundance  of  food  in  our  country,  and  private 
rights  ought  not  to  be  invaded  except  in  cases  of  necessity  for  public 
defense. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  September  30,  1801. 

General  David  E.  Twiggs, 

New  Orleans: 

Do  not  accept  the  Mississippi  troops  for  less  than  twelve  months, 
unless  they  are  simply  for  local  defense,  under  law  passed  last  session. 
Captain  Hollins  was  only  ordered  to  turn  over  to  you  a single  rifled  gun 
as  a model  for  rifling  other  guns  at  the  foundery.  If  he  refuses  this, 
let  me  know.  Terry  has  already  been  ordered  to  join  General  Johnston 
with  his  regiment.  Do  as  you  please  about  assigning  Higgins  to  ord- 
nance duty.  It  is  said  here  that  young  Palfrey,  recommended  by  you 
for  your  staff,  is  not  twenty-one  years  old.  If  this  is  so  he  cannot  be 
appointed  an  officer  in  the  Army. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  Va.,  September  30,  1861. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans,  La.: 

Your  several  dispatches  about  arms  and  generals  received.  Pray  have 
a little  patience.  I am  doing  the  best  I can  with  the  means  at  my  dis- 
posal, and  you  do  not  allow  me  time  to  concert  the  arrangements  neces- 
sary to  satisfy  you.  In  two  or  three  days  I will  inform  you  fully  of 
what  is  to  be  done. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


’ 750  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Abstract  from  field  return  of  troops  of  the  Confederate  States  near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  Maj. 
Gen.  Braxton  Bragg  commanding,  for  October  1,  1861. 


Commands. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

OflBcers. 

Men. 

"RvigailA 

150 

125 

2 

4 

2,  778 
2, 061 
76 
51 

3,  686 
2,  008 
94 
55 

(AnnArann’s)  UrifyailA  

A laha.ma,  Mounted  Rifles  (Jenkins)  .......................................... 

W f»1tuTi  O-ufl.rrla  (MePheraon) 

Total 

281 

4,  966 

6,533 

Kew  Orleans,  October  4,  1861. 

To  Secretary  of  War: 

Black  Eepublicans  assembling  a fleet  at  Head  of  Passes.  The  Eich- 
mond,  a sloop  of  war,  a schooner,  a captured  pilot-boat,  and  the  Water 
Witch  were  there  yesterday  evening.  I will  send  some  powder  and  re- 
enforcements to  Colonel  Duncan  immediately.  I do  not  think  Fort  Jack- 
son  is  the  point  that  will  be  attacked.  I ^vill  try  to  be  ready  to  meet 
them  at  all  points. 

D.  E.  TWIGGS. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  October  7,  1861. 

Capt.  S.  H.  Lockett, 

Corps  of  Engineers^  Mobile^  Ala. : 

Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  1st  instant  has  been  received.*  The  com- 
manding general  being  responsible  for  the  defense,  he  decides  what 
works  shall  be  built  and  when.  Your  own  responsibility  ends  when 
\ your  views  have  been  made  known  to  him  officially. 

With  regard  to  armament,  I had  supposed  that  having  the  Secretary’s 
order  for  thirty  guns  from  North  Carolina  we  were  sure  to  get  them,  but 
there  is  no  hope  in  that  quarter.  From  present  appearances  I would 
not  recommend  you  to  rely  on  getting  any  more  heavy  guns  or  carriages 
from  this  quarter.  The  demands  from  all  directions  are  urgent,  and  the 
Secretar^^  says  he  cannot  give  what  he  has  not  got.  If  you  do  not  get 
heavy  guns  for  the  remaining  bastions  of  Fort  Gaines — and  I see  no 
probability  of  getting  them — you  will  have  to  mount  a rifled  32  in  each. 
If  the  flank  guns  fail  (and  I can  gain  no  information  of  them)  you  had 
better  fasten  the  embrasure  shutters  flrmly,  and  make  a loop-hole  for 
musketry  in  each.  Of  course  j^ou  will  have  the  guns  rifled  for  Grant’s 
Pass,  and  another  gun  ought  to  be  added  there.  When  Heft,  the  maga- 
zine at  that  place  was  not  sufficiently  covered. 

I see  you  have  had  a broadside.  One  heavy  rifled  gun  left  on  the  3d. 
Very  truly,  yours, 

D.  LEADBETTEE, 

Major  Engineers.,  Acting  Chief  of  Bureau. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XVI.J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


751 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  173.  ( Richmond^  Fa.,  October  7,  18G1. 

******* 

IX.  The  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  Provisional  Army,  is 
extended  to  embrace  the  coast  and  State  of  Alabama. 

******* 

Bv  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

JXO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- GeneraL 


General  Orders,  ) • Headquarters  Troops  of  C.  S., 

No.  110.  ] Near  Pensacola^  Fla.j  October  12,  1861. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  Provisional  Army,  is  relieved  from  duty 

ith  this  command,  and  will  proceed  to  New  Orleans,  and  report  to 

Major-General  Twiggs,  in  conformity  to  special  orders  from  the  War 
Department. 

The  regret  of  the  commanding  general  in  parting  with  General  Rug- 
gles, whose  labors  have  been  so  untiring  and  efficient  with  this  army, 
is  lessened  hy  the  knowledge  of  his  transfer  to  a more  extended  field  in 
Louisiana,  where  he  is  commended  to  the  confidence  of  many  friends. 

II.  Brigadier-General  Gladden,  Provisional  Army,  is  assigned  to  the 
First  (Ruggles’)  Brigade.  Col.  J.  Patton  Anderson  is  relieved  from  the 
command  of  his  regiment,  the  First  Florida,  and  will  relieve  Brigadier- 
General  Gladden  in  command  of  the  Second  (Anderson’s)  Brigade. 

III.  The  habit  again  growing  up  in  the  army  of  an  indiscriminate 
waste  of  ammunition  must  be  discontinued.  No  guns  will  be  loaded 
except  on  the  advanced  and  beach  picket  guards,  and  their  guns  will  be 
discharged  at  a target  the  next  morning  at  sunrise  under  their  respect- 
ive officers.  The  discharge  of  a gun  at  any  other  hour  will  subject  the 
offender  to  arrest  and  trial.  Captain  Jenkins’  company,  mounted  vol- 
unteers, will  patrol  the  camps  of  the  whole  army  for  the  enforcement  ot 
this  order,  and  all  officers  will  be  held  accountable  for  any  infringement. 
Not  only  our  success  but  our  safety  depends  on  a preservation  of  our 
very  limited  supply  of  ammunition. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg : 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


War  Department, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  October  13,  1861. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans^  La.  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I snatch  a moment  this  (Sunday)  evening  to  answer 
your  favor  of  the  29th  ultimo.  Matters  have  been  so  changed  since  the 
date  of  that  letter  that  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  do  more  than  say  that 
I have  used  every  effort  in  my  power  to  put  [youj  in  such  a position  as 
shall  allay  all  fears  relative  to  the  defenses  of  New  Orleans. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  a brilliant,  energetic,  and  accomplished 
officer,  has  been  assigned  to  the  command  of  your  department.  Powder, 
saltpeter,  and  cannon  have  been  forwarded,  and  will  be  still  further  sup- 
plied as  fast  as  they  can  be  possibly  spared,  and  the  recent  gallant  dash 


752  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

of  Captain  Ilollins  at  the  blockading  fleet  must  have  infused  new  life 
and  spirit  into  our  people. 

The  Government  is  fast  i)roviding,  to  the  extent  of  its  ability,  shoes 
and  clothing  for  our  troops,  and  is  greatly  relieved  in  this  herculean  task 
by  the  patriotic  and  generous  aid  of  just  such  governors  of  States  as 
our  own  Tom  Moore. 

I am  sure  you  will  be  persuaded  that  nothing  I can  do  shall  be  left 
undone  for  the  defense  of  Louisiana,  while  you  would  not  wish,  I am 
equally  sure,  that  I should  neglect  the  defenses  of  other  points  of  im- 
portance in  order  to  concentrate  all  our  resources  in  NTew  Orleans  alone. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

J.  P.  BEXJAMIY. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Ala.  and  West  Fla., 

No.  1.  ♦ Near  Pensacola^  Fla.,  October  14,  18G1. 

I.  The  command  of  Major-General  Bragg,  extended  by  Special  Orders, 
No.  173,  Adjutant-GeneraFs  Oflice,  October  7, 18G1,  to  include  the  coast 
and  State  of  Alabama,  will  be  known  as  the  Department  of  Alabama 
and  West  Florida.  A ll  returns  and  reports  from  troops  stationed  therein 
will  be  rendered  to  the  headquarters,  near  Pensacola. 

II.  The  following  officers  compose  the  staff  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding : 

1.  Maj.  George  G.  Garner,  assistant  adjutant-general. 

2.  First  Lieut.  Towson  Ellis,  aide-de-camp. 

3.  First  Lieut.  J.  E.  Slaughter,  acting  inspector-general. 

4.  Capt.  W.  B.  Boggs,  chief  of  engineers  and  artillery. 

5.  Capt.  H.  Oladowski,  chief  of  ordnance. 

6.  Maj.  L.  W.  O’Bannon,  chief  quartermaster. 

7.  Capt.  Thomas  M.  Jones,  chief  of  subsistence  and  paymaster. 

8.  Surg.  A.  J.  Foard,  medical  director. 

9.  First  Lieut.  H.  W.  Walter,  acting  judge-advocate. 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Withers  will  continue  in  the  execution  of  his 
present  command,  to  be  known  as  the  District  of  Alabama. 

####### 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg : 

GEO.  G.  GAENEE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General 


\ 

New  Orleans,  La.,  October  14, 1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Ya.: 

We  want  muskets  without  delay.  Send  us  some. 

THO.  O.  MOOEE. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  October  16, 1861. 


Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans,  La.: 

Will  send  you  the  very  first  muskets  that  I can  dispose  of. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


753 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond j Fa.,  October  18,  1861. 

Col.  J.  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance : 

Dear  Sir:  Fort  Gaines,  at  Mobile,  Ala.,  yet  requires  for  its  arma- 
ment sixteen  24-pouncler  howitzers  and  carriages  for  tlank  casemate 
defense.  Three  of  its  bastions  are  yet  without  guns  in  barbette,  and 
require  a columbiad  in  each — say  three  8-inch  columbiads,  with  barbette 
carriages. 

Very  trulv,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  LEADBETTER, 

Major  Engmeers,  Acting  Chief  of  Bureau, 


Headquarters  Department  ISTo.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  October  18,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : As  this  city,  the  first  in  importance  in  the  Confederacy,  has 
been  greatly  drained  of  arms,  ammunition,  medical  stores,  clothing, 
and  supplies  for  other  points,  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  the  heads 
of  bureaus  be  requested  to  order  nothing  further  of  that  description  to 
be  forwarded  from  here  until  we  have  provided  ourselves  with  a fair 
supply  for  the  force  required  for  the  defense  of  this  city.  Anything 
that  in  my  judgment  could  be  spared  I would  readily  send  forward ; 
but  it  will  require  great  exertions  to  put  ourselves  in  a proper  state  of 
defense,  and  nothing  should  be  diverted  from  that  purpose  until  the  object 
is  gained.  The  actual  state  of  preparation  I shall  not  put  on  paper. 

When  companies  or  regiments  enlisted  for  twelve  months  have  been 
in  service  under  State  authority  for  a portion  of  the  time  and  are  then 
transferred  to  the  Confederate  service,  persistent  objection  is  made  in 
some  instances  to  being  mustered  for  a longer  period  than  the  balance 
of  the  original  twelve  months.  Most  of  these  have  fully  nine  months 
to  serve,  and  as  the  fate  of  New  Orleans  for  this  season  must  be  settled 
within  that  time,  I shall  not  stand  upon  that  point,  unless  you  direct 
me  by  telegraph  to  do  so. 

I am  greatly  in  need  of  two  things,  viz,  an  assistant  adjutant-general, 
acquainted  with  the  details  of  office  matters,  forms,  &c.,  who  can  in- 
struct the  volunteers  and  keep  the  records  in  such  shape  that  claims 
may  be  settled  at  some  indefinite  future  i^eriod,  and  some  saltpeter  for 
the  manufacture  of  powder.  While  the  first  would  greatly  facilitate 
matters  here,  it  is  not  indispensable;  the  latter  is. 

We  are  daily  expecting  funds,  without  which  we  cannot  get  on  a great 
while. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General  J Commanding, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Troops  Confederate  States,  * 

No.  120.  i Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  October  22,  1861. 

The  major-general  commanding,  intending  to  be  absent  for  a few  days 
on  a tour  of  inspection,  the  command  of  the  troops  at  and  near  Pensa- 
48  R R— VOL  VI 


754  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

cola  will  devolve  upon  Brigadier-General  Gladden,  pending  the  disa- 
bility of  Brig.  Gen.  E.  H.  Anderson. 

The  official  designation  of  the  forces  at  and  near  Pensacola  will  in 
future  be,  Army  of  Pensacola.” 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg; 

GEO.  G.  GAENEE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


New  Orleans,  La.,  October  23,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 


Is  it  impossible  to  give  us  powder  or  saltpeter  in  quantity  imme- 
diately ? 


M.  LOVELL. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  October  23,  1861. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La,: 

We  calculate  that  we  have  sent  in  powder  and  saltpeter  to  New 
Orleans  withiu  the  last  month  the  equivalent  of  500  barrels  of  powder, 
to  be  added  to  the  stock  previously  on  hand.  We  can  spare  no  more 
at  present  without  urgent  necessity.  Telegraph  me  what  your  whole 
supply  is. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  C.  S.  A., 

New  Orleans^  La.,  October  25 j 1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War: 

Dear  Sir  : I have  received  your  telegram  relative  to  the  amount  of 
powder  and  saltpeter  sent  to  this  point  within  the  past  month,  but 
think  it  hardly  advisable  to  make  known  our  deficiency  through  the 
telegraph  office. 

Your  dispatch  says  that  ^‘the  equivalent  of  500  barrels  of  powder 
has  been  sent  here  within  a month.”  I find  no  correct  returns  of  ord- 
nance and  ordnance  stores  from  the  various  posts,  but  have  sent  a cir- 
cular calling  for  them,  and  am  getting  them  in.  I know  that  the  acting 
ordnance  officer  has  several  invoices  of  powder  which  have  not  yet  come 
to  hand.  Admit,  however,  that  we  have  500  barrels.  We  have  now  at 
the  various  forts  and  approaches  210  guns  in  position  and  about  100 
more  that  we  shall  soon  have  in  place,  giving  in  all  310  guns  of  the 
caliber  of  a 24-pounder  and  upwards.  The  average  charge,  large  and 
small,  will  be  8 pounds  for  each  gun,  or  2,480  pounds  for  a siugle  round 
apiece.  Five  hundred  barrels  contains  50,000  pounds,  which  would  give 
us  20  rounds  per  gun,  not  more  than  enough  for  an  hour’s  fight;  but 
the  powder  received  from  Memphis  was  quite  worthless.  More  than 
30  barrels  invoiced  to  us  have  not  arrived,  and  we  loaned  Commodore 
' Hollins  the  powder  with  which  he  made  his  attack  upon  the  vessels 
above  the  passes  a few  days  since.  We  have  therefore  less  than  20 
rounds  per  gun. 

I am  hurrying  into  operation  two  mills  which  will  give  us  6,000  or 
8,000  pounds  per  day  if  we  can  get  saltpeter,  and  have  sent  an  agent 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  755 

to  contract  for  working  some  of  tlie  idle  salt])eter  caves  in  the  adjoining 
States.  Of  sulphur  and  charcoal  we  have  a sni)ply. 

The  want  of  powder  is  our  only  glaring  deticiency.  I do  not  allow 
an  ounce  to  be  burned  unnecessarily,  and  am  straining  every  nerve  to 
add  to  our  supply.  If  I can  get  saltpeter,  and  the  enemy  will  give  us 
a few  weeks,  which  I think  he  Avill  do,  we  shall  be  pretty  well  prepared 
to  defeat  him.  With  100  rounds  per  gun  I should  feel  pretty  safe. 
Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General^  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Departjuent  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Mobile,  October  25,  1861. 

Adjutant-General  C.  .S.  Army, 

llichmond : 

Sir:  As  indicated  in  my  dispatch  of  the  22d,  I left  Pensacola  that 
night,  and  arrived  here  on  the  23d.  After  a long  and  free  interview 
with  General  Withers  on  the  state  of  his  command,  it  was  arranged  to 
visit  the  defenses,  which  was  done  yesterday. 

A small  battery  is  being  erected  on  iiiles  at  the  junction  of  Mobile 
and  Tensas  Kivers,  not  far  from  the  city,  which  may  have  a beneticial 
effect  in  preventing  boat  expeditions  should  the  enemy  enter  the  ba3^ 

At  Grant’s  Pass  a small  earthwork  has  been  erected,  and  furnished 
with  three  guns  and  a garrison  of  one  company.  This  is  probably  suf- 
ficient for  the  purpose  of  keeping  this  pass  open  to  our  steamers  still 
allowed  to  run  to  Slew  Orleans.  As  the  place  is  not  susceptible  of  suc- 
cessful defense  against  any  large  attacking  force,  I directed  the  hull  of 
an  old  vessel  we  own  here  to  be  heavily  ballasted  and  anchored  there, 
ready  to  close  the  pass  at  a moment’s  notice,  and  a practicable  ford  to 
be  staked  out  by  which  the  garrison  can  reach  the  main- land. 

Fort  Gaines  is  rapidly  approaching  a condition  for  strong  defense, 
•but  is  almost  destitute  of  guns  and  ammunition.  Demands  long  since 
made  for  both  meet  no  response.  It  is  of  little  or  no  importance  except 
to  prevent  the  enemy  from  using  the  island  against  us,  being  about  2.J 
miles  from  the  channel.  With  a view  of  preventing  a landing  on  the 
island  an  outwork  is  in  progress,  some  3 miles  oft,  and  masked  by  inter- 
vening woods.  Deeming  this  a weakness,  by  dispersing  our  forces  and 
armament,  I directed  its  discontinuance.  The  completion  of  the  fort 
will  be  pushed  vigorously,  and  the  armament  increased  as  rapidly  as 
possible.  Two  large  brick  buildings,  three  stories  high,  built  inside  the 
fort,  apparently  as  a mark  for  the  enemy’s  fire,  to  mask  the  field  of  our 
guns,  or  to  furnish  splinters  and  brickbats  for  the  destruction  of  the 
garrison,  I have  directed  to  be  demolished  at  once.  The  temporary 
quarters,  of  wood,  badly  located  and  much  dispersed,  are  to  be  concen- 
trated in  a proper  position. 

Fort  Morgan  is  in  a better  condition,  though  not  half  armed,  and  with 
a very  limited  supply  of  ammunition.  In  rough  weather,  and  especially 
during  the  north  winds  of  winter,  boats  cannot  land  at  the  wharf  at  this 
])ost.  Another  wharf  is  being  constructed  some  3 miles  off',  at  Xavy 
Cove,  and  a railroad  laid  to  it  from  the  fort.  Three  sand  batteries  are 
being  constructed  for  the  defense  of  this  position.  Fort  Morgan  is  the 
key  to  Mobile  Bay,  and  must  be  held  with  a heavy  armament  and  ample 
suiiplies.  I shall  at  once  reduce  my  position  at  Pensacola  to  one  cf 


756  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  ANP  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

defense  strictly,  and  send  what  can  be  spared  to  this  point,  though  it 
will  be  totally  inadequate  to  the  wants  here. 

The  safety  of  this  position  is  in  the  enemy’s  ignorance,  if  he  be  igno- 
rant, for  they  seem  to  get  late  and  correct  information  from  us  by  illicit 
means  through  our  own  people.  It  m^y  be  that  the  very  state  of  affairs 
so  long  existing  on  the  Gulf  has  called  out  his  heavy  expedition  not  yet 
heard  from,  and  which  may  strike  us  at  any  moment  without  warning. 
We  must  at  every  hazard  force  him  to  land  aud  fight  us  in  the  open 
field.  For  this  we  are  well  prepared  at  Pensacola,  except  in  light  artil- 
lery, for  which  the  Ordnance  Department  has  persistently  promised 
and  as  persistently  withheld  all  supplies.  Here  we  are  equally  deficient 
in  that  and  not  very  well  off*  with  infantry,  but  in  both  we  possess  some 
elements  of  improvement  not  heretofore  available  to  me.  I shall  at  once 
commence  the  manufacture  of  artillery  harness,  carriages,  guns,  and 
ammunition  at  tliis  point,  and  hope  soon  to  increase  our  efficiency — or 
rather  decrease  our  inefficiency — in  this  essential  arm.  We  need  more 
cavalry  for  defensive  operations  at  both  points,  but  it  is  useless  to  call 
for  them  unless  we  are  assured  of  arms. 

A recent  order  from  General  Pillow,  if  we  are  correctly  informed, 
will  paralyze  this  arm  of  our  service,  if  it  does  not  starve  us  all  out.  A 
heavy  rise  in  the  provision  market  is  already  the  result  of  this  unfor- 
tunate move.  With  a rigid  blockade  in  front  and  a stringeiff;  embargo 
behind  on  both  provisions  and  munitions  we  occupy  rather  a perilous 
position.  It  may  be  well  to  inform  the  author  of  this  move  of  our  pres- 
ence here  and  of  the  fact  that  we  are  engaged  in  the  same  cause  with 
himself.  I inclose  the  report  of  Mr.  Hessee,  quartermaster’s  agent  here, 
on  this  subject.  We  are  confidently  assured  of  railroad  connection 
within  three  weeks  hence  to  Pensacola.  This  will  greatly  increase  our 
ability  to  meet  an  attack  on  either  place.  With  unity  of  sentiment  and 
concert  of  action  between  the  commanders  mutual  aid  could  be  received 
and  given  with  great  celerity  between  this  and  the  department  west; 
but  one  common  superior,  if  the  Government  has  an  officer  of  the  requi- 
site rank,  would  more  effectually  secure  the  same  object,  and  greatly 
strengthen  the  defenses  of  the  whole  Gulf  coast.  On  this  point  I sub- 
mit a communication,  indorsed  by  Brigadier-General  Withers,  in  regard 
to  a telegraph  line  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad.  I shall  encourage 
its  construction.  Our  lines  on  the  coast  can  be  destroyed  at  any  time 
by  the  enemy. 

Would  it  not  be  more  healthful  and  comfortable,  and  equally  as  cheap, 
to  concentrate  near  this  place  and  Pensacola  the  unarmed  regiments  in 
Alabama  in  suitable  camps  of  instruction,  where  they  could  be  ready  to 
receive  the  arms  of  the  twelve-months’  men  soon  to  be  discharged? 
They  might  be  learning  the  artillery  drill,  too,  which  they  cannot  do 
where  they  are.  The  discharges  will  commence  in  three  months,  and 
the  subject  is  worthy  of  early  attention.  The  effort  to  raise  troops  here 
for  local  defense,  sedentary  militia,  is  working  badly,  and  should  be 
abolished  everywhere.  Whenever  we  can  get  arms  we  can  get  men  for 
the  war  unconditionally.  The  two  regiments  of  Colonels  Buck  and  Grnw- 
ford  have  consented  to  change  their  times  and  tenure  of  service,  and  are 
mustered  in  for  twelve  months. 

Brigadier-General  Withers  is  laboring  hard  and  successfully.  He 
has  very  properly  suspended  the  grand  scheme  for  squandering  money 
by  digging  ditches  around  the  city,  which  would  have  required  40,000 
men  to  defend  them,  and  has  concentrated  his  means  and  labor  on  im- 
portant points  requiring  the  promptest  attention  and  all  his  resources. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


757 


I shall  have  to  spare  him  a part  of  my  regular  officers  from  Pensacola, 
as  his  need  is  great  and  pressing.  I shall  return  to  Pensacola  to-morrow. 
I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major-General,  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 
Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  October  28,  18G1. 
Adjutant-General  0.  S.  Army, 

Biclimond,  Ya.: 

Sir  : I arrived  here  yesterday  from  Mobile,  and  find  no  change  to 
report.  The  enemy  is  in  a constant  state  of  excitement  on  Santa  Rosa, 
and  has  frequent  alarms.  He  has  moved  artillery  up  the  island  to  our 
landing  place  of  the  late  expedition.  General  Withers^  command  needs 
much  to  put  it  in  an  efficient  condition.  He  has  about  4,200  troops — 
which  should  be  increased  to  6,000 — mostly  raw,  and  inefficiently  organ- 
ized, armed,  and  equipped,  and  very  destitute  of  military  instructors. 
The  positions  of  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines  and  Grant’s  Pass  are  occupied 
by  his  best  troops,  about  2,000,  and  in  close  proximity.  The  two  senior 
officers  commanding  at  the  forts  are  very  competent,  but  sadly  addicted 
to  drinking,  and  therefore  unsafe  for  those  exposed  positions.  The  Gen- 
eral cannot  remain  there  and  discharge  his  other  duties,  though  he  will 
visit  them  frequently.  The  remainder  of  his  command,  except  two  de- 
tached companies,  will  be  concentrated  in  a suitable  camp  on  the  west 
of  Mobile  Bay,  and  some  15  or  20  miles  below  the  city,  where  they  will 
be  away  from  dissipation,  can  be  cheaply  supplied,  and  will  be  available 
for  any  attack.  These  two  positions  require  commanders  of  military 
knowledge  and  experience  and  capacity  for  command. 

First  Lieut.  J.  E.  Slaughter,  acting  inspector-general  j Capt.  W.  R. 
Boggs,  Engineers  j Lieut.  Gol.  J.  B.  Villepigue,  Georgia  and  Mississippi 
regiment,  and  Maj.  L.  W.  O’Bannon,  quartermaster,  furnish  material 
from  which  the  President  might  select  two  ‘brigadiers  for  those  impor- 
tant positions,  I can  very  well  fill  the  vacancies  on  my  staff  from  well- 
instructed  volunteers,  except  in  the  Engineers.  Should  Colonel  Yille- 
l>igue  receive  one  of  the  appointments,  one  of  the  others  might  fill  his 
vacancy.  I shall  order  First  Lieut.  G.  W.  Holt,  0.  S.  Army,  to  report 
to  General  Withers,  at  Mobile,  as  depot  quartermaster  there,  and  dis- 
charge the  agent  now  on  that  duty.  Lieutenant  Holt  deserves  and 
should  receive  promotion.  First  Lieutenant  Hallonquist,  C.  S.  artil- 
lery, will  also  be  ordered  to  report  to  General  Withers,  as  chief  of 
artillery.  As  that  command  has  several  companies  of  light  artillery,  I 
suggest  his  appointment  as  major  of  them.  Promotion  could  not  fall 
on  a more  gallant  or  efficient  officer.  If  it  could  be  arranged  so  that 
Brigadier  General  Ruggles  could  be  my  second  in  command  here,  or 
could  assume  my  local  duties,  my  services  could  be  much  more  efficient, 
and  from  the  hold  he  has  on  the  confidence  and  affection  of  the  troops 
here  I know  the  consequences  feared  by  the  Department  in  my  removal 
would  not  ensue.  I should  still  be  much  with  them. 

I am,  sir,  verv  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


758  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVl. 

O’Bannonville,  October  29,  1861. 

Geiieral  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  : 

In  Tiew  of  tbe  heavy  expedition  now  on  its  way  South,  we  should 
develop  all  our  resources.  One  regiment  here  and  one  at  Mobile  can 
be  armed  by  using  arms  of  the  sick  and  disabled.  Gan  they  be  sent 
from  Huntsville  ? We  have  efficient  light  artillery.  For  want  of  sup- 
plies we  have  less  than  2,000  effective  men  at  Mobile  outside  of  the  forts. 

BEAXTOK  BEAGG. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond j October  29,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans : 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  18th  instant  was  not  received  till  yesterday,  28th. 
I telegraphed  you  to-day  that  we  have  no  power  to  receive  troops  for 
less  than  twelve  months,  but  where  troops  offer  themselves  speciaUy  for 
local  defense  they  may  be  accepted  in  any  proportion  and  for  any  term, 
as  they  are  a mere  improvised  militia,  not  entitled  to  pay  or  subsistence 
except  during  actual  service.  (See  act  of  21st  August,  Xo.  229,  of  third 
session.) 

I cannot  restrain  the  heads  of  bureaus  from  purchasing  or  forwarding 
supplies  from  Xew  Orleans.  This  interference  with  commerce  exceeds 
my  power  except  in  case  of  extreme  urgency.  I much  prefer  that  you 
should  make  requisitions  for  everything  in  the  way  of  supply  that  you 
need,  and  have  your  purchases  made  in  Xew  Orleans,  and  thus  it  is  easy 
to  prevent  the  removal  from  the  city  of  what  is  required  for  its  defense 
without  infringing  on  the  rights  of  any  one. 

I anxiously  await  your  letter  about  the  supply  of  powder  and  salt- 
peter. I cannot  conceive  what  has  become  of  the  quantity  recently  sent 
to  Xew  Orleans,  say  within  the  last  six  weeks.  I hope  your  demand  for 
supply  was  based  on  erroneous  information  from  persons  who  did  not 
know  the  facts. 

I have  ordered  a youug  officer,  said  to  be  of  high  merit  as  an  engineer, 
to  report  to  you — First  Lieutenant  Cunningham,  just  appointed  in  artil- 
lery, with  a view  to  assign  him  to  Engineer  Corps  if  he  proves  as  com- 
petent as  represented. 

I am  much  gratified  to  learn  from  different  sources  that  you  have 
succeeded  in  inspiring  general  confidence  in  Xew  Orleans,  thereby  justi- 
fying the  confidence  reposed  by  the  Government  in  yourself. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIX, 
Aeting  Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 
Near  Pensacola^  Fla.j  October  30,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War^  Richmond^  Ya.: 

Sir  : On  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  6th  instant  a short  reply  was 
made  to  the  first  point  and  a further  one  promised  on  the  main  subject. 

Though  very  grateful  to  my  wounded  feelings,  yours  was  not  entirely 
satisfactory  to  me,  nor  to  those  on  whose  behalf  I had  presumed  to  com- 


Chap  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  759 

])lain.  I now  propose  to  controvert  your  positions,  knowing  the  danger 
1 encounter. 

Nothing,  it  seems,  can  be  done  for  my  neglected  officers  under  the 
legislation  as  it  now  exists.  How  does  it  happen  that  so  much  has  been 
done  for  others,  their  juniors,  under  this  same  legislation  ? You  ac- 
knowledge this  in  your  letter.  You  admit  one  case  in  Colonel  Wheeler. 
Others  present  themselves  to  my  mind.  A private  in  one  of  my  com- 
])anies,  a gentleman  of  high  attainments  and  merit,  onl^"  equaled  by  his 
modesty,  was  offered  the  colonelcy  of  a regiment.  He  declined  it  in 
favor  of  one  of  my  regular  officers,  but  saying,  If  civilians  must  be 
aj)pointed,  then  I will  accept.”  He  was  at  once  commissioned,  and 
removed  from  a position  he  adorned  on  my  staff  to  one  he  was  unpre- 
])ared  to  fill.  He  will  in  time  make  a fine  officer,  but  those  he  i)referred 
seeing  appoiuted  were  already  made.  Other  regiments  raised  at  the 
same  time  were  officered  by  civilians  in  the  same  way.  AU  of  my  staff 
officers  here  of  the  old  Eegular  Army,  the  first  to  quit  it,  some  even 
before  their  States  seceded,  were  allowed  to  rest  in  subordinate  positions, 
while  their  inferiors  in  rank,  of  the  eleventh-hour  converts  and  civilians, 
were  placed  over  their  heads.  Certainly  the  legislation  of  Congress  never 
required  this.  You  now  propose  that  whenever  I can  spare  them  you 
will  find  means  to  give  them  increased  rank  in  the  Provisional  Army. 
I will  not  spare  them  if  I can  help  it,  nor  are  they  desirous  of  leaving 
me,  but  I claim  consideration  for  them  equal  to  that  accorded  to  their 
inferiors  in  other  armies.  My  officers  and  myself  have  remained  at  our 
posts  faithfully  laboring  in  the  cause  we  so  early  espoused.  We  have 
not  united  in  the  On  to  Eichmond,”  seeking  high  places.  We  considered 
it  unmilitary  and  unbecoming.  We  were  ardently  serving  the  cause, 
not  ourselves,  but,  nevertheless,  we  did  not  suppose  our  Government 
would  so  soon  forget  we  were  in  its  service  and  degrade  us.  This  state 
of  things,  my  dear  sir,  we  believe  has  been  brought  about  to  some  extent 
without  the  knowledge  of  the  President  and  against  his  wishes,  but  it 
is  nevertheless  a rankling  sore,  which  he  only  can  cure.  I am  candid, 
perhaps  harsh,  but  I am  doing  him  more  service  than  by  permitting  the 
evil  to  grow  while  he  is  in  ignorance.  I do  not  hesitate  to  say,  im- 
pugn the  action  of  your  predecessor.”  He  has  done  the  service  more 
harm  in  the  Cabinet  than  he  will  ever  repair  in  the  field. 

Let  me  now  appeal  to  you  for  an  old  brother  soldier,  who  is  more 
aggrieved  and  with  more  cause  than  any  of  us.  Brigadier-General 
Euggles  first  reported  to  me  as  second  in  command  under  the  impres- 
sion derived  from  the  Adjutant  General,  and  I believed  it  from  the  pre- 
cedence given  his  name  in  his  order.  We  soon  learned  that  Brigadier- 
General  Anderson,  his  junior  by  many  years  in  the  old  service,  and  it 
is  no  disparagement  to  say  very  far  his  inferior  as  a soldier,  was  his 
senior  in  rank.  General  Euggles,  soon  after  raising  this  question,  was 
ordered  to  New  Orleans,  as  a means,  we  hoped,  of  removing  this  cause 
of  complaint.  What  was  his  and  our  dismay,  then,  to  learn  that  another 
junior,  just  from  the  enemy,  who  had  been  up  to  a late  hour  lecturing 
them  on  the  art  and  science  of  war,  was  promoted  over  his  head,  and 
assigned  to  a command  the  highest  and  most  important  in  the  Southern 
country.  That  command  includes  my  home  and  fireside,  and  all  that  is 
dear  to  me  in  life.  I can  appreciate  the  feeling  of  sullen  dissatisfaction 
which  pervades  my  neighbors.  The  appointee  is  competent,  but  he  does 
not  and  cannot  possess  the  confidence  of  many  who  look  with  distrust  on 
his  eleventh-hour  conversion.  A great  element  of  strength  is  thus  lost 
to  us.  You  will  never  preserve  the  morale  of  this  army  by  thus  degrad- 
ing the  commanders  they  so  much  admire  and  love.  The  feeling  of  dis- 


760  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

content  has  reached  the  rank  and  file  intelligent  enough  to  read  and 
digest  these  things,  and  where  I expected  to  re-enlist  hundreds  for  the 
war  tens  cannot  be  found.  They  will  not  abandon  the  cause,  but  will 
try  and  find  a service  less  obscure  and  more  appreciated — one  in  which 
their  commanders  possess  sufficiently  the  confidence  of  the  Government 
to  justify  them  in  expecting  more  consideration. 

The  result  of  all  your  deliberations  has  not  been  to  preserve  the 
morale  of  this  army.  Soldiers  who  have  confidence  in  and  respect  for 
their  commanders  are  never  demoralized  by  seeing  them  advanced  in 
rank  or  command  or  by  seeing  their  sphere  of  usefulness  increased,  nor 
will  you  encourage  the  zeal  of  those  commanders  by  making  known  to 
them  that  success  in  their  arduous  labors  of  organization  and  instruc- 
tion is  to  consign  them  to  inferior  positions,  as  mere  drill-masters. 

Feeling  so  deeply  it  was  due  to  myself,  to  you,  and  the  President 
that  I should  give  free  expression  to  my  sentiments,  it  is  done  in  no 
spirit  of  insubordination.  All  that  I have,  all  that  I am,  shall  remain 
in  this  cause  whenever  and  wherever  it  may  please  the  Government  to 
employ  me. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

BRAXTOl!7  BRAGG, 
Major-  General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Department  Xo.  1, 

Xew  Orleans,  La.,  October  31,  1861. 
His  Excellency  President  Davis: 

Dear  Sir:  The  works  for  the  defense  of  this  city  are  progressing 
rapidly,  and  I think  in  a couple  of  weeks  we  can  defeat  any  force  that 
shall  attempt  invasion,  if  we  can  provide  ourselves  with  powder.  I have 
now  one  mill  in  operation  which  will  turn  out  1,200  pounds  per  day, 
another  which  can  make  1,500,  and  in  two  weeks  hope  to  have  a 
third  in  full  blast  which  will  make  3,000  or  3,500  pounds  per  day.  I 
have  your  dispatch  about  saltpeter  and  am  looking  for  it  daily ; but  we 
ought  to  have  to-day  50  tons  of  cannon  powder  on  hand  besides  what 
we  can  make. 

My  letter  to  Mr.  Benjamin  of  the  25th  instant  will  give  you  an  idea  of 
what  we  require  to  serve  our  guns. 

I think  we  can  fix  the  raft  between  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  so 
as  to  make  a complete  obstruction  under  the  fire  of  those  works.  I send 
you  inclosed  a sketch  of  the  works  and  raft.  * The  dotted  black  lines 
above  the  latter,  running  diagonally  to  Saint  Philip,  represent  an 
arrangement  which  I propose  to  shed  the  drift  over  towards  the  open- 
ing in  the  raft  on  the  Fort  Jackson  shore. 

With  your  permission  I will  urge  strongly  upon  you  the  appointment 
of  Col.  J.  K.  Duncan  as  a brigadier- general  j he  is  worth  a dozen  of 
Ruggles,  and  has  rendered  most  efficient  service,  with  a zeal,  untiring 
industry,  and  ability  which  entitle  him  to  your  high  consideration.  Had 
he  more  rank  he  could  be  of  great  assistance  to  me  in  organizing  and 
giving  directions,  and  I can  assure  you  that  help  would  not  be  unaccept- 
able, as  I have  to  keep  driving  all  day  and  frequently  the  larger  part  of 
the  night.  If  you  have  serious  objections  I will  not  press  it,  but  the 
public  service  would  be  advanced  by  giving  him  rank  enough  to  direct, 
and  if  necessary  order,  the  colonels  of  volunteer  regiments  in  this  de- 
partment, who  require  a great  deal  of  dry-nursing. 


Not  found. 


CHAr.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  7G1 

General  Bragg  consents  to  the  removal  of  Major  Lovell  to  service  here. 
I have  two  armed  boats  which  he  could  use  to  material  advantage  on 
the  coast  of  Mississippi,  where,  I am  sorry  to  say,  there  are  many  disaf- 
fected persons,  who  will  communicate  with  the  enemy  at  every  oppor- 
tunity. 

I receive  every  assistance  here,  except  from  some  of  the  speculators, 
who  endeavor  to  secure  materials  that  the  Government  must  have.  The 
first  operation  I can  fix  upon  them  I shall  publish  their  names  to  the 
community. 

I am  inclined  to  think  that  the  attack  on  this  coast  will  be  on  Mobile 
from  East  Pascagoula  by  land,  with  a strong  demonstration  by  water. 
Is  that  city  defended  by  intrenchments  on  the  land  side  ? 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL. 


O’Bannonville,  Octoler  31,  18G1. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant-  General : 

Does  my  command  include  General  Walker’s  brigade  at  Huntsville? 
In  an  emergency  I might  use  a part  of  it  with  the  arms  of  my  sick  and 
wounded.  The  measles  at  Mobile  has  disabled  many. 

BKAXTON  Bj^AGG, 
Major-General  Commanding, 


Eichmond,  October  31,  1861. 

General  Bragg, 

Pensacola : 

You  are  authorized  to  take  two  of  the  Alabama  regiments  from 
Huntsville,  to  be  armed  with  the  spare  arms  at  Mobile  and  Pensacola. 
If  the  expedition  should  make  its  attack  elsewhere  you  must  not 
expect  to  retain  them  with  you. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIX, 
Acting  Secretary  .of  War, 


Bowling  Green,  October  31,  1861. 

J.  P.  Benjamin: 

By  special  messenger  General  Lovell  writes  from  Xew  Orleans,  Octo- 
ber 24 : 

There  is  an  absolute,  immediate  necessity  for  powder  or  saltpeter  for  the  defense  of 
New  Orleans,  and  the  ordnance  officer  at  Nashville  reports  15  or  20  tons  of  saltpeter  at 
each  of  the  mills,  and  20  tons  on  the  way  from  Georgia;  also  1,500  pounds  of  cannon 
powder  on  hand  now,  being  prepared  for  General  Zollicoffer.  Twenty-four  hundred 
pounds  will  yet  be  required  by  General  Polk  from  the  first  manufactured.  Great  as 
seems  the  pressure  at  New  Orleans,  I do  not  feel  authorized  to  make  demands  on  the 
ordnance  department  at  Nashville  except  for  the  wants  of  my  own  department,  and 
therefore  give  you  information  of  the  call  and  the  supply. 

The  messenger  of  General  Lovell  is  waiting,  and  I wish  for  instruc- 
tions. Can  the  20  tons  of  saltpeter  from  Georgia  expected  be  sent  to  X ew 
Orleans  ? 

A.  S.  JOHXSTOX, 

General. 


762  OPEEATIOXS  IX  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AXD  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Eichmoxd,  Xovemher  1,  18G1. 

General  A.  Sidney  Johnston, 

Boicling  Green ^ Ky. : 

Your  clispatcli  received.  Send  nothing  to  General  Lovell  without 
orders  from  this  Department.  I have  ordered  10  tons  of  saltpeter  sent 
to  him  from  Augusta. 

J.  P.  BEYJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


O’Bannonville,  Xoreynher  1,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

I shall  be  ready  to  spare  the  two  regiments  and  a considerable  portion 
of  my  other  force  for  any  point  the  enemy  may  assail.  My  railroad  con- 
nection with  Mobile  will  be  completed  in  twelve  davs. 

BEAXT017  BEAGG/ 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  200.  j Richmond,  Ya.,  November  1,  1861. 

17.  The  two  Mississippi  regiments,  known  as  or  called  the  Fourth 
Mississippi  Brigade,  now  at  Camp  Pettus,  near  Enterprise,  Miss.,  will 
proceed  to  Pensacola,  Fla.,  and  report  to  Major  General  Bragg,  com- 
manding. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

* * # * * # # 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Abstract  from  field  return  of  the  Army  of  Pensacola,  Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg  com- 
manding, for  November  1,  1861. 


Commands. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

i 

OflBcers. 

Men. 

1st  (Gladden’s)  Brigade 

167 

135 

4 

4 

2, 970 
2,063 
87 
51 

3, 813 
2,  639 
99 
55 

/•(I  ( Andfirson’s)  Brigade 

A In.hamn,  ATonuted  Rifles  (.TenVins) 

Walton  Gnarda  (McPherson) 

Total 

310 

5, 171 

6,  606 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  November  4,  1861. 

Major-General  BrAGG, 

Pensacola  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  I have  ordered  two  and  shall  probably  order  a third 
Mississippi  regiment  to  Pensacola.  These  regiments  are  not  yet  organ- 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDEXCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  7G3 

izecl  witli  field  officers.  The  men  are  recovering  from  measles,  and  it  is 
tlioiiglit  imprudent  to  send  them  north  at  this  season.  This  will  give 
you  an  opportunity  to  reward  such  of  your  officers  as  you  may  think 
most  worthy  with  field  appointments.  Send  in  a list  of  recommenda- 
tions for  appointments  of  field  officers  for  these  regiments,  and  I doubt 
not  the  President  will  be  glad  to  avail  himself  of  the  opportunity  of 
testifying  his  sense  of  the  merits  of  those  officers  who  have  cheerlully 
borne  with  you  the  dull  routine  and  cheerfully  watch  at  Pensacola  with- 
out a murmur.  You  know  that  such  appointments  are  made  under  act 
No.  155,  second  session,  and  are  temporary  in  their  character.  They 
expire  at  the  end  of  the  war,  and  the  officers  then  resume  their  regular 
position  in  the  permanent  Army.  As  soon  as  it  is  ascertained  that  no 
attack  is  to  be  made  on  you  by  the  enemy’s  naval  expedition,  I hope 
you  will  send  us  in  the  place  of  those  new  regiments  those  of  your  pres- 
ent forces  who  have  served  longest  and  seem  to  you  best  to  merit 
removal  to  more  active  field  service. 

.Yours  of  25th  ultimo*  to  Adjutant-General,  with  its  inclosures,  is  re- 
ceived. I have  written  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston  on  the  subject  of  the 
interference  by  General  Pillow  with  the  forage  collected  for  General 
Withers’  command.  I recognize  the  justice  of  his  complaint,  and  trust 
that  no  further  occasion  of  like  character  will  require  action  on  the  part 
of  the  Department. 

I fully  concur  in  your  strictures  on  the  local-defense  system,  but  you 
are  mistaken  in  supposing  that  the  Confederate  Government  can  do 
anything  to  prevent  it.  The  difficulty  lies  with  the  governors  of  the 
States,  who  are  unwilling  to  trust  the  common  defense  to  one  common 
head.  They  therefore  refuse  arms  to  men  who  are  willing  to  enlist 
unconditionally  for  the  war,  and  put  these  arms  in  the  hands  of  a mere 
home  militia,  who  are  not  bound  to  leave  the  State.  It  is  a very  unto- 
ward condition  of  things,  but  as  we  have  no  arms,  and  the  State  author- 
ities will  not  give  us  the  control  of  the  matter,  we  are  forced  to  accept 
from  them  just  what  they  choose  to  give.  Still  worse,  they  are  accept- 
ing and  arming  men  for  local  defense  for  six  or  twelve  months,  and 
thus  breaking  up  our  volunteer  regiments  that  were  offering  for  the  war, 
in  order  to  get  from  us  such  arms  as  we  could  supply.  All  this  is  sad, 
but  I know  not  how  to  avoid  it.  Each  governor  wants  to  satisfy  his 
own  people,  and  there  are  not  wanting  politicians  in  each  State  to  en- 
courage the  people  to  raise  the  cry  that  they  will  not  consent  to  be  left 
defenseless  at  home.  The  voice  of  reason,  which  would  teach  them  that 
their  home  defenses  would  be  best  secured  by  a vigorous  attack  on  the 
enemy  on  his  own  frontier  is  unheeded,  and  a clamor  is  raised  against 
us  for  not  attacking  the  enemy  in  front  by  the  very  men  who  are  depriv- 
ing us  of  the  possibility  of  such  a movement,  by  witholding  the  arms 
necessary  for  re-enforcing  our  little  Army,  that  is  so  fearfully  outnum- 
bered that  I dare  not  give  you  the  figures.  I have  entire  confidence 
that  you  will  do  all  that  skill  and  energy  can  effect  with  your  own  insuf- 
ficient means,  and  will  to  the  utmost  of  my  power  aid  in  all  measures 
that  you  may  devise  for  the  security  of  the  department  committed  to 
your  charge. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 

* Not  found. 


764  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 

Orleans,  La.,  November  4,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin  : 

Will  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  allow  us  to  use  the  Marine  Hos- 
pital for  military  purposes  ? Shall  I recognize  foreign  consuls 

M.  LOVELL. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  November  4,  1861. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

Foreign  consuls  are  recognized  by  our  Government  in  all  commercial 
matters.  What  kind  of  military  use  do  you  propose  to  make  of  the 
Marine  HospitaL^  Answer,  and  I will  apply  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury.  I ordered  10  tons  of  saltpeter  sent  to  you  by  express  from 
the  Augusta  Arsenal. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Huntsville,  November  4,  1861. 

J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Orders  have  been  received  from  General  Bragg,  saying  by  authority 
of  the  Secretary  of  War.  Ho  these  orders  supersede  the  orders  to  report 
to  General  Sidney  Johnston  % Answer  at  once. 

L.  P.  WALKEE, 
Brigadier- General. 


Eichmond,  November  5,  1861. 

General  L.  P.  Walker, 

Huntsville Ala. : 

General  Bragg  was  authorized  to  call  down  to  the  coast  any  organ- 
ized regiments  that  he  could  arm  until  we  are  relieved  from  the  alarm 
about  the  naval  expedition.  It  is  useless  to  keep  your  regiments  idle 
in  camp  whilst  waiting  arms.  As  soon  as  General  Johnston  can  arm 
them  your  brigade  will  be  put  on  the  march  for  his  headquarters.  Gen- 
eral Bragg  had  arms  enough  of  the  sick  on  hand  to  arm  two  regiments 
in  Mobile  and  Pensacola,  and  for  this  reason  was  allowed  to  call  them 
to  his  aid.  I write  you  in  fuU. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Near  Pensacola^  November  5,  1861. 
Adjutant-General  0.  S.  Army, 

Richmond^  Ya.: 

Sir  : From  the  delay  in  hearing  from  the  enemy’s  fleet,  which  sailed 
south  on  the  29th  ultimo,  we  infer  it  is  intended  for  some  point  in  the 
Gulf.  With  a view  of  being  ready  with  all  our  available  means,  I have 
ordered  General  Walker  to  send  one  regiment  of  his  command  to  Mo- 
bile and  one  here  to  be  armed  with  the  weapons  of  our  sick.  Colonel 
Deas’  regiment  and  Colonel  Beck’s,  already  armed  by  private  enterprise 


Chaf.  XVL]  correspondence,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  765 

and  by  the  State  of  Alabama,  I have  ordered  to  report  to  General 
Withers,  at  Mobile. 

This  will  give  an  efficient  force  of  about  7,000  here  and  5,000  at  Mo- 
bile. From  what  I learn  of  the  force  in  Louisiana  from  private  sources 
I suppose  we  could  calculate  on  assembling  15,000  men  at  any  point  the 
enemy  might  assail  from  this  to  Kew  Orleans. 

If  nothing  intervenes,  we  shall  pass  a train  from  here  to  Mobile  on 
the  11th.  By  giving  assistance  and  working  at  night  this  result  is 
accomplished  some  days  sooner  than  we  expected. 

I am  much  in  need  of  some  young  and  active  navy  officers  for  my 
small  gunboats.  They  were  promised  me  verbally  last  summer,  and  I 
have  since  applied  for  them.  Our  landsmen  are  but  poor  substitutes. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major- General,  Commanding, 


Huntsville,  November  7,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin  : 

I have  ordered  the  troops  under  my  command  to  Pensacola  and  Mo- 
bile, and  shall,  unless  otherwise  directed,  proceed  to  Mobile  myself. 

L.  P.  WALKER. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  November  8,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. : 

IVIiU  here  now  ready.  Gan  make  3,000  pounds  of  powder  per  day,  but 
without  an  ounce  of  saltpeter.  Cannot  you  send  it  from  Memphis  i 

THO.  O.  MOORE. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  November  8,  1861. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans^  La, : 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  comprehend  what  has  become  of  the  salt- 
peter sent  to  New  Orleans.  I have  sent  24  tons,  and  cannot  learn  that 
one  pound  has  been  received  or  one  pound  of  powder  made.  On  Sep- 
tember 26, 3 tons  were  sent  by  freight  j on  September  27, 1 ton  was  sent 
by  express  j on  October  1, 3 tons  were  sent  by  express ; on  October  2,  7 
tons  were  sent  by  express  j on  November  2, 10  tons  were  sent  by  express. 
All  this  was  sent  from  Augusta,  and  I cannot  get  the  acknowledgment 
that  one  pound  was  ever  received,  and  you  now  say  you  have  not  one 
ounce.  This  mystery  must  be  explained  before  I can  send  any  more. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  C.  S.  A., 

New  Orleans,  La,,  November  8,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Dear  Sir  : Governor  Moore  has  just  handed  me  your  dispatch  of 
to  day  relative  to  saltpeter.  The  amount  named  therein  (24  tons)  will 


766  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

all  have  been  received  when  the  10  tons  now  on  their  way  from  Augusta 
shall  arrive.  The  acting  ordnance  officer,  Captain  Eawle,  informs  me 
that  he  has  not  yet  acknowledged  the  receipt  of  the  14  tons  already 
received,  because  he  has  had  no  invoices  with  the  greater  part  of  it, 
and  does  not  know  from  whom  it  came.  The  only  invoice  we  have 
from  Augusta  is  that  for  10  tons  now  on  the  way.  Every  pound  we 
have  on  hand  is  being  made  up  into  powder,  but  a good  deal  of  it  is  so 
mixed  with  foreign  matter  that  it  does  not  give  more  than  pound  for 
pound  of  powder  j but  when  all  made  up  it  will  only  make  about  50,000 
pounds,  which  when  distributed  will  give  us  about  20  rounds  per  gun, 
as  fully  explained  in  my  letter  to  you  of  the  25th  ultimo. 

We  have  a battery  of  light  artillery  here,  raised  by  order  of  General 
Twiggs,  composed  of  Confederate  recruits  under  Captain  Higgins,  with 
a complement  of  four  horses  to  each  gun  and  caisson.  He  applies  to 
me  for  a farrier,  which  I consider  necessary  and  a judicious  economj^, 
but  find  no  legal  authority  for  employing  one.  I am  satisfied  that  a 
good  farrier  would  more  than  pay  for  himselt^  especially  here,  where 
the  price  of  horses  is  so  high.  Will  you  authorize  his  employment? 

I have  been  requested  to  ask  your  attention  to  the  case  of  Dr.  S. 
Burke,  now  on  Huty  at  Fort  Jackson.  He  was  the  surgeon  on  duty 
with  the  Louisiana  Regiment  of  Artillery  when  it  was  mustered  into  the 
Confederate  service  on  1st  June,  but  by  some  oversight  on  the  part  of 
the  mustering  officer  he  was  not  transferred.  He  nev^ertheless  remained 
at  his  post  on  severe  duty  from  that  time  up  to  21st  September,  when 
he  received  his  commission.  This  he  hesitates  to  accept,  as  he  thereby 
loses*  nearly  four  months’  rank  and  pay  and  one  of  his  juniors  takes 
precedence  of  him.  He  asks  that  his  appointment  may  date  1st  June, 
the  day  of  transfer  of  the  regiment  with  which  he  has  been  serving 
since  its  entry  into  service.  His  zeal  and  attention  to  duty  are  highly 
spoken  of  by  his  commander.  Colonel  Duncan,  who  intercedes  for  him 
in  this  act  of  justice.  ' , 

1 have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  printed  circular 
of  instructions,  as  also  of  your  letter  of  29th  ultimo.  I have  to  thank 
you  for  the  expression  of  confidence  therein  contained,  and  shall  do  my 
utmost  to  prove  that  the  administration  has  made  no  mistake  in  my 
case.  We  are  progressing  rapidly  towards  a good  state  of  defense. 
The  interior  line  of  works  will  soon  be  complete  and  the  guns  mounted. 
I have  increased  the  armament  of  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb  by  four  42s 
each,  and  have  sent  twelve  to  Colonel  Duncan  for  the  forts  below.  I 
think  we  shall  make  a complete  obstruction  of  the  raft  (see  the  sketch 
I sent  the  President),  and  if  we  stop  the  enemy’s  ships  we  can  hammer 
them  to  pieces,  if  the  powder  holds  out. 

I have  sent-1,000  men  to  Berwick  Bay,  and  have  called  for  four  com- 
panies of  mounted  men  (local-defense  men)  from  Saint  Mary’s  Parish, 
mainly  to  show  themselves  occasionally  among  the  negroes. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 


O’Bannonville,  November  11,  1861. 

General  Cooper  : 

Railroad  to  Mobile  completed  this  morning.  It  is  equal  to  3,000  men 
at  each  end. 


BRAXTOR^  BRAGG. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  7G7 

War  Depart]ment,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  November  17,  1801. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans: 

Dear  Sir  : I have  your  letter  of  the  8th  instant,  and  am  happy  to 
learn  that  the  saltpeter  has  been  received  in  New  Orleans.  I beg  your 
special  attention  to  the  manufacture,  as  from  imperfect  refining  of  the 
saltpeter  much  of  the  powder  made  at  different  points  absorbs  moisture 
so  rapidly  as  quickly  to  become  worthless.  Our  supply  of  powder  and 
of  material  for  its  manufacture  is  so  small,  that  it  would  be  really  a 
calamity  to  exhaust  our  material  and  find  the  powder  valueless- 

1 received  your  former  letter  in  regard  to  the  quantity  of  powder 
required  in  your  department,  and  am  anxiously  awaiting  the  promised 
report  of  the  ordnance  stores  on  hand,  for  there  was,  of  course,  quite  a 
quantity  of  powder  on  hand  before  the  saltpeter  was  sent.  I beg  you 
will  have  made  for  me  as  early  as  possible  a comiilete  official  return  of 
all  ^‘ordnance  and  ordnance  stores”  in  your  deiiartment,  as  it  is  impos- 
sible for  me  to  introduce  regularity  into  the  administration  of  this 
Department  without  such  returns.  I always  feel  a suspicion  when  they 
are  not  furnished  that  makes  me  reluctant  to  respond  to  requisitions. 

I have  also  learned  to  regard  with  great  distrust  the  statements  of 
manufacturers  of  what  they  are  going  to  make.  A statement  of  the 
actual  results  of  one  week^s  work  in  the  powder-mills  in  New  Orleans 
would  be  far  more  satisfactory  than  any  number  of  assurances  of  pros- 
pective efficiency.  I see  no  objection  to  your  employing  a farrier,  if 
necessary,  for  your  company  of  light  artillery.  The  law,  however ,*does 
not  permit  the  enlisting  of  such  an  artificei*  to  any  other  than  cavalry 
comi)aDies.  In  regard  to  Dr.  Burke^s  case,  I beg  you  to  inform  him 
that  many  such  cases  exist,  but  I cannot  remedy  them  until  I get 
authority  from  Congress,  which  I am  now  about  to  ask  and  hope  to 
obtain.  As  some  additions  have  been  made  to  my  printed  circular  I 
send  you  another  copy  as  amended.  I am  much  gratified  to  hear  of 
your  rapid  progress  in  perfecting  the  defenses  of  New  Orleans,  and 
especially  from  different  friends  of  your  success  in  inspiring  confidence 
amongst  our  people. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Acting  Secretary  of  War, 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.y  November  17,  1861. 
Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

Richmond : 

Sir  : In  a letter  from  the  Secretary  of  War  I am  informed  that  the 
three  regiments  of  Mississippi  volunteers  to  be  ordered  here  are  not 
organized,  and  I am  desired  to  make  recommendations  for  field  officers. 
The  inclosed  rosters  of  field  officers  will  show  you  there  is  some  grave 
misunderstanding  about  the  two  regiments  which  have  arrived.*  They 
claim,  too,  that  their  service  dates  from  August  24  last,  when  called  out 
by  the  State,  leaving  them  only  nine  months  to  serve. 

In  regard  to  the  companies  to  compose  the  other  regiment  for  the  war 
I sent  you  a telegram  from  Major  Hessee,  reporting  their  refusal  to  come. 
Yesterday  I was  called  on  by  Colonel  Dowd,  claiming  to  be  colonel  of 


Not  found. 


768  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

the  regiment  referred  to.  He  informs  me  there  are  nineteen  companies 
in  all — ten  organized  as  a regiment  under  him  and  nine  other  independ- 
ent companies ; that  they  construed  the  order  variously,  but  that  his 
companies  would  refuse  to  come  except  as  an  organized  regiment.  The 
other  nine,  however,  would  move  under  the  order  and  soon  be  here. 

With  these  facts  before  you,  it  is  for  the  Department  to  solve  the  ques- 
tion. Col.  T.  H.  Watts^  Alabama  regiment  for  the  war  arrived  yester- 
day 5 aggregate  about  900. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BKAXTON  BEAGG, 
Major- General^  Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

November  23,  1861. 

Eespectfully  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  Colonel  Dowd’s 
regiment  has  since  been  ordered  to  Savannah,  to  report  to  General  Lee. 
I have  no  recollection  of  the  telegram  of  Major  Hessee. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola,  Fla,,  November  19,  1861. 
Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

Richmond,  Ya,: 

Sir  : The  process  of  reorganizing  the  twelve-months’  men  in  this  army 
for  the  war,  under  a suggestion  from  the  President,  had  been  com- 
menced, and  a few  companies  were  in  progress.  The  plan  was  to  allow 
the  men  of  the  same  regiment  to  form  companies  and  elect  their  officers, 
when  they  would  be  mustered  in  for  the  war  and  discharged  on  their 
old  engagements.  These  companies  to  be  attached  to  their  old  regi- 
ments until  a sufficient  number  were  obtained  for  a regiment,  when  the 
companies  would  be  aggregated,  and  the  field  officers  appointed  by  the 
President. 

A letter  from  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  the  9th  of  November,  in  reply 
to  my  request  for  the  discharge  of  Captain  Posey’s  company,  First 
Alabama  Eegiment,  lays  down  a principle,  necessary  in  that  case  to 
make  it  conform  to  law,  which  I fear  is  incompatible  with  the  course 
proposed  by  me,  and  I must  therefore  suspend  my  action  until  further 
advised.  If  the  men  must  be  first  discharged  and  then  re-enlisted,  but 
few  wiU  be  secured.  Most  of  them  having  the  option  will  insist  on  going 
home,  and  nothing  but  the  presence  of  an  enemy  in  sight  will  prevent 
it ; • and  if  their  re-enlistment  is  postponed  until  near  the  time  of  their 
discharge  the  same  desire  to  get  home,  with  an  immediate  prospect  of 
gratifying  it,  will  have  the  same  result.  The  arrival  of  a goodly  num- 
ber of  unarmed  men,  ready  to  receive  all  guns  as  soon  as  turned  in,  will 
stimulate  re-enlistments ; and  one  company  of  the  instructed  and  dis- 
ciplined soldiers  of  the  oldest  force  here  will  be  worth  any  two  just 
formed. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BEAGG, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


CiiAr.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  7G9 

Headquarters  Department  Xo.  1,  C.  S.  A., 

New  Orleans^  La.^  November  19,  1801. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Dear  Sir:  Since  my  last  communication  we  have  steadily  progressed 
in  our  preparations  for  defense.  Six  tons  of  i)owder  have  been  made, 
and  distributed  to  the  various  works  in  due  i)roportion.  1 have  increased 
the  armament  of  Fort  Pike  b^^  four  42-pounders,  Fort  Macomb  with  four 
42s  and  one  8-inch  shell  gun.  Fort  Livingston  Avith  one  8-inch  columbiad, 
and  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  with  six  42-pounders  each.  The 
raft  in  the  river  between  the  last-named  forts  has  been  further  secured 
by  four  anchors  of  3,000  pounds  each  and  fastened  by  heavy  chains  to 
either  shore,  and  I think  will  stop  a fleet  under  the  close  Are  of  more 
than  100  heavy  guns  (with  Commodore  Hollins’  assistance  about  150). 
Feeling  satisfied  that  ships  under  steam  can  pass  forts  in  an  open  chan- 
nel, I am  taking  prompt  measures  to  obstruct  the  passage  at  Forts  Pike 
and  Macomb,  at  Berwick  Bay,  and  in  the  Mississippi  above  the  city 
at  a point  where  I shall  concentrate  the  tire  of  50  guns  of  heavy  caliber. 

I have  ordered  the  Marine  Hospital  to  be  fitted  up  for  army  use  by 
the  quartermaster.  On  inquiry  I found  that  we  could  not  rent  a hos- 
pital for  less  than  $3,000  per  annum,  and  it  would  cost  half  as  much 
more  to  fit  it  up.  Besides  this,  we  hire  three  or  four  buildings  for  ord- 
nance stores.  The  sum  of  these  rents  laid  out  on  the  hospital  will  ena- 
ble it  to  answer  all  purposes,  and  the  improvements  will  belong  to  the 
GoA'ernment.  Nothing  will  be  lost  in  rent. 

We  shall  have  in  operation  in  a few  days  three  powder  mills,  two  of 
which  are  private  property  and  one  belongs  to  the  city.  They  will  turn 
out  more  than  3 tons  per  day.  The  powder  is  proved,  and  rejected  if 
much  under  range.  We  will  want  all  the  saltpeter  that  can  be  had,  as 
we  will  be  able  to  work  up  about  3 tons  a day.  Permit  me  to  call  your 
attention  to  the  necessity  of  a telegraph  line  between  ^leridian  and 
Mobile;  also  between  Meridian  and  Montgomery.  The  line  hence  to 
Mobile  runs  along  the  coast,  and  can  be  cut  at  any  time  by  a force  from 
the  enemy’s  fleet,  to  say  nothing  of  the  largely  disaffected  population 
on  the  southern  coast  of  Mississippi.  I inclose  you  a letter  received 
from  Mr.  Douglass  on  this  subject.*  It  requires  immediate  attention. 

General  Pillow  telegraphed  me  to  send  him  5,000  men  to  Columbus. 
This  I declined,  as  I have  no  more  than  are  necessary  for  the  defense  of 
New  Orleans  and  its  approaches.  If  the  river  had  been  obstructed 
aboA^e,  so  as  to  i)reA’^ent  a fleet  from  passing  down,  I might  have  felt 
justified  in  giving  him  some  assistance,  but  I should  have  attached  more 
weight  to  the  call  if  it  had  come  from  General  Johnston.  . 

I regret  that  I cannot  liaA^e  some  columbiads  and  mortars  in  addition 
to  my  present  armament.  Some  of  the  detached  companies,  transferred 
from  the  State  service  under  General  Twiggs’  orders,  haA^e  become  much 
reduced  and  disorganized  by  bad  management  and  poor  officers,  and  I 
should  wish  to  have  power  to  disband  some  and  consolidate  others,  so 
as  to  make  the  force  more  effective;  also  authority,  under  your  sanction, 
to  discharge  men  in  certain  cases  of  hardship,  family  affliction,  or  where 
they  are  required  for  important  work — as,  for  instance,  some  cases  of 
widows’  only  sons,  or  where  parents  have  died  since  entry  into  service, 
or  where  they  are  required  in  founderies  or  workshops  where  Government 
work  is  being  done.  I should  exercise  such  authoritj"  very  sparingly, 
and  only  in  cases  where  I feel  satisfied  you  would  approve. 


49  R R— VOL  VI 


Not  found. 


770  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chat.  XYl. 

Colonel  Preston,  who  was  to  join  my  staff,  has  gone  to  South  Caro- 
lina. Am  I not  entitled  to  two  officers  in  the  adjutant  and  inspector 
general’s  department — one  lieutenant  colonel  and  one  major? 

I have  received  the  appointments  of  Majors  Palfrey  and  Lanier.  Gen- 
eral Ruggles  has  been  sick  since  his  arrival  here,  which  has  devolved 
all  the  inspection  of  troops  upon  me  from  Berwick  to  Mississippi  City. 
I was  in  hopes  that  the  President  would  act  on  my  request  in  relation 
to  Colonel  Duncan.  Matters,  however,  by  dint  of  incessant  attention, 
are  progressing  favorably,  and  I hope  soon  to  be  able  to  report  myself 
as  beyond  the  chances  of  an  attack. 

Das  your  attention  been  called  to  the  hict  that  the  enemy  can  land 
near  East  Pascagoula  and  march  24  miles  over  a good  road  into  Mobile? 
I understand  that  there  are  no  intrenched  lines  on  the  land  side  around 
that  city,  but  can  hardly  think  it  possible  that  it  has  not  been  done.  If 
so,  it  is  an  easy  road  from  Ship  Island  to  Mobile. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General,  C.  8.  Army. 


Circular.]  Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  November  21,  1861. 

With  a view  of  preserving  to  our  cause  the  invaluable  services  of 
those  soldiers  he  has  so  long  commanded  with  pride,  the  general  is 
desirous  of  reorganizing  his  old  regiments  for  the  war.  The  advantages 
to  be  obtained  by  the  officers  and  men  themselves  are  so  apparent  as  to 
give  the  strongest  hope  of  a large  success.  But  few  of  us,  if  any,  can 
contemplate  retiring  from  the  field  to  the  inglorious  occupation  of  idly 
witnessing  the  labors  of  our  mothers,  wives,  and  daughters,  nobly 
working  for  their  defenders  in  the  field. 

To  receive  a discharge  and  go  home  temporarily,  with  a view  of  again 
enlisting  in  some  other  command,  will  subject  the  soldier  to  many 
annoyances  he  has  probably  not  contemplated.  He  will  never  again  be 
as  well  satisfied,  mixed  up,  as  he  will  be,  with  strangers  and  raw  men, 
where  he  will  have  to  go  through  all  the  drudgery  of  elementary  instruc- 
tion, so  essential  to  them,  but  irksome  to  him.  All  his  former  acquain- 
tances and  esprit  de  corps  will  be  lost,  and  he  will  be  looked  on  as  a raw 
recruit  instead  of  a veteran  of  one  campaign.  Above  all,  he  will  lose 
his  arms,  for  the  army  is  now  full  of  men  eager  to  see  him  depart,  that 
thej^  may  secure  his  gun,  with  which  to  win  a name.  To  return  with  an 
old  shot-gun,  or  perhaps  with  no  gun  at  all,  and  wait  a chance  oppor- 
tunity to  secure  what  has  been  thrown  away,  will  be  the  fate  of  those 
who  thus  depart.  Those  who  remain  may  confidently  rely  on  soon  being 
employed  actively — if  not  here,  at  some  other  point  to  which  they  can 
now  be  sent,  their  places  being  supplied  by  the  new  troops;  and  as  far 
as  he  can  do  so,  consistently  with  his  sense  of  duty,  the  general  will 
allow  to  those  who  re-enlist  and  require  it  an  opportunity  to  visit,  home 
and  arrange  their  business  affairs.  This  indulgence  will  be  granted  to 
re-enlisted  men  in  preference  to  all  others. 

1.  Companies  of  not  less  than  64  privates  (a  larger  number  would  be 
preferred),  with  their  proper  officers,  non-commissioned  officers,  and 
musicians,  will  be  received  and  mustered  for  the  war,  retaining  their 
present  arms  and  equipments,  when  they  will  be  discharged  from  their 
old  engagements  and  paid  off  to  that  date. 

2.  Such  companies  will  be  attached  to  their  old  regiments  until  a 
sufficient  number  is  obtained  to  constitute  a new  regiment,  when  they 


Chap.  XVL| 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


771 


will  t>e  aggregated,  and  field  officers  will  be  appointed  by  the  rresid(*ut. 
In  making  these  appointments  he  will  no  doubt  be  inllnenced  by  a 
known  desire  of  a large  majority  of  a regiment,  ascertained  tliroiigli  tlie 
X^roper  military  channel;  but  no  elections  will  be  held  and  no  electioneer- 
ing will  be  tolerated.  Merit,  not  x)oi)ularity,  will  control  the  selections. 

Such  of  his  veterans  as  are  willing  to  join  him  for  the  war  the  general 
will  be  i)roud  to  receive,  as  evincing  a confidence  he  has  labored  to 
deserve.  It  may  not  be  his  good  fortune  to  lead  them  against  the  enemy, 
but  on  any  field  and  against  any  foe  he  will  answer  for  their  conduct, 
and  predict  for  them  a brilliant  victory  or  a glorious  death. 

By  command  of  Major  General  Bragg: 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adj iitant- Genera L 


O’Bannonville,  J^ovemher  23,  18G1. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

General  Withers  should  have  the  assistance  of  two  regular  officers  of 
rank  and  experience.  Dissipation  and  a want  of  experience  and  organi- 
zation will  cause  me  to  tremble  for  the  result  if  he  is  vigorously  attacked 
now. 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

November  28,  18G1. 

Adjutant-General  0.  S.  Army, 

Richmond^  Va. : 

Sir  : The  arrival  of  an  unorganized  regiment  of  Mississippians  yester- 
day gives  us  at  this  place  now  four  new  regiments,  3,000  men  at  least, 
with  only  about  G'JO  efficient  arms  between  them.  About  the  same  state 
of  affairs  exists  at  Mobile.  These  men  will  at  once  be  iiut  to  a rigid 
course  of  instrindion,  and,  with  the  examx^le  and  influence  of  our  well- 
instructed,  well-disciplined  veterans,  will  soon  be  raadeinto  good  soldiers. 
When  arms  can  be  had  for  them  I shall  be  able  to  siiare  a considerable 
])ortion  of  my  gallant  little  army  for  more  active,  and  therefore  more 
gratifying,  service  elsewhere. 

I am,  sir,  very  resx)ectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla..,  November  29,  18G1. 
Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

Richmond.,  Ya. : 

Sir  : To  transmit  some  letters  to  our  prisoners  of  war  and  send  over 
the  free  negro  in  my  possession  to  his  friends  I yesterday  sent  a flag  to 
Fort  Pickens,  with  a communication  to  Colonel  Brown,  a coxiy  of  which 
I inclose.*  He  refused  to  receive  my  communication  or  to  reply,  and 
only  consented  to  take  the  negro  after  one  of  his  officers  specially  waited 
on  him  to  represent  the  urgency  of  the  case.  Fort  Pickens  is  not  seri- 
ously injured,  of  course,  as  my  fire  was  not  directed  at  the  fort,  which 
is  ours,  but  at  those  inside  of  it.  The  armament  and  garrison  seem  to 


Not  found. 


772  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  IChap.  XVI. 

liave  suffered,  and  the  commander  is  by  no  means  as  courteous  and  ami- 
able as  he  was  after  the  infliction  on  his  outside  confrere^  Colonel  Wil- 
son. My  lookouts  report  that  escorts  to  their  grave-yard,  which  is  im- 
mediately under  our  glasses,  are  verj^  frequent,  and  that  two  officers 
certainly  have  been  buried.  Yesterday  a small  boat  attempted  to  enter 
the  harbor  from  the  fleet — a privilege  heretofore  accorded  them,  as  our 
steamers  were  allowed  to  run  freely  to  the  yard.  We  fired  on  it,  when 
the  crew  precipitately  abandoned  it  and  swam  ashore,  leaving  the  boat 
to  float  off.  Some  of  our  shots  went  very  near  the  fort,  but  they  de- 
clined the  invitation.  We  infer  they  are  satisfied.  One  of  their  ships 
(the  Hartford)  was  towed  off’ yesterday  by  a gunboat,  thus  proving  her 
disability.  Some  operation  is  going  on  by  them  far  up  Santa  itosa 
Island,  but  what  we  cannot  exactly  conjecture.  An  expedition  leaves 
to-day  to  ascertain. 

Captain  Thom’s  company  of  Marines,  100  men,  leaves  to-day  for  Vir- 
ginia, by  request  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  This  is  the  third  draft 
made  on  me,  and  while  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  discipline  and  in- 
struct his  men,  the  Secretary  must  excuse  me  for  declining  any  longer 
to  furnish  him  arms,  &c.  It  is  a depleting  process  I cannot  stand. 

As  early  as  last  spring  and  frequently  since  I have  asked  for  some 
young  navy  officers,  but  without  success.  I have  two  steam  gunboats 
commanded  by  landsmen.  A rifled  ship  gun  promised  for  one  of  them 
some  weeks  ago  is  not  yet  heard  from.  These  points  are  of  importance. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major- General  Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Ala.  and  West  Fla., 

No.  II.  / Near  Pensacola^  Fla..,  December  1,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  L.  P.  Walker,  having  reported  in  person  at  these  head- 
quarters for  duty,  is  assigned  to  the  District  of  Alabama,  and  will  report 
to  Brigadier-General  Withers,  at  Mobile. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg  : 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Abstract  from  field  return  of  the  District  of  Alabama,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Jones 
M.  Withers,  December  2,  1861. 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Ist  Alabama  Battalion 

15 

202 

367 

406 

ISt.li  Alabfi.ma 

36 

594 

858 

942 

1 Qt.h  A 1 n,ha,Tna, 

35 

625 

940 

992 

20th.  Alabama  

34 

474 

836 

916 

22(1  Alabama 

37 

376 

709 

783 

Beck’s  Alabama  regiment 

30 

333 

674 

728 

Company  infantry  Alabama  volunteers 

4 

62 

66 

66 

Battalion  infantry  Mississippi  volunteers  (3  companies) 

11 

196 

238 

267 

Companies  (5)  mounted  Alabama  volunteers 

14 

371 

410 

461 

Battalion  Light  Artillery  (5  companies) 

23 

407 

471 

506 

Fort  Gaines 

61 

991 

1, 144 

1,263 

Fort  Morgan  

82 

1, 223 

1,  596 

1,  691 

* Total 

382 

5,854 

8,309 

9,  021 

Chap.  XVL]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  773 

New  Orleans,  La.,  December  2,  1801. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War: 

My  Dear  Sir  : I desire  to  introduce  to  you  Capt.  J oliu  A.  Stephenson. 
Captain  S.  is  a commission  merchant  of  New  Orleans  of  high  standing. 
He  constructed  and  built  the  Manassas.  He  is  a man  of  large  river 
experience,  having  for  many  years  had  command  of  steamboats  on  the 
Mississippi.  Great  confidence  is  felt  by  our  community  in  his  skill, 
energy,  and  ability,  so  much  so,  that  they  are  ready  to  advance  the 
means  to  build,  under  his  superintendence,  another  ram.  This,  how- 
ever, they  will  not  do  without  some  assurance  that  the  Government  will 
not  take  the  boat  out  of  the  possession  and  control  of  CaiJtain  S.  The 
fact  is  that,  while  great  confidence  is  felt  here  in  Commodore  Hollins  as 
a naval  officer,  our  people  are  convinced  that  he  is  led  astray  in  his 
judgment  of  individuals,  as  he  has  no  just  means  of  forming  a correct 
estimate  of  their  character  and  ability.  It  is  no  disparagement  to  his 
ability  as  an  officer  to  say  this  much  of  him,  and  it  is  said  in  the  best 
and  friendliest  spirit.  We  all  hope  you  will  aid  in  carrying  out  the 
wishes  of  our  people,  and  do  all  in  your  power  to  further  the  object  in 
view.  Captain  Stephenson  will  communicate  freely  with  you.  You  can 
rely  upon  him. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

THO.  O.  MOOPvE. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  December  2,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Brago, 

Pensacola : 

Sir:  I am  sorry  to  say  that  I was  in  error  in  supposing  certain  Mis- 
sissippi regiments  ordered  to  your  command  to  be  without  organization. 
I supposed  the  companies  to  have  been  tendered  to  us  independent  com- 
lianies  under  a call  made  by  this  Department,  but  it  turns  out  that  they 
.were  called  into  service  by  General  A.  S.  Johnston,  under  an  unlucky 
proclamation  which  he  issued  for  twelve  months’  men  before  he  was 
fully  aware  of  the  policy  of  the  Government  on  the  subject. 

I have,  however,  ordered  to  you  one  regiment  of  independent  com- 
panies, which  you  will  be  able  to  organize  and  to  luovide  with  field 
officers,  when  the  President  will  take  pleasure  in  nominating  on  your 
recommendation. 

I see  no  objection  to  your  getting  the  men  of  the  different  twelve- 
months’  regiments  in  your  command  to  re-enlist  for  the  war,  as  suggested 
in  your  letter  of  the  ioth  ultimo. 

In  the  precise  case  referred  to  in  my  letter  of  November  9 I did  not 
see  how  it  could  be  done  without  violating  the  rights  of  some  of  the 
parties,  but  in  the  way  you  propose  no  one  is  injured.  We  have  a right 
to  discharge  any  one  whose  services  are  no  longer  needed.  The  only 
modification  I suggest  is  that  when  you  muster  in  the  new  companies 
“for  the  war,”  as  they  are  formed,  you  make  the  muster  to  take  effect 
at  some  future  day,  on  which  day  you  will  discharge  the  men  from  their 
former  contract. 

I do  not  see  why  a man  may  not  be  mustered  in  to-day  for  service  “for 
the  war,”  his  term  of  service  to  commence  on  the  1st  January  next.  He 
would  then  remain  in  his  present  organization  until  the  1st  January, 
and  on  that  day  be  discharged  from  his  old  obligation  and  become  bound 


774 


OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS., 


AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


by  the  new  one.  If  you  think  this  plan  objectionable,  pray  point  out 
the  difficulty,  as  I am  most  anxious  to  effect  the  object,  and  I am  sure 
Congress  (now  in  session)  would  grant  any  legislation  necessary  for  the 
purpose. 

A law  will,  I doubt  not,  be  passed  in  a day  or  two,  offering  a bounty 
for  re-enlistment  that  will  afford  you  great  helj)  in  getting  your  volun- 
teers to  remain  in  service. 

Let  me  congratulate  you  and  your  gallant  command  on  the  successful 
repulse  of  the  recent  attack.  I await  your  official  report  for  submission 
to  Congress,  and  in  hopes  of  hearing  that  their  vessels  were  effectually 
crippled. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BE^TJAMINT. 


P.  S. — I never  thought  of  asking  whether  General  Withers  had  taken 
any  measures  to  defend  Mobile  against  a coup  de  main  via  Pascagoula. 
A few  thousand  men  landed  there  could  make  a rapid  night  march  and 
surprise  the  city,  if  I remember  the  distance  aright.  According  to  my 
recollection  it  is  not  more  than  18  or  20  miles. 


Headquarters  Department  N'o.  1,  C.  S.  A., 

J^ew  Orleans^  La.,  December  5,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  I avail  myself  of  Colonel  Davis’  trip  to  Kichmond  to  send  you 
a map  and  description,  which  will  give  you  some  definite  idea  of  the 
existing  condition  of  affairs  in  this  department. 

Commencing  at  Calcasieu  Bay,  we  have  one  company  with  two 
24  pounders,  which  are  now  being  put  up  and  will  prevent  foraging 
parties  from  reaching  the  cattle- grazing  prairies  around  the  head  of  that 
lake. 

At  Grand  Chenier  there  is  a company  of  militia  that  I am  furnishing 
with  one  6-pouuder  gun.  In  Saint  Mary’s  Parish  there  are  two  com- 
panies of  infantry  and  one  battery  (at  Franklin).  I have  also  mustered 
one  company  of  cavalry  for  local  defense.  These  troops  are  also  in- 
tended for  moral  effect  in  that  densely  slave-populated  section. 

Passing  east  to  Atrhafalaya  Bay,  I have  placed  there  a regiment  of 
1,000  men  (less  two  companies  at  Franklin),  having  one  company  each 
at  Forts  Berwick  and  Chene,  at  each  of  which  forts  are  mounted  one 
32-pourider  rifled  gun  and  four  24-pounders.  I have  thus  strengthened 
this  point  because  the  railroad  which  supplies  us  with  Texas  cattle 
jiere  approaches  very  near  to  the  coast  and  is  accessible  with  8 feet  of 
'ss  ater.  1 have  also  ordered  the  main  channel  of  the  Atchafalaya  to  be 
filled  by  sinking  live-oak  trees,  leaving  open  an  intricate  channel  80  feet 
wide  for  the  entrance  of  vessels  runnin  g the  blockade.  Flats  loaded  with 
live-oak  will  be  kept  in  readiness  to  sink  in  this  channel  at  a moment’s 
warning.  Bafts  are  also  being  prepared  to  obstruct  the  bayou  under 
the  guns  of  Forts  Berwick  and  (Jhene.  We  can  support  this  point  in 
four  hours,  by  the  Opelousas  road,  by  trooi)s  from  the  city. 

There  is  no  navigable  bayou  until  we  reach  Grand  Caillou,  on  which 
I have  a work  with  two  32-pounders  and  two  full  companies.  Th^  other 
bayous  are  unuavigable  except  La  Fourche,  on  which  I have  also  located 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  775 

a work  with  two  32s  and  two  companies  of  men.  These  works  extend 
from  swamp  to  swamp  on  either  side  of  the  bayous. 

At  Fort  Livingston  are  four  companies  (about  300  men),  witli  one 
rifled  32,  one  8 inch  columbiad,  seven  24s,  and  two  flank  howitzers  (24s), 
with  four  12-pounders  on  the  land  side.  Should  this  Avork  be  passed,  all 
the  inlets  converge  at  the  Little  Temple,  where  a work  is  just  flnished, 
where  I shall  put  two  32s  and  100  men. 

On  the  Mississippi,  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  are  in  good  order 
and  garrisoned  by  ten  comjianies — nearly  1,000  men.  They  are  armed 
as  follows: 

Fort  Jackson : six  42-pounders,  twenty-six  24-pounders,  two  32-i)ounder 
rifles,  sixteen  32-iiounders,  three  8-inch  columbiads,  one  10-inch  colum- 
biad, one  10-inch  and  two  8-inch  mortars,  with  two  48-i)ounder  and  ten 
24-pounder  howitzers. 

Fort  Saint  Philip:  six  42-pounders,  nine  32  pounders,  twenty-tw^o 
24-pounders,  four  8-inch  columbiads,  one  8-inch  and  one  10  inch  mortar, 
and  three  field  guns. 

Between  the  forts  the  river  is  completely  obstructed  by  a raft  of  logs 
securely  chained  to  both  banks  and  held  by  fifteen  large  anchors  weigh- 
ing from  2,500  to  4,000  pounds  each,  and  laid  in  25  fathoms  of  water 
with  00  fathoms  of  strong  chain.  This  raft  is  a complete  obstruction, 
and  has  an  enfilading  fire  from  Fort  Jackson  and  a direct  fire  from  Saint 
Philip. 

On  the  Lake  Borgne  side  we  have,  first,  a work  1 mile  back  from 
Proctorsville,  with  six  guns  (two  32s  and  four  24s),  with  100  men.  They 
can  be  re-enforced  from  the  city  by  the  Mexican  Gulf  Eailroad.  I have 
contracted  for  a telegraph  line  from  here  to  the  work,  to  be  paid  for  by 
the  city. 

At  Tower  Dupre  there  is  one  large  company,  with  five  24-pouijders. 
The  adjoining  bayou  has  been  obstructed  by  piles.  At  Battery  Bien- 
venue  I have  100  men,  with  ten  24 -pounders. 

Fort  Macomb  is  garrisoned  by  three  companies  (250  men),  and  armed 
with  four  42s,  one  8-iuch  columbiad,  twenty-one  24-pounders,  and  four 
flank  howitzers  (24s).  The  live-oak  grove,  Vv^hich  grew  within  300  yards 
of  the  fort  and  oflered  a secure  approach  for  the  enemy,  I have  had 
felled  at  a cost  of  $1,000,  of  which  the  State  paid  half  and  the  city  half. 

Fort  Pike  has  a garrison  of  350  men,  and  the  following  armament : 
Four  42s,  one  9-inch  and  one  8-inch  gun,  two  32-pounder  rifled  guns, 
twenty  24-pounders,  and  five  24-pounder  flank  howitzers.  I have  bad 
logs  cut  and  chains  and  anchors  bought,  to  obstruct  the  channel  both 
at  Forts  Macomb  and  Pike.  I have  also  contracted  to  shoal  the  mouths 
of  West  and  East  Pearl  Eivers  to  4 feet  by  sinking  obstructions.  1 keep 
a regiment  and  a field  battery  in  advance,  at  Bay  Saint  Louis  and  Pass 
Christian,  and  have  made  a depot  of  15,000  rations  at  Gainesville,  in 
case  they  are  driven  back  suddenly  from  the  coast  by  a large  force  of 
the  enemy. 

The  foregoing  comprises  the  exteMor  line,  with  which  I am  in  com- 
munication by  telegraph  to  Berwick  Bay,  Fort  Jackson,  Fort  Macomb, 
and  Fort  Pike.  Instructors  have  been  sent  to  the  various  forts  requir- 
ing it,  and  the  garrisons  are  all  quite  proficient  in  the  drill  of  the  sea- 
coast  gun. 

The  interior  line,  as  you  will  observe  on  the  map,  composes,  with  the 
intervening  swamps,  a complete  continuous  line  around  the  city,  includ- 
ing Algiers  within  its  liifiits.  It  is  almost  entirely  finished.  Ten  32s 
are  mounted  on  the  line  below  the  barracks,  at  its  junction  with  the 


776  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

river,  and  ten  42s  will  soon  be  u]3  on  the  opposite  side,  giving  a cross- 
fire of  twenty  guns  at  that  point.  The  lines  extend  to  the  swamp  on 
each  side,  and  have  flanking  arrangements  for  32-pounder  carronades 
to  sweep  the  whole  point.  Their  development  is  8J  feet,  with  a wide 
ditch,  which  is  fllled  with  water.  On  the  Gentilly  Ridge  the  same  kind 
of  work,  with  four  guns  5 on  the  Pontchartrain  Railroad  flve  guns,  the 
canal  four  guns,  the  Bayou  Saint  John  four,  and  the  Jefferson  Railroad 
two  guns — all  with  flanking  arrangements  for  infantry.  The  guns  of 
these  small  works  will  all  be  mounted  within  ten  days. 

Above  the  city  the  line  extends  from  the  swamp  to  the  river,  with 
flanking  arrangements  for  artillery,  and  terminates  at  the  river  with  a 
powerful  battery  of  fourteen  42-i:)ounders.  At  this  point  Major  Lovell 
is  building  an  obstruction  under  the  Are  of  this  battery,  which,  I think, 
will  prevent  any  vessel  from  passing  down  the  river.  On  the  Algiers 
side  the  line  is  just  behind  the  Barataria  Canal,  and  runs  from  the  river 
to  the  swamp.  It  is  all  complete  except  the  battery  on  the  river,  where 
it  is  intended  to  mount  ten  32-pounders.  The  whole  should  be  finished 
and  mounted  in  two  weeks,  when  New  Orleans  will  be  a citadel. 

The  exterior  line  is  manned  by  about  4,500  men,  and  I have  about 
3,500  for  the  interior  line,  besides  about  0,000  well-armed  volunteers  in 
the  city,  who  are  uniformed  and  drilled.  With  15,000  men  I can  defend 
the  city  against  any  force  that  can  be  brought,  unless  we  are  attacked 
on  all  sides  at  once.  I have  also  had  two  sham  parapets  made  in  the 
city  and  some  guns  mounted,  as  schools  of  practice  for  the  volunteers. 
In  enumerating  the  troops  I do  not  reckon  two  regiments  (1,G00  men) 
that  I sent  up  to  Columbus  last  week  to  General  Polk’s  aid. 

The  two  powder-mills  are  in  running  order,  one  at  the  barracks  and  one 
at  the  old  Marine  Hospital.  Major  Rains  came  down  last  week,  and  after 
a full  inspection  reports  that  they  can  easily  turn  out  2 tons  of  powder 
per  day,  and  I am  making  a contract  with  responsible  parties  here  for 
200  tons  of  saltpeter.  Sulphur  and  charcoal  we  have  in  abundance. 
The  new  marine  hospital  is  being  fitted  up  at  a small  cost,  one-half  for 
a hospital  and  the  other  for  a laboratory  and  store-rooms  for  munitions 
of  war,  implements,  arms,  &c. 

With  a sufficiency  of  powder  I should  consider  myself  in  a position 
to  hold  New  Orleans  for  an  indefinite  length  of  time.  The  only  point, 
then,  for  consideration  would  be  provisions.  I am  endeavoring  silently, 
through  other  parties,  to  induce  holders  to  lay  in  not  less  than  60,000 
barrels  of  flour,  of  which  the  city  consumes  about  800  per  diem.  This, 
with  beef  cattle  from  Texas  and  from  Mississippi  via  Mandeville,  would 
enable  us  to  stand  a siege  of  two  or  three  months,  if  it  should  be  neces- 
sary. 

I have  thus  endeavored  to  give  you  a rough  sketch  of  the  progress 
that  has  been  made  in  the  work  assigned  me  by  the  administration. 
There  are  a thousand  minor  matters  which  have  taken  up  a great  deal 
of  time  and  given  much  trouble,  but  the  heaviest  part  of  the  work  is 
done.  The  amount  of  labor  involved  has  been  more  than  I anticipated, 
as  matters  were  in  a much  worse  condition  than  I could  have  supposed 
possible ; but  I have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  I fegard  New  Orleans 
at  present  as  strong  enough  to  withstand  any  attack  that  is  likely  to  be 
made. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding  Department  No.  1. 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  777 

Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.,  December  10,  18G1. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond^  Ya. : 

Sir:  The  transfer  of  Colonel  Wood’s  regiment.  Seventh  Alabama,  to 
East  Tennessee  leaves  me  little  over  0,000  arms  here.  With  this  num- 
ber and  my  present  means  of  rapid  re-enforcement  from  Mobile  I have 
no  apprehension,  but  it  leaves  me  a large  number  of  men,  near  3,000, 
without  arms,  and  renders  it  impossible  for  me  to  comply  with  the  wish 
expressed  in  yours  of  the  4th  November  for  a transfer  of  some  of  my 
oldest  and  best  troops  to  more  active  service.  Could  I give  aii  assur- 
ance of  such  a move  to  these  men  I am  satisfied  it  would  have  a happy 
effect  in  causing  many  to  re-enlist  “for  the  war.”  Without  such  assur- 
ance and  a short  furlough  to  visit  their  homes  but  few  can  be  secured. 
It  would  be  a great  misfortune  to  lose  them,  for  they  are  the  best  troo))s 
I have  ever  kuown,  all  inferior  men  having  been  culled  out.  The  artil- 
lery will  be  an  especial  loss,  for  it  takes  time  and  much  labor  to  teach 
the  duties  of  that  arm..  As  most  of  my  artillery  officers  of  the  regular 
service  have  been  transferred  to  other  and  higher  duties,  I shall  have 
to  ask  of  the  Department  to  allow  me  in  some  way  to  retain  some  of  the 
best  of  those  in  the  volunteers  here,  when  their  men  are  discharged,  to 
act  as  instructors.  The  time  of  some  of  the  companies  of  one  of  my  best 
regiments  (the  First  Alabama)  expires  in  January,  six  weeks  from  now, 
as  they  claim  from  the  time  they  entered  the  State  service,  and  not  their 
transfer  to  the  Confederacy  in  March. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BRAGG, 

Major-  General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.j  December  10,  1861. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army: 

Sir  : When  I assumed  command  in  this  department  I found  that  a 
number  of  independent  companies,  originally  mustered  into  the  State 
service,  had  been  transferred  to  the  Confederate  service  at  the  request 
of  General  Twiggs. 

Some  of  these  companies  had  very  poor  officers,  and  in  some  cases 
the  ranks  were  filled  in  part  with  men  wholly  unfit  for  military  service; 
and  the  sifting  out  of  these  companies  has  in  some  instances  reduced 
them  below  the  number  required. 

What  I desire  to  know  is,  whether,  in  companies  thus  reduced^  and 
when  the  officers  are  manifestly  incompetent,  I cannot  have  the  author- 
ity to  break  them  up  or  to  transfer  the  good  men  and  let  the  officers  be 
turned  over  again  to  the  State  authorities.  I could  thus  add  much  to 
the  efficiency  of  the  service,  while  materially  diminishing  the  expense  in 
getting  rid  of  inefficient  and  supernumerary  officers. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL. 

Major- General^  Commanding  Department, 


778  OPERATIONS  IN-  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Neic  Orleans^  La.,  December  10,  18G1.' 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

Sir:  After  great  delay  and  many  blunders  I have  succeeded  in  get- 
ting up  a return*  of  the  troops  in  my  department  for  the  month  of 
October.  It  is  not  as  accurate  as  it  should  be,  but  will  give  you  an 
approximate  idea  of  the  force  here.  1 have  sent  the  Thirteenth  Lou- 
isiana and  Third  Mississippi  Kegimeuts  to  Columbus  at  the  earnest 
instance  of  the  generals  in  command  there,  but  have  called  upon  Gov- 
ernor Moore  for  two  regiments  to  replace  them,  which  I have  ordered  to 
be  mustered.  I do  not  know  whether  this  exceeds  my  authority  or  not; 
if  it  does,  please  give  me  the  necessary  orders,  as  I want  all  the  men  I 
can  arm.  The  November  returns  sTiall  not  be  delayed  so  long, 
iiespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- Ge7ieral,  Commanding  Department. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  December  11,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : Yours  of  the  2d  only  reached  me  yesterday.  It  will  relieve  some 
embarrassment  with  the  two  Mississippi  regiments  which  had  elected 
field  officers.  Upon  a critical  examination  of  all  the  new  regiments 
recently  received,  they  were  found  to  contain  many  men  utterly  unfit 
for  service.  All  such  have  been  promptly  discharged.  It  does  not 
weaken  our  strength,  and  materially  lightens  our  expenses,  especially 
in  the  medical  department. 

The  regiment  of  independent  companies  was  on  the  eve  of  organiza- 
tion when  your  order  for  one  company  (Captain  Coopwood^s)  to  join 
Colonel  Dowd’s  regiment  at  Savannah  cheeked  it.  Some  imposition  has 
been  practiced  in  this  case.  I shall  apply  to  the  governor  of  Mississippi 
to  send  me  another  company  to  fill  the  regiment.  It  is  suffering  much 
for  want  of  organization. 

Great  difficulties  are  being  encountered  in  reorganizing  our  old  men 
for  the  war.  I inclose  a circular  issued  to  them  some  three  weeks  since. 
It  produced  some  effect  for  a while,  but  no  result  so  far.  Our  fight,  I 
fear,  has  iujured  the  prospect.  Men  wish  to  go  home  and  talk  over 
their  deeds  with  friends  and  families.  I shall  now  try  by  liberal  offer 
of  furloughs.  As  they  are  to  go  anyhow,  it  will  be  as  well  to  let  them 
go  on  furlough,  and  they  will  not  be  able  to  stay.  The  women  will  not 
tolerate  it.  Many  return  who  have  gone  off*  sick,  and  say  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  stay  at  home.  It  is  a mere  indefinite  fancy  to  get  away,  and  be 
clear  of  the  restraints  of  military  control  for  a while.  They  will  soon 
repent  and  rejoin  the  service,  but  the  loss  of  organization  and  expense 
of  getting  them  back  will  be  great.  Though  my  discipline  has  been 
rigid,  I think  I can  safely  say  it  has  not  driven  a desirable  man  from 
the  service,  and  most  of  them  are  now  better  men  and  better  soldiers, 
and  more  attached  to  me,  than  if  they  had  been  allowed  liberty  and 
license. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  779 

A letter  from  Colonel  Clialmers,  Ninth  Mississippi  Ite^^inient  (a  very 
good  officer),  who  was  requested  by  me  to  try  and  reorganize  his  admi- 
rable regiment,  may  throw  some  light  on  the  i)oints  of  difficulty.  If  Ave 
had  arms  for  my  new  men  the  promise  they  desire  could  be  made,  but 
in  the  absence  of  Colonel  Wood’s  regiment  we  have  only  about  0,000 
stand  of  guns.  My  reply  to  the  colonel  tries  to  combat  the  idea  of  going- 
north  now.  Wood’s  regiment  is  clamorous  to  return  already.  I shall 
not  despair  of  success  nor  cease  to  strive,  but  the  prosiiect  is  not  very 
encouraging.  Your  i)lan  of  fixing  a future  date  for  discharge  and  com- 
mencement of  new  service  will  be  tried. 

The  danger  to  Mobde  which  you  suggest  is  provided  for.  Mounted 
men  are  stationed  at  the  points  where  the  enemy  might  land,  AAuth 
instructions  to  report  any  hostile  demonstration,  and  all  our  inlantr}’ 
out  of  the  forts  and  light  artillery  ale  in  readiness  for  concentration  on 
any  point,  and  the  telegraph  could  secure  re-enforcements  from  here  in 
ten  hours.  A thorough  inspection  by  my  staff  officers  is  now  goiug  on 
in  all  the  departments  of  General  Withers’  command,  and  I shall  soon 
pay  him  another  visit  myself.  I inclose  a copy  of  a letter  just  received 
from  him,  upon  which  I ordered  the  closing  of  Grant’s  Pass  effectually 
and  unconditionally.  The  defenses  of  the  sound  have  been  sadly  oA^er- 
looked.  As  early  as  last  May  I called  the  attention  of  our  friends  in 
Louisiana  to  the  subject.  They  replied  the  Navy  Department  had  it 
in  hand.  If  I may  judge  from  what  they  have  done  here,  but  little 
has  been  accomplished.  But  this  is  a matter  not  within  my  province, 
though  I can  but  lament  results. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BRAGG, 
3Iajor-  General^  Coynmanding. 

[Inclosure,  j 

Headquarters  District  of  Alabama, 

Mobile^  December  9,  1861. 

Maj.  George  G.  Garner, 

Assistayit  Adjutant- General^  Pensacola^  Fla.: 

Sir  : The  coast  guard  between  this  place  and  New  Orleans  is  not  such 
as  the  polic3^  and  interest  of  the  Confederate  GoAwnment  demands. 
Several  schooners  and  steamers  have  been  captured  of  late.  The  steamer 
Lewis,  from  New  Orleans  to  this  place,  with  cargo  of  sugar  and  molas- 
ses, was  captured  about  ten  days  since,  and  a part  of  her  crew  have  re- 
turned here.  From  the  engineer  of  the  boat,  a Mr.  Haley,  Avho  has  the 
reputation  of  being  entirely  reliable,  I learn  that,  besides  the  cargo  of 
the  Lewis,  Ship  Island  was  coA^ered  with  barrels  of  sugar,  turpentine, 
molasses,  and  resin,  and  with  lumber  and  cattle.  The  character  of  the 
lumber  and  cattle  was  such  as  to  xireclude  the  thought  of  those  articles 
having  been  brought  out  from  the  North.  When  taken  on  board  the 
enemy’s  vessel,  he  found  the  New  Orleans  papers  of  the  preceding  day’s 
date  on  the  table  in  the  ca’cin.  During  his  detention  expeditions  were 
sent  out  nightly,  and  which  he  believes  were  intended  to  keep  uji  com- 
munication with  the  shore.  A steamer  to  carry  off'  freight  runs  regularly- 
between  the  island  and  New  York.  This  report  is  corroborated  by  all 
the  information  I have  been  able  to  gather  from  other  sources.  To  crush 
out  this  evil  I Avould  suggest  the  propriety  of  closing  Grant’s  Pass,  as 
the  most  effectual  way  of  removing  all  pretext  for  a coast  trade  so  ad- 
vantageous to  the  enemy.  The  battery  there,  removed  to  Cedar  Point 
and  strengthened,  would  command  those  waters,  and  not  be  subject  to 


780  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 


tlie  objections  to  Grant’s  Pass,  as  Cedar  Point  is  part  of  the  main-land, 
with  good  road  leading  into  the  back  country. 

The  idea  of  our  caricature  gunboats  being  a protection  to  the  coast 
trade  is  to  me  simply  ridiculous.  In  truth  I should  look  on  our  Navy 
Department  as  an  amusing  fancy  sketch  but  for  the  waste  of  money  and 
corruption  for  which  it  is  the  excuse. 

lu  that  I am  tormented  by  hourly  applications  from  selfish  boat-owners 
for  permits  through  Grant’s  Pass,  you  will  oblige  me  by  telegraphing 
me  at  the  earliest  moment  the  decision  of  the  general  as  to  this  trade 
being  stopped  promptly  and  finally.  The  railroad  communication  and 
reduced  charges  prevent  the  necessity  for  all  undue  risks  to  keep  the 
coast  trade  open.  We  cannot,  therefore,  afibrd  to  furnish  the  enemy 
the  low-water  transportation,  which  they  can  only  get  by  taking  our 
boats,  as  well  as  the  produce  of  our  country. 

The  coast  being  within  General  Lovell’s  department,  I have  nothing 
to  recommend  for  its  being  properly  guarded. 

Very  respectfully,  major,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  WITHERS, 

Brigadier- General,  &c. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Ofpice, 

No.  264.  i Richmond,  Va.,  December  12,  1861. 

*#***## 

16.  The  command  of  Major-General  Bragg  is  extended  west,  so  as  to 
include  Pascagoula  Bay  and  that  portion  of  Mississippi  east  of  the  Pas- 
cagoula River. 

###**** 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War ; 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  A djutant-  General, 


Jackson,  Miss.,  December  12,  1861. 
His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis: 

Lincoln  boats  continually  harassing  our  sea-coast.  Our  people  will  be 
driven  from  their  homes  and  their  property  destroyed.  Third  Regiment 
Mississippi  Volunteers  have  been  ordered  from  the  coast  to  Kentucky; 
many  of  them  sailors,  and  much  needed.  Please  order  them  back  to 
seaport  and  keep  them  there. 

JOHN  J.  PETTUS. 


Richmond,  Va.,  December  13,  1861. 

Gov.  John  J.  Pettus, 

Jaclcson,  Miss. : 

Keep  the  regiment  to  which  you  refer  on  the  sea-coast  until  further 
orders.  There  is  a confusion  in  numbering  the  regiments,  so  that  I can- 
not tell  which  one  it  is.  We  will  endeavor  to  organize  a force  better 
adapted  to  sea-coast  defense  than  an  infantry  regiment,  and  duly  inform 
you. 


JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  781 

Jackson,  Miss.,  December  14,  18G1. 
His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President j Richmond : 

Dear  Sir  : I am  earnestly  requested  by  the  people  of  the  Mississippi 
Gtilf  coast  and  by  Governor  Pettus  to  ask  the  attention  of  the  President 
and  the  Secretary  of  War  to  the  defense  of  the  coast  by  a niihtary  force 
on  shore  sufficient  to  protect  property  and  repel  invasion  by  the  enemy. 
The  governor  requests  me  to  ask  that  three  regiments  shall  be  accepted 
into  the  Confederate  service  under  the  act  authorizing  troops  to  be 
accepted  for  local  defense,  to  be  stationed  on  the  coast ; also  a battalion 
which  he  has  now  organized  and  equipped,  and  which  could  be  sent 
there  immediately.  It  is  also  requested  by  him  and  by  the  Hon.  R. 
Seale,  Representative  from  the  coast,  that  the  Third  Regiment,  Colonel 
Reason’s,  shall  be  one  so  accepted,  and  that  it  be  ordered  back  to  the 
coast,  from  which  it  was  by  recent  order  of  General  Johnston  removed 
to  Columbus,  Ky.,  where  it  now  is.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  this  reg- 
iment is  composed  mainly  or  in  large  part  of  men  familiar  with  the 
coast,  its  bays  and  bayous,  and  accustomed  to  the  management  of  water- 
craft. This  is  very  important,  and  the  governor  authorizes  me  to  say 
he  will  supply  its  place  at  Columbus  with  another  regiment  at  the  earli- 
est practicable  day.  The  legislature  has  made  an  appropriation  of 
$250,000  to  build  gunboats  on  the  coast,  and  force  will  be  required  to 
lirotect  the  points  at  which  they  are  to  be  constructed.  The  necessity 
of  a military  force  for  our  coast  protection  and  defense  is  imperious,  and 
I earnestly  and  respectfully  urge  it  upon  the  President  and  Secretary  of 
War. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  J.  McRAE. 

The  Seventh  Regiment,  Colonel  Goode’s,  is  now  upon  the  coast  at  Bay 
Saint  Louis  and  in  the  Confederate  service,  under  command  of  General 
Lovell.  This  to  be  one  of  three. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  December  16,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  yours  of  the 
7th  instant,  inclosing  a letter  from  Dr.  Cartwright  to  the  President, 
relative  to  the  Mexican  Gulf  Railroad.  I am  not  aware  that  the  Gov- 
ernment or  the  parties  who  claim  to  have  purchased  the  road  have  any 
intention  of  using  the  iron  for  ship -building  purposes,  nor  do  I believe 
that  any  such  purpose  exists.  Had  any  plan  of  that  railroad  been  laid 
before  me,  I should  have  weighed  the  respective  advantages  to  the  Gov- 
ernment of  using  the  iron  on  the  road  or  on  the  ships  and  decided 
accordingly.  I am  well  satisfied  that  the  whole  scheme  is  to  make  a 
grand  speculation  for  private  purposes,  either  by  selling  the  iron  in  this 
market  or  by  forcing  the  road  upon  the  Government  at  an  exorbitant 
price. 

I have  a work  at  Proctorsville,  across  the  railroad,  mounting  six 
32-pounders,  and  manned  by  100  men,  distant  from  the  vity  27  miles, 
which  covers  the  valuable  i)lantations  along  the  left  bank  of  the  river. 
To  re-enforce  this  work  rapidly  I have  constructed  a switch  from  the 
Pontchar train  to  the  Mexican  Gulf  road,  at  a cost  of  $1,600,  and  am 
putting  up  telegraph  lines  between  the  city  and  Proctorsville,  which 


782  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [CiiAr.  XVI. 

will  enable  me  to  receive  early  notice,  and,  by  using  the  rolling  stock  of 
the  Pontchartrain  road,  to  send  down  4,000  men  in  four  hours. 

It  is  this  arrangement  that  I do  not  wish  to  be  interfered  with  by 
what  I consider  a ^‘rail  speculation.”  The  only  order  I have  given  in 
the  case  is  to  say  that  the  road  shall  not  be  torn  up  so  as  to  prevent 
the  passage  of  troops.  I have  told  them  they  may  take  up  the  present 
rail  and  put  down  the  T-rail,  but  they  decline.  Of  one  thing  I am  sure, 
the  Government  has  no  prospective  beneht  in  what  the  company  pro- 
poses to  do. 

To  avoid,  however,  the  exercise  of  military  authority,  if  possible,  I 
sought  other  means  of  obtaining  the  end  in  view,  by  ordinary  process 
of  law.  Learning  that  the  State  has  mortgages  upon  the  road,  I con- 
sulted with  the  attorney-general,  who  is  now  taking  the  necessary  steps 
to  prevent,  by  an  injunction,  any  damage  being  done  to  it,  so  as  to 
preserve  it  intact  for  the  better  security  of  the  claims  that  the  State 
has  upon  it.  I cousider  it,  therefore,  hardly  necessary  to  discuss  the 
propriety  of  military  interference  as  long  as  the  matter  is,  or  forthwith 
will  be,  with  the  civil  autborities,  but  have  merely  mentioned  the  fore- 
going facts  to  give  you  the  correct  data  in  the  premises. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.,  December  17,  1861. 

Adjutant-General, 

Richmond^  Va.: 

Sir  : On  the  14th  instant  the  enemy  landed  about  1,000  men  on  Santa 
Rosa  Island,  and  they  are  now  encamped  near  the  fort.  No  movement 
of  any  sort  on  their  part  indicates  a renewal  of  the  attack.  Should  their 
ships  again  attempt  to  take  position  against  McRee,  they  will  be  re- 
ceived by  a masked  battery  of  five  heavy  shell  and  three  rifled  guns, 
which  will  teach  them  a lesson.  This  battery  was  projected  last  spring, 
but  abandoned  after  an  examination  of  the  Coast  Survey  charts.  It 
seems  the  depth  of  water  has  increased  or  the  chart  was  wrong. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTOhT  BRAGG, 
Major- General^  Commanding. 


Xavy  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Pu.,  December  17,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : This  Department  is  unable  to  obtain  any  powder  for  the  naval 
service  at  Xew  Orleans,  and  Flag-Officer  Hollins  reports  that  he  is 
without  a grain.  The  daily  produce  of  the  mills  at  Xew  Orleans,  I am 
informed,  may  be  sufficient  for  its  naval  as  well  as  for  its  military 
defenses  j and  I have  the  honor  to  request,  if  you  can  possibly  do  so, 
that  you  will  be  pleased  to  instruct  General  Lovell  to  supply  Flag-Offi- 
cer Hollins  with  cannon  powder  upon  his  requisitions  as  it  may  be  re- 
quired for  the  public  service. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  MALLORY, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


CHAr.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATir. 


783 


War  Department, 
Richmond^  F«.,  December  18,  1801. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Commanding  Department,  (&c.,  New  Orleans,  La.: 

Sir  : *In  comiiliauce  witli  a request  addressed  to  this  Department  by 
the  Hon.  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  you  are  instructed  to  do  all  in  your 
power,  consistent  with  the  exigencies  of  the  military  service  in  your 
department,  towards  supplying  Flag-Officer  Hollins,  0.  S.  Navy,  with 
cannon  powder,  upon  his  requisition  therefor. 

1 am,  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  ^Yar. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Neio  Orleans,  La.,  December  19,  1801. 

Governor  Moore  : 

Dear  Sir  : I return  Colonel  Fontaine’s  letter.  I do  not  disapprove 
of  fortifying  Vicksburg.  I said  in  my  previous  letter  we  had  no  officer 
of  Engineers  and  no  guns  to  spare,  and  I thought  it  too  late  to  commence 
a self-protecting  work.  If  they  wish  to  build  it,  however,  let  them  do 
so,  although  I must  adhere  to  my  previous  opinion,  that  it  is  better  to 
concentrate  the  forts  and  obstructions  at  the  j)oints  where  the  batteries 
already  exist.  If  this  cannot  be  done,  I would  grant  permission  to  go 
to  work  on  the  Louisiana  side,  but  I can  give  them  no  competent  officer, 
no  guns,  and  no  powder. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

[Ilk  closure.] 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 
Ordnance  Office,  Jackson,  Miss.,  December  18,  1861. 
His  Excellency  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

Governor  of  Louisiana : 

Dear  Sir  : I hope  you  will  pardon  me  for  again  calling  your  atten- 
tion to  the  subject  of  the  defense  of  New  Orleans.  I have  entire  confi- 
dence in  your  wisdom  and  patriotism  and  the  ability  of  the  officers  to 
whom  you  have  intrusted  the  safety  of  our  great  metropolis  ; but  ])er- 
sons  at  a distance  from  an  object  can  see  its  position,  with  all  its  bear- 
ings, more  distinctly  than  those  who  are  in  close  contact  with  it.  The 
plans  of  the  enemy  are  now  clearly  developed.  They  intend  to  attempt 
the  descent  of  the  Mississippi  without  attacking  Columbus  or  Fulton 
at  all.  Their  object  will  be  to  reach  Memphis  and  Nash^^lle  by  move- 
ments up  the  Tennessee  and  Cumberland  Eivers  and  from  Bowling 
Green,  so  as  to  compel  General  Polk  to  fall  back  upon  Memphis  and 
General  Johnston  upon  Nashville.  I believe  they  will  be  whipped  if 
they  attempt  it,  but  they  may  not,  and  we  should  not  let  our  hopes  lull 
us  iuto  supineness  and  a neglect  of  our  security.  As  soon  as  their  army 
moves  upon  Bowling  Green  and  their  flotilla  commences  the  ascent  of 
the  Tennessee  from  Paducah,  you  may  expect  their  gunboats  to  enter 
Lake  Pontchartrain  and  attempt  the  capture  of  Manchac  and  the  occu- 
I)ancy  of  all  the  positions  on  Lake  Maurepas  and  above  your  city  accessi- 
ble to  a land  force  put  ashore  from  their  transports.  Unless  every  pass 
is  fortified  on  both  sides  and  obstructed  the  attempt  may  succeed,  for 


784  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

no  batteries  can  stop  the  passage  of  steamers,  unless  their  headway  can 
be  checked  while  they  are  held  under  fire.  I shall  go  to  Vicksburg  to- 
morrow, to  lay  out  our  fortifications  and  to  make  an  estimate  of  the 
number  of  negroes  it  will  take  to  finish  them.  I feel  confident  that  a 
large  force  will  descend  the  Mississippi,  if  one  is  moved  up  the  Tennes- 
see Eiver,  as  soon  as  the  latter  succeeds  in  reaching  a iiroper  point  for 
debarking  for  Memphis.  I will  fortify  Vicksburg  and  prevent  its  cap- 
ture, but  I cannot  prevent  the  enemy  from  burning  it  and  passing  it. 
1 can  keep  them  from  enteiing  the  corporation,  but  they  can  shell  it  from 
the  river  and  from  the  Louisiana  side.  A fort  constructed  at  the  bend 
above  would  guard  the  railroad  approach  to  Vicksburg  and  the  interior 
of  your  State,  and  prevent  them  from  cutting  a canal  and  turning  the 
river  through  the  narrow  neck  between  the  bends,  which  a small  army 
could  do  in  a single  daj^  I believe  that  their  designs  will  be  thwarted 
by  a kind  Providence.  God  seems  to  fight  our  battles  for  us  and  to 
turn  our  very  blunders  into  advantages  against  our  foes;  but  still  I 
should  feel  more  confident  if  the  Tennessee  and  Cumberland  Elvers  were 
closed  on  the  military  line  between  Generals  Johnston  and  Polk ; if  a 
fort  was  opposite  Columbus,  two  others  opposite  above  Memphis,  and 
two  on  the  oi)posite  banks  of  the  bend  above  Vicksburg.  This,  with 
obstructions  between  Forts  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson,  and  all  the  ap- 
proaches from  the  Mississippi  Sound,  east  of  the  city  and  above  it,  sim- 
ilarly guarded,  would  insure  the  safety  of  New  Orleans,  if  we  had  one 
strong  brigade,  with  a thousand  cavalry  and  two  batteries  of  horse  artil- 
lery, about  the  Bay  of  Saint  Louis  and  the  mouth  of  Pearl  Eiver.  I 
think  your  greatest  immediate  danger  threatens  you  from  that  direc- 
tion. 

With  the  highest  regard  for  your  excellency,  and  with  the  deepest 
regret  that  1 have  to  differ  in  opinion  with  General  Lovell,  I am,  respect- 
fully, your  obedient  servant, 

EWD.  FONTAINE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Chief  of  Ordnance^  Mississippi  Army. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.,  December  20,  1861. 

Adjutant-General, 

Richmond,  Va. : 

Sir  : We  were  getting  on  finely  in  re-enlisting  the  twelve-months’ 
men  here,  having  some  450  in  the  Ninth  Mississippi  Eegiment  and  a fair 
prospect  in  tbe  First  Alabama,  a well-instructed  body  of  artillery,  when 
the  unfortunate  law  of  bounties  and  universal  suffrage  upset  everything. 
Men  who  were  perfectly  willing  to  accept  good  and  competent  field  offi- 
cers, especiaHy  necessary  in  artillery,  are  now  torn  and  tossed  about  by 
the  intrigues  of  designing  men,  seeking  their  own  advancement  or  re- 
venge upon  others  who  have  made  them  do  their  duty.  Discord  now 
reigns  where  all  was  harmony,  and  our  very  best  officers  are  sure  to  be 
sacrificed  to  this  fell  spirit.  The  men  did  not  ask  this  privilege,  did  not 
desire  it,  and  would  not  now  claim  to  exercise  it,  but  for  these  dema- 
gogues, who  are  misleading  them  from  anything  but  pure  motives.  We 
shall  still  labor  to  overcome  this  evil,  greater  than  all  others  combined, 
and  hope  yet  to  reorganize  a part  under  the  old  law.  In  one  month  we 
should  have  secured  5,000  of  the  6,000  twelve-months’  men  here.  Now 
if  we  get  2,000  we  shall  do  well.  Our  best  field  officers  are  certainly 
sacrificed ; a poor  reward  for  past  faithful  services.  They  would  have 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  785 

cheerfully  met  this  fate  at  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  but  from  their  own 
Government  it  is  hard  to  bear. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BKAXTON  BKAGG, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Ala.  and  West  Fla., 

No.  18.  j Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  December  20,  1801. 

The  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Withers  is  extended  westward,  so 
as  to  include  Pascagoula  Bay  and  that  portion  of  Mississippi  east  of 
Pascagoula  Eiver. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg : 

GEO.  G.  GARNEK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  DepartjMent,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Pecember  23,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  two  letters  of 
10th  instant  and  one  of  16th. 

1.  I entirely  approve  your  forwarding  the  Thirteenth  Louisiana  and 
Third  Mississippi  Regiments  to  the  aid  of  our  commanders  in  Kentucky. 
While  I do  not  feel  at  liberty,  under  present  circumstancesyto  order 
unconditionally  any  troops  to  be  sent  from  your  department,  I shall  be 
most  happy  to  learn  that  you  can  spare  any  for  the  aid  of  the  generals 
in  Kentucky,  who  are  sadly  outnumbered.  Of  course  it  is  useless  to 
call  out  any  troops  that  you  cannot  arm,  unless  they  are  willing  to 
enlist  for  the  war,  in  which  event  the  Government  is  willing  to  pay  the 
expense  of  holding  them  in  camp  of  instruction  until  armed.  We  want 
all  the  men  that  will  enlist  for  the  war  and  we  want  all  armed  men  that 
will  enlist  for  twelve  months.  I only  require  that  you  keep  your  returns 
up  to  date,  so  that  I may  be  at  all  times  advised  of  the  entire  resources 
at  command  of  the  Government  in  your  department. 

2.  In  relation  to  your  question  about  the  power  to  break  up  and 
reorganize  companies,  so  as  to  get  rid  of  incompetent  officers,  I have  to 
say  that  under  the  acts  of  Congress  company  officers  are  always  elective, 
and  this  right  of  the  men  must  be  kept  steadily  in  view  and  always 
respected.  Now  you  have  done  well  to  sift  out  the  men  unable  to  do 
duty  and  discharge  them  from  the  service.  The  companies  thus  reduced 
below  the  standard  number  may  be  disbanded  at  our  pleasure  if  not 
filled  up  by  other  able  men.  We  have  no  right  to  assign  them  to  com- 
manders whom  they  have  not  elected,  but  we  have  a right,  with  their 
consent,  to  consolidate  them  into  new  companies,  and  have  new  elec- 
tions of  officers.  The  best  plan,  it  seems  to  me,  is  to  get  the  men  to 
agree  to  form  new  companies  and  re-enlist.  On  getting  their  agree- 
ment, muster  the  old  companies  out  of  service  and  new  companies  into 
service  at  the  same  time,  and  let  the  latter  elect  their  new  officers. 
With  your  advice  and  influence  they  could  readily  be  induced  to  elect 
competent  officers  j but  the  whole  matter  must  be  managed  by  concert 
with  the  men,  and  not  by  exercise  of  authority,  for  we  have  none. 

3.  On  the  subject  of  the  iron  of  the  Mexican  Gulf  Railroad  I will  write 
you  again  in  a day  or  two.  Mr.  Gordon  is  here,  and  it  is  possible  an 

50  R R— VOL  VI 


786  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

arrangement  may  be  made  advantageous  to  the  Government  and  satis- 
factory to  the  company. 

4.  J have  now  to  ask  your  attention  to  the  subject  of  the  coast  defense 
of  Mississippi.  The  interception  of  your  communication  with  that  t)or- 
tion  of  your  department  has  caused  us  to  take  into  serious  considera- 
tion the  formation  of  a new  district,  extending  from  the  mouth  of  Pearl 
Eiver  to  East  Pascagoula,  and  detaching  it  from  your  command,  as  it 
must  be  almost  impracticable  for  you  to  give  it  any  personal  attention. 
In  the  mean  time,  however,  our  concern  has  been  awakened  by  news 
that  there  is  considerable  communication  kept  up  between  our  coast 
and  the  enemy  by  small  traders  running  with  sloops  and  schooners  out 
of  the  different  streams  that  empty  into  the  Mississippi  Sound,  and 
supplying  the  enemy  at  Ship  Island  and  the  Ohandeleurs  with  all  the 
intelligence  they  can  gather,  as  well  as  the  daily  papers  of  New  Orleans. 
I inclose  you  for  examination  and  reflection  a paper  on  this  subject,  pre- 
pared by  Hon.  J.  J.  McKae,  who  is  intimately  acquainted  with  the  whole 
coast,  and  on  which  the  President  has  written  an  indorsement  that  I 
also  recommend  to  your  attention.*  We  must,  as  far  as  possible,- pro- 
tect our  people  against  marauders,  and  the  proclamation  issued  by  the 
Yankee  general,  as  contained  in  the  papers,  is  so  open  an  invitation  to 
the  slaves  to  revolt,  that  they  ought,  in  my  opinion,  at  once  be  removed 
out  of  the  reach  of  the  incendiary  gang,  who  are  not  simply  our  enemies, 
but  the  enemies  of  the  human  race.  If  you  think  you  cannot  communi- 
cate with  the  southern  coast  of  Mississippi  with  sufficient  facility  to 
supervise  efficiently  defensive  measures,  you  will  be  good  enough  so  to 
inform  me  at  once,  and  we  must  try  to  find  a commander  for  it  as  a 
separate  district. 

Please  inform  me  how  the  powder  factory  is  getting  on  and  what 
quantity  of  powder  you  have.  Major  Pains  tells  me  that  the  mills  thus 
far  are  not  making  over  1,500  pounds  a day,  although  capable  of  mak- 
ing about  twice  that  quantity. 

I am,  vour  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

I^ew  Orleans.,  La..,  December  24,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P:  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  18th  instant  relative  to  furnishing  Commodore  Hollins  with  cannon 
powder.  I have  made  it  a point,  without  instructions,  to  aid  him  to  the 
extent  of  my  ability,  and  he  has  already  been  furnished  by  us  with 
nearly  4 tons  of  powder.  I have  collected  materials  at  great  trouble 
and  exi)ense  and  urged  to  completion  a large  mill  for  making  powder 
for  the  purpose  of  supplying  my  own  wants,  and  they  are  yet  far  from 
being  in  a satisfactory  condition.  I have  already  turned  over  to  the 
Navy  more  powder  than  in  justice  to  the  Army  I should  have  done, 
and  it  will  require  more  than  I have  on  hand  to  give  a half  allowance 
to  the  guns  I have  mounted.  If  I can  be  supplied  with  saltpeter  in 
large  quantities  I can  easily  furnish  Captain  Hollins  and  myself,  or  if 
he  will  procure  the  saltpeter  I will  have  it  worked  up.  As  matters 
now  stand  he  cannot  rely  upon  me  for  a pound.  I must  supply  myself 


See  McRae  to  Davis,  j).  781;  indorsement  not  found. 


Chap.XYI.]  correspondence,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  787 

first,  and  I feel  satisfied  that  you  will  indorse  my  action  when  you  are 
made  acquainted  with  all  the  circumstances. 

I beg  leave  to  ask  your  attention  to  my  recommendation  in  reference 
to  Colonel  Duncan.  There  are  nearly  5,000  men  in  the  works  on  the 
exterior  line,  without  any  competent  brigade  commander,  who  should 
be  a thorough  artillerist  and  understand  well  the  nature  of  the  coast. 
It  is  utterly  impossible  for  me  to  visit  these  works  while  keeping  up  the 
affairs  of  the  department  in  this  city. 

Respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Mobile,  December  24,  1861. 

Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

Eichmx)nd,  Ya. : 

Sir  : The  senior  officer  of  the  Navy  here,  having  charge  of  such  forces 
of  that  department  as  operate  in  Mobile  Bay,  declines  to  recognize  any 
military  authority.  It  is  not  my  desire  to  encroach  on  the  province  of 
this  department,  but  it  occurs  to  me  our  service  would  be  more  efficient 
under  one  than  two  heads.  At  sea,  beyond  the  range  of  my  guns,  no 
question  would  be  raised  of  the  supremacy  of  this  department,  but 
inside  the  bay  harmony  and  efficiency  are  both  sacrificed  by  this  division 
of  authority.  At  Pensacola  a senior  naval  officer  to  the  one  here  ac- 
knowledges my  jurisdiction. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

New  Orleans,  La.,  December  25,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  received  your  letter  stating  that  Major  Lovell  could  not 
be  put  on  duty  here  with  rank  of  field  officer  except  to  command  troops. 
I was  led  into  mistake  in  the  matter  by  having  in  mind  the  case  of 
Colonel  Duncan. 

I cannot  spare  Major  Lovell,  whose  services  in  obstructing  the  chan- 
nels have  proved  invaluable,  and  the  objection  as  to  command  can  easily 
be  obviated.  There  are  in  this  department  on  duty  twenty-one  separate 
companies  of  volunteers,  who  cause  as  much  office  detail  at  depart- 
ment headquarters  as  twenty-one  regiments  would  do.  With  your  per- 
mission I will  organize  these  troops  into  regiments  and  battalions,  and 
assign  field  officers  to  them.  I can  thus  place  Major  Lovell  on  duty 
here  with  troops  as  a field  officer,  and  his  position  with  General  Bragg’s 
army  can  be  filled  by  another  officer.  Shall  I thus  assign  him  ? 

I have  mustered  in  regiments  in  j)lace  of  the  troops  that  I sent  to 
General  Johnston,  and  have  called  upon  Governor  Moore  for  an  addi- 
tional regiment  to  man  the  guns  on  the  interior  line.  If  in  this  I have 
been  in  error,  please  let  me  know.  In  conversation  with  the  President 
before  leaving  Richmond,  I understood  him  to  say  that  I could  call  for 
such  troops  as  the  case  might  require,  taking  care  not  to  create  more 
expense  for  maintaining  men  than  was  absolutely  necessary. 


788  OPEEATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

As  the  enemy  is  congregating  at  Ship  Island,  I shall  organize  the 
forces  here  as  rapidly  as  possible.  The  governor,  at  my  request,  has 
ordered  aU  the  independent  volunteer  companies  to  form  into  regiments 
and  elect  their  field  officers,  which  will  give  about  6,000  pretty  well 
armed  men  in  the  city  subject  to  call.  Do  they  bring  their  general 
officers  when  called  into  service  ? A militia  law  has  also  been  draughted 
and  presented,  which  I think  will  make  about  one-third  of  the  militia 
available  at  short  notice. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 

Major- General j Commanding, 


New  Orleans,  La.,  Becemler  27,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  made  into  good  powder  all  the  saltpeter  sent.  Can  you  spare 
any  more  ? 


M.  LOYELL. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  December  27,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg, 

Pensacola : 

My  Dear  Sir  : When  we  sent  General  A.  S.  Johnston  to  take  com- 
mand of  the  Western  Department  it  was  believed  that  he  would  proceed 
at  once  to  the  west  of  the  Mississippi  and  conduct  the  campaign  in 
Arkansas  and  Missouri.  The  obtaining  possession  of  the  latter  State 
is  of  such  supreme  importance,  that  I need  not  say  to  you  a word  on  the 
subject.  Before,  however.  General  Johnston  reached  the  Mississippi 
the  threatened  invasion  of  Tennessee  and  the  advance  of  the  Federal 
forces  into  Kentucky  rendered  it  necessary  to  detain  him  in  this  latter 
State,  equally  important  as  Missouri  to  the  Confederacy,  and  threaten- 
ing more  immediate  danger,  especially  when  considered  in  connection 
with  the  menaced  attack  on  our  lines  of  communication  by  railroad 
through  East  Tennessee.  At  that  time,  too,  the  Department  of  Mis- 
souri was  committed  by  the  enemy  to  General  Fremont,  whose  incom- 
petency, well  known  to  us,  was  a guarantee  against  immediate  peril. 
All  this  is  now  changed.  Missouri  is  under  command  of  an  able  and 
well-instructed  military  commander.  Dissensions  exist  between  General 
Price  and  General  McCulloch  which  prevent  their  cordial  co-operation. 
We  are  threatened  with  grievous  disaster.  McCulloch  has  put  his  army 
(of  about  9,000  excellent  troops)  into  winter  quarters  in  Northwestern 
Arkansas.  Price  has  advanced  alone,  and  we  fear  with  fatal  rashness, 
into  a district  of  country  where  he  is  likely  to  be  surrounded  and  cut  off 
by  overwhelming  forces,  and  the  Army  of  Missouri  is  represented  to  be 
a mere  gathering  of  brave  but  undisciplined  partisan  troops,  coming 
and  going  at  pleasure,  and  needing  a«master  mind  to  control  and  reduce 
it  into  order  and  to  convert  it  into  a real  army. 

After  long  and  anxious  consultation  with  the  President  we  can  find 
no  one  but  yourself  on  whom  we  feel  we  could  rely  with  confidence 
as  commander-in-chief  of  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department  j yet  we 
do  not  know  how  to  fiU  your  place  at  Pensacola.  Missouri,  however, 
must  not  be  lost  to  us,  even  at  some  risk  of  misfortune  at  Pensacola. 


Ch.vp.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


789 


You  have  so  thoroughly  and  satisfactorily  prepared  the  defenses  at 
the  latter  point  that  we  scarcely  believe  another  attempt  will  be  made 
on  your  defenses,  and  we  hope  that  by  sending  Kirby  Smith  to  take 
your  place,  if  you  should  leave,  that  important  point  will  be  successfuly 
defended. 

You  see  already  that  my  x>urpose  is  to  ask  you  if  you  would  consent 
to  go  to  the  West.  In  that  event  General  Johnston’s  command  would 
be  limited  by  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  giving  him  as  much  even  then  as  he 
can  efficiently  attend  to,  and  your  command  would  embrace  everything 
west  of  the  Mississippi  except  the  coast  defenses.  Your  campaign  would 
comprehend  the  States  of  Arkansas  and  Missouri,  together  with  North- 
ern Texas  and  the  Indian  Territory.  General  Price  will  probably  be 
continued  in  the  command  of  the  Missouri  troops  when  mustered  into  our 
service.  Their  number,  of  course,  I cannot  approximate,  but  we  could 
scarcely  have  less  than  20,000  or  25,000  men  from  that  State.  In  Arkan- 
sas and  the  Indian  Territory  our  forces  amount  to  about  12,000.  A num- 
ber of  other  regiments  are  now  nearly  organized  in  Texas  and  Arkansas, 
and  we  would  find  means  of  arming  two  or  three  of  the  new  regiments 
at  Pensacola,  and  thus  disengaging  for  your  command  the  two  best  Mis- 
sissippi regiments. 

With  all  these  resources,  aided,  of  course,  by  our  hearty  and  cordial 
co-operation,  it  seems  to  me  that  we  may  confidently  look  for  brilliant 
results.  If  the  tide  of  battle  should  turn  towards  the  Mississippi  Eiver 
your  operations  would  be  conducted  in  concert  with  General  Johnston^s, 
and  of  course,  in  that  event,  he  would  rank  you ; but,  unless  in  case  of 
joint  operations  on  the  river,  your  command  would  be  entirely  independ- 
ent, and  such  joint  operations  would  only  be  undertaken  by  special  order 
of  the  President  or  by  your  own  concert  with  General  Johnston. 

Will  you  undertake  this  work  ? I tell  you  frankly  I believe  you  owe  it 
to  your  country  in  this  her  hour  of  peril,  but  it  will  not  be  urged  on  you 
against  your  will.  If  we  cannot  now  make  available  your  name  and 
reputation  as  a soldier,  I confess  I know  not  where  else  to  look  at  this 
time.  The  President  and  myself  have  anxiously  scanned  every  name  on 
our  army  list,  and  under  all  the  circumstances  (many  of  which  it  is  not 
possible  to  communicate  in  this  letter)  we  invariably  fell  back  on  yours 
as  the  name.  The  circumstances  are  pressing.  I could  not  say  all  that 
was  important  for  your  consideration  by  telegraph,  but  I must  beg  you, 
as  soon  as  it  is  possible,  to  answer  me  by  telegraph  ^‘I  refuse,”  if  such  be 
your  conclusion.  If  you  say  in  reply,  “ I refuse,”  I must  see  what  next 
best  can  be  done. 

I am,  yours,  very  truly, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Mobile^  Ala.j  December  29,  1861. 

Adjutant-General  G.  S.  Army, 

Richmond j Va. : 

Sir  : An  occurrence  of  the  27th  instant  at  Fort  Morgan  illustrates  the 
absolute  necessity  of  the  military  commander  here  having  control  of 
the  guard  boats  in  the  harbor.  On  that  morning  a small  vessel  from 
Havana  attempted  to  run  the  blockade  with  supplies  for  us.  Pressed 
by  the  enemy,  she  was  beached  under  the  guns  of  Fort  Morgan.  The 
enemy  attempted  to  cut  her  out  or  destroy  her,  and  the  guns  of  our  fort 
had  difficulty  in  keeping  them  off  until  a small  unarmed  steamer  went 


790  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

to  her  assistance,  and  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  relieved 
and  brought  her  in.  She  brought  in  150  bags  of  coffee,  with  some  sul- 
phur and  other  small  stores.  During  all  this  time  the  Florida,  an  armed 
steamer,  is  lying  at  the  moorings  of  the  city,  unoccupied  and  independ- 
ent. An  armed  schooner  is  also  lying  in  the  harbor  here  utterly  useless. 
It  would  be  economy  to  give  her  away  and  discharge  the  crew. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Departivient  No.  1,  G.  S.  A., 

New  Orleans^  La.^  December  29,  1861. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : At  12  o’clock  last  night  Hobart  & Foster’s  powder-mill,  in  the 
old  Marine  Hospital,  exploded.  One  charge  of  powder  (4,000  pounds) 
was  in  the  drying-room,  and  another  of  the  same  amount  was  in  the 
cylinders,  all  of  which  was  lost,  I had  taken  out  4,000  pounds  the  same 
day.  The  mill  was  turning  out  this  amount  daily. 

The  mill  that  I brought  over  from  Handsborough  will  be  put  up  in 
twenty  days,  and  this,  together  with  the  city  mill,  will  enable  us  to  turn 
out  2,500  or  3,000  pounds  daily.  Hobart  & Foster  will  proceed  imme- 
diately to  rebuild  their  mill,  and  I shall  drive  it  through  with  all  the 
means  at  my  control,  and  hope  to  have  it  in  operation  again  in  six  weeks. 

The  total  amount  of  saltpeter  invoiced  to  this  point  since  the  middle 
of  last  September  is  82,506  pounds  gross,  of  which  only  62,000  ever  came 
to  hand.  The  weight  of  the  casks  and  sacks  is  to  be  deducted,  besides 
which  some  of  it  was  very  impure.  Hobart  & Foster  had  three  days’ 
supply  on  hand  at  the  time  of  the  explosion  (10,000  pounds),  which  was 
not  injured. 

The  enemy  has  now  at  Ship  Island  twenty-two  vessels,  large  and  small, 
and  is  landing  troops  in  large  numbers.  They  have  been  sounding  and 
staking  out  the  channels  leading  towards  the  Rigolets  and  Chef  Men- 
teur  Pass,  but  I think  this  is  only  a blind  to  draw  our  attention, from 
Mobile,  which  I think  is  their  object  of  attack.  They  cannot  take  New 
Orleans  by  a land  attack  with  any  force  they  can  bring  to  bear. 

I should  much  like  to  have  for  an  inspector-general  an  officer  of  knowl- 
edge and  experience.  I am  almost  entirely  deficient  in  the  way  of  offi- 
cers. General  Ruggles  and  Colonel  Duncan  are  the  only  two  serving 
with  troops  who  can  render  me  aid.  No  other  department  is  so  deficient, 
and  certainly  none  is  more  important. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding. 


Mobile,  December  30, 1861. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant-  General : 

The  enemy’s  vessels,  some  twenty,  are  below,  landing  supplies  and 
large  bodies  of  troops  on  Ship  Island. 


BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  791 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  January  1,  18G2. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Neic  Orleans^  La.: 

Can  give  you  no  more  salti>eter,  but  expect  large  supply  very  soon. 
Send  me  return  of  your  entire  stock  of  ammunition. 

J.  P.  BE17JAMIN-, 
Secretary  of  War. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  January  1,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Dear  Sir  : I must  earnestly  request  that  tbe  Thirteenth  Louisiana 
Eegiment,  as  well  as  the  Third  Mississippi,  be  ordered  back  to  New 
Orleans.  The  wretchedly-armed  green  troops  sent  here  from  Mississippi 
cannot  supply  the  place  of  Gibson^s  regiment,  armed  by  me.  We  are 
here  entitled  to  that  regiment,  and  I should  have  urged  that  they  should 
not  have  been  permitted  to  leave  if  the  implied  promise  of  General  Polk 
had  not  been  given  that  they  would  be  returned  when  needed.  They 
are  needed. 

Tours,  very  truly, 

THO.  O.  MOOEE. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.j  January  1,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  23d  ultimo,  with  its  inclosure,  relative  to  the  defense  of  the  Missis- 
sippi coast.  You  have  suggested  the  propriety  of  making  a new  depart- 
ment out  of  the  district  between  Pearl  Elver  and  Pascagoula,  and  have 
asked  my  views  about  it.  I do  not  see  the  necessity  of  such  a step,  as 
Pearl  Eiver  is  of  necessity  a part  of  Department  No.  1,  and  Pascagoula 
of  General  Bragg^s  department.  The  country  between  (the  piney  woods 
district  of  Mississippi)  is  a sandy  barren,  running  back  40  or  50  miles, 
with  a poor,  sparse  population,  and  is  utterly  destitute  of  any  supplies 
which  might  be  necessary  for  troops.  Nearly  all  that  is  of  value  is  the 
line  of  fine  summer  residences  just  on  the  beach,  and  as  long  as  the 
enemy  has  full  command  of  the  water  he  can  at  any  time  land  under  fire 
of  his  heavy  guns  and  take  possession  of  these  houses  at  Biloxi,  Missis- 
sippi City,  &c.  The  companies  of  infantry  to  be  stationed  as  suggested 
by  Mr.  McEae  would  be  more  than  useless,  as  a couple  of  light-draught 
gunboats  with  a few  8-inch  sheUs  could  at  any  time  drive  them  back 
from  the  beach,  leaving  in  the  enemy’s  possession  all  that  is  really  of  any 
value,  viz,  the  fine  houses,  &c.,  on  the  shore,  and  the  opposition,  ineffi- 
cient though  it  would  be,  would  give  the  enemy,  in  their  own  judgment, 
good  cause  for  committing  excesses. 

We  can,  however,  station  troops  in  such  a manner  as  to  prevent  much 
communication  with  the  enemy  by  our  own  people ; but  in  this  we  should 
have  the  assistance  of  the  Navy  Department,  as  we  have  no  armed  ves- 
sels to  use  for  that  purpose. 

I have  telegraphed  General  Johnston  to  send  me  back  the  Third  Mis- 
sissippi Eegiment  from  Columbus,  so  that  I can  again  place  them  on  the 
sound  coast.  I have  a regiment  of  infantry  and  a battery  of  artillery 
at  Bay  Saint  Louis  and  Pass  Christian.  The  regiment  that  I removed 


792  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

was  stationed  at  Mississippi  City  and  Handsborongh,  and  when  I sent 
them  away  I wrote  to  Governor  Pettus  to  ask  if  he  could  furnish  more 
men  to  replace  them.  I learn  that  he  has  ordered  some  cavalry  down 
there,  but  if  you  will  look  on  the  map  I sent  you  by  Colonel  Davis  you 
will  observe  that  this  section  of  the  country  is  so  cut  up  with  streams 
that  it  is  very  difficult  for  troops  to  move  through  it,  and  no  use  could 
be  made  of  it  by  the  enemy. 

AU  that  I ask  is  to  give  me  some  competent  and  experienced  subordi- 
nate officers  that  I can  place  some  reliance  on,  and  the  supervision  and 
management  of  the  affairs  of  the  department  between  Pearl  Eiver  and 
Pascagoula  will  be  an  easy  matter  j but  I do  not  think  that  in  any  event 
it  shoffid  be  made  a separate  department.  If  you  have  a competent  offi- 
cer to  spare  to  place  over  that  section  of  the  country  let  him  report  to 
me,  and  I will  put  him  in  position  to  do  all  that  can  be  done  there  by 
infantry  and  light  artillery,  and  can  keep  in  hand  here  in  New  Orleans 
a force  sufficient  to  throw  upon  the  enemy  should  he  presume  to  make 
a flank  march  towards  Covington. 

The  coast  is  beyond  a question  untenable  should  the  enemy  land  in 
considerable  force,  which  I do  not  think  he  will  do,  east  of  Bay  Saint 
Louis,  unless  it  be  with  a view  to  Mobile.  The  part  between  that  bay 
and  Pascagoula  is  valueless  in  a military  point  of  view  except  to  use 
the  houses  on  the  coast  for  quarters,  and  this  cannot  be  prevented  with- 
out a naval  force  of  some  kind. 

I wUl  have  the  return  of  powder  made  up  and  send  it  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. I wrote  you  fully  about  powder  a few  days  since. 

Eespectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 
Major-General,  C,  S,  Army. 


Abstract  from  field  return  of  the  Army  of  Pensacola,  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  Braxton 
Bragg,  on  the  1st  day  of  January,  1862. 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

£ 

o 

o 

§ 

Ist  (Gladden’s)  Brigade 

198 

201 

3 

4 

2,  970 
3, 09S 
78 
56 

3,  896 
3,  947 
88 
00 

4.  793 
4, 103 
94 
64 

2d  (Anderson’s)  Brigade 

Alabama  Mounted  Rifles 

Walton  Guards 

Grand  total 

406 

6, 197 

7,  991 

9,054 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  January  3,  1862. 

Gov.  John  J.  Pettus, 

JacTcson,  Miss.: 

Orders  were  sent  some  time  since  to  General  Lovell  for  the  defense  of 
the  coast  of  Mississippi,  and  I hope  he  has  taken  measures  which  it 
would  now  be  too  late  for  me  to  initiate.  The  movement  no  doubt  is 
intended  against  Mobile  or  New  Orleans,  but  I shall  much  regret  if  any 
successful  raid  be  made  against  the  villages  on  our  coast. 

JEFFEESON  DAYIS. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  793 

IlDQRs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.^  January  4,  18G2. 

Adjutant-General, 

Richmond^  Va. : 

Sir  ; After  completing  my  inspections  at  Mobile  I reached  here  on 
the  morning  of  the  2d  instant.  Affairs  in  that  part  of  my  command  are 
not  in  a very  encouraging  state,  and  I regret  to  say  I see  but  little 
hope  of  improvement  with  the  means  at  my  command. 

The  question  of  rank  between  Colonels  Powell  and  Maury  was  settled 
in  favor  of  the  former,  and  the  latter,  found  oft*  duty  in  Mobile,  has  re- 
turned to  his  post.  Colonel  Powell  appears  to  be  an  intelligent,  ener- 
getic, and  faithful  officer,  but  for  want  of  experience  in  army  service 
has  great  difficulties  to  contend  with.  The  forts  are  in  much  better  con- 
dition than  when  I visited  them  in  October,  and  with  ammunition  would 
be  in  condition  to  iirevent  any  entrance  to  Mobile  Bay.  The  services 
of  a good  gunboat,  in  conjunction  with  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines,  would 
be  of  great  service ; but  they  are  utterly  useless  at  the  city  of  Mobile, 
where  they  are  now  kept.  The  health  of  the  troops  at  the  forts  is  very 
good,  and  everything  indicates  improving  discipline  and  a close  atten- 
tion to  duty. 

The  infantry  brigade  under  Brig.  Gen.  L.  P.  Walker,  encamped  on 
the  main-land,  some  12  or  15  miles  from  Mobile,  on  the  road  to  Pasca- 
goula, I regret  to  report  in  a very  bad  condition.  The  commander  had 
established  himself  in  the  city  of  Mobile  with  a large  and  useless  staff 
at  a heavy  expense,  whilst  his  troops  were  suffering  in  crowded  tents 
and  huts,  without  hospitals  or  any  of  those  essentials  for  the  comfort 
and  health  of  raw  men.  There  was  no  organization,  no  system,  and  no 
instruction.  Each  regimental  and  battalion  commander  was  independ- 
ent of  all  the  rest.  The  necessary  consequence  is  disease,  demoraliza- 
tion, and  great  mortality,  about  one-third  of  the  command  being  sick, 
with  a great  deficiency  of  hospital  accommodation. 

I ordered  General  Walker  sent  to  his  command  before  I left  here  j but 
under  various  pretexts  he  was  still  absent  from  his  command  on  the  1st 
instant.  Except  as  a matter  of  iirinciple,  I attach  no  importance  to 
this  absence  of  the  general,  as  his  want  of  knowledge  and  experience, 
and  it  appears  to  me  an  inaptitude  for  military  command,  render  it  im- 
possible for  him  to  supply  the  wants  in  that  brigade.  I consequently 
look  for  little  improvement  without  a change. 

The  Department  cannot  but  see  the  great  importance  of  this  position 
at  the  present  time,  and  the  necessity  of  having  a well-organized,  well- 
instructed,  disciplined,  and  equipped  command  at  such  an  exposed 
point.  The  recent  movements  of  the  enemy  render  it  more  impor- 
tant than  ever.  Had  my  former  recommendations  been  adopted  oui 
strength  would  have  been  much  greater  y it  may  not  be  too  late  to  re- 
trieve a part  of  what  is  lostj  but  time  is  precious,  and  prompt  and 
decided  action  necessary. 

Cannon,  powder,  and  small  arms  and  accouterments  are  the  great 
essentials  for  our  strength,  provided  we  can  get  proper  commanders  to 
have  them  used. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 


794  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVT. 

Eichmond,  January  5,  18G2. 

General  Braxton  Bragg, 

O’Bannonville^  Fla. : 

My  private  letter  to  you  [of  December  27, 1861]  was  written  before 
the  enemy  had  landed  at  Ship  Island  and  Biloxi,  and  it  is  not  just  that 
you  should  now  be  asked  to  accede  to  the  proposal  contained  in  my 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Departiment,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.^  Va.,  January  5,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg, 

Pensacola.,  Fla. : 

Sir  : I ought  sooner  to  have  replied  to  your  several  letters  of  the 
10th,  llth,  17th,  and  29th  ultimo,  but  I was  extremely  anxious  to  give 
you  definite  information  in  relation  to  the  subject  of  re-enlistment  of 
twelve-months’  men  j and  after  the  act  of  Congress  on  the  subject  I was 
much  engrossed,  in  concert  with  the  President  and  Adjutant-General, 
in  the  attempt  so  to  execute  the  law  as  to  prevent  the  disorganization 
of  the  Army. 

No  one  can  deprecate  more  sincerely  than  I do  the  obvious  conse- 
quences of  what  you  well  denominate  the  system  of  universal  suffrage 
in  the  Army ; but  the  law^vers  have  spoken,  and  we  must  do  the  best 
we  can.  I send  you  herewith  a circular  copy  of  the  regulations  we  have 
devised,  which  will  appear  in  a few  days  in  the  shape  of  a general  order 
from  the  bureau  of  the  Adjutant- General. 

I know  in  advance  that,  however  contrary  to  your  own  ideas  of  a 
proper  system,  the  Department  can  rely  with  confidence  on  your  cordial 
co-operation,  and  at  least  one  point  is  gained,  viz,  that  after  the  first 
election  all  vacancies  will  be  filled  by  promotion. 

I regret  the  total  impossibility  of  supplying  you  with  arms  for  your 
unarmed  regiments.  We  have  a large  cargo  near  at  hand,  but  Heaven 
knows  when  we  will  receive  it,  if  at  all  f and  until  we  can  get  in  some 
arms  from  abroad  we  cannot  put  another  man  in  the  field.  It  is  a cruel 
necessity  that  forces  this  avowal,  but  it  is  due  to  you  to  state  the  facts. 
In  the  mean  time  our  enemy,  with  free  intercourse  abroad  and  fall  con- 
trol of  the  sea-coast,  augments  his  forces  at  pleasure,  and  leaves  us  a 
desperate  struggle,  to  be  maintained  only  by  heroic  effort  and  uncon- 
querable will.  Everywhere  we  are  outnumbered,  and  while  demagogues 
and  newspaper  squibblers  are  clamorous  for  offensive  movements,  we 
are  scanning  the  horizon  with  anxious  eyes  and  praying  for  no  other 
succor  than  arms  and  powder — for  nothing  but  weapons  with  which  to 
fight  in  defense  of  our  rights.  If  the  winter  closes  upon  the  campaign 
without  serious  disaster  all  will  be  well,  for  it  is  impossible,  with  the 
varied  efforts  already  made,  with  the  large  supplies  already  purchased, 
and  with  the  numerous  expedients  now  in  progress,  that  some  success- 
ful venture  shall  fail  to  occur,  and  thus  put  into  our  hands  all  that 
is  wanted  to  wrest  from  the  foe  the  admission  that  our  subjugation  is 
impossible. 

The  President  has  ordered  the  appointment  of  Major  Jones  to  be 
colonel  of  the  new  regiment  of  Mississippians  organized  by  you,  which 
you  will  please  to  number  as  the  Twenty-seventh  ^Mississippi  j but  he 
does  not  seem  entirely  to  concur  in  your  recommendation  of  the  lieu- 
tenant-colonel. As  soon  as  he  determines  that  point  Lipscomb  will  be 


Chap.  XVL]  COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  795 

appointed  major,  as  you  advise.  In  Colonel  Bullock’s  regiment  the  field 
officers  are,  if  I am  not  mistaken,  to  be  filled  up  under  the  laws  of  Ala- 
bama, the  regiment  being,  I believe,  one  that  was  tendered  by  the 
State  with  its  field  officers  already  elected.  Where  regiments  are  formed 
by  us  out  of  separate  companies  we  appoint  the  field  officers,  and  vacan- 
cies are  filled  by  promotion ; but  where  the  State  organizes  and  tenders 
the  regiment,  the  field  officers  are  appointed  by  the  State. 

Your  letters  of  the  24th  and  29th,  in  relation  to  the  right  of  command- 
ing the  naval  forces  in  the  harbor,  have  been  submitted  to  the  President, 
and  he  concurs  in  your  opinion.  As  the  matter,  however,  is  somewhat 
delicate,  and  we  all  desire  to  avoid  unpleasant  conflicts  of  authority,  I 
will  converse  with  ]\Ir.  Mallory  on  the  subject  and  write  you  again. 

I am,  yours,  respectfully, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Pa.,  January  5,  1862. 

Major-General  Lovell, 

Rew  Orleans^  La. : 

Sir  : Your  letters  of  the  24th  and  25th  ultimo,  have  been  received. 

1st.  My  request  in  relation  to  the  powder  asked  for  by  Commodore 
Hollins  was  of  course  subordinate  to  your  discretion,  but  I am  anxious 
to  accommodate  the  Navy  on  all  proper  occasions  and  to  keep  up  cor- 
dial relations  in  all  branches  of  the  service. 

2d.  I will  call  the  President’s  attention  again  to  your  recommendation 
in  favor  of  Colonel  Duncan. 

3d.  Your  suggestion  as  to  organization  of  independent  comi3anies 
into  regiments  and  battalions  is  entirely  approved.  I had  no  idea  that 
the  condition  of  your  forces  was  such  as  you  represent.  We  never  per- 
mit an  accumulation  of  independent  companies.  We  consult  their 
wishes,  however,  in  throwing  them  together,  and  you  are  requested,  with 
this  view,  to  organize  two  regiments  out  of  these  twenty-one  companies, 
and  to  send  to  this  Department  a return  of  the  organization,  with  muster 
rolls  and  a recommendation  for  appointment  of  field  officers.  In  this 
way  provision  can  be  made  for  Major  Lovell  within  your  department. 

4th.  Your  muster-in  of  other  regiments  in  place  of  those  sent  to  Ken- 
tucky is  approved  j indeed,  until  further  orders,  you  are  authorized  to 
receive  and  muster  into  the  Confederate  service  all  companies,  battal- 
ions, or  regiments  that  tender  themselves  for  the  war,  or  three  years  j 
but  bear  in  mind  we  will  accept  no  men  for  a less  term,  unless  they  arm 
themselves  at  their  own  expense.  In  this  event  you  may  accept  them 
for  not  less  than  twelve  months. 

5th.  The  militia,  when  called  out  as  such,  bring  their  generals  with 
them. 

6th.  I hope  soon  to  hear  of  your  having  been  able  to  do  something 
to  check  the  enemy  and  encourage  our  people  on  the  sea-coast  of  Mis- 
sissippi, though  of  course  I cannot  and  do  not  expect  you  to  weaken 
your  command  in  New  Orleans  for  the  purpose  of  punishing  marauders 
on  the  sea-coast.  If  you  could  get  up  a small  local  organization,  how- 
ever, with  a flying  battery,  equipped  with  good,  reliable  horses,  for  rapid 
movements,  so  as  to  prevent  the  landing  of  small  parties  of  plunderers, 
it  would  have  a happy  effect  and  give  pleasure  and  confldence  to  our 
people  in  Southern  Mississippi. 

Your  obedient  servant,  J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


796 


OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  LChap.  XVL 


War  Depart]ment,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond j Fa.,  January  6,  1862. 

Hon.  S.  E.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose,  for  your  perusal,  two  letters*  from 
General  Bragg,  which  I beg  may  be  returned  to  me. 

Without  desiring  for  a moment  that  any  authority  should  be  assumed 
over  the  vessels  and  officers  of  the  INavy  by  any  military  commander,  it 
does  seem  to  me  that  small  craft  in  harbors  and  shore  waters  should  to 
some  extent  be  made  subordinate  to  commanders  of  departments  charged 
with  the  coast  defenses,  and  I beg  to  call  your  attention  to  the  subject 
and  to  ask  for  your  views. 

I may  be  permitted  to  add  that  General  Withers  on  a former  occasion 
represented  the  naval  officers  in  command  of  the  gunboats  in  Mobile 
Bay  as  being  utterly  inefficient  and  unreliable.  I do  not  even  know 
their  names,  and  of  course  have  no  knowledge  on  the  subject  beyond 
the  report  of  the  military  commanders ; but  as  you  cannot  have  chosen 
your  best  officers  for  such  unimportant  commands,  I think  it  not  improb- 
able that  there  is  ground  for  the  complaints. 

Yours,  very  respectfully. 


J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Secretary  of  War, 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Fa.,  January  6,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La,: 

Sir  : Your  letters  of  the  24th  and  29th  ultimo  are  received.  I have 
to  announce  to  you  that  the  President  has  authorized  the  appointment 
of  Colonel  Duncan  as  brigadier-general,  and  his  nomination  will  be  sent 
to  Congress  to-morrow. 

The  President  desires  that  you  assign  General  Trimble  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  district  stretching  from  the  Eigolets  to  Pascagoula,  and 
oonfide  to  him  that  part  of  your  department,  furnishing  him  one  or  two 
light  batteries,  well  equipped,  for  active  movement,  and  such  number  of 
troops  as  may  be  sufficient  for  checking  marauding  parties  that  may 
attempt  plunder.  It  is  not,  of  course,  expected  that  he  can  resist  an 
army;  but  you  can  furnish  him  with  sufficient  force  to  encourage  and 
inspirit  the  people  on  the  sea-shore,  cut  off  communication  of  evil-dis- 
posed persons  with  the  enemy,  and  check  boating  parties  attempting  to 
carry  on  a predatory  warfare. 

I am  sorry  to  hear  of  the  destruction  of  the  powder-miU,  with  its  con- 
tents, as  we  have  not  a pound  to  spare.  You  will  be  good  enough  to 
send  me  at  once  a statement  by  which  I can  discover  which  of  the  salt- 
peter shipments  have  failed  to  reach  you,  as  you  seem  to  be  short  at 
least  20,000  pounds  by  your  letter  of  the  29th. 

I will  see  if  I can  send  you  a good  inspecting  officer.  I think  Major 
Pickett  is  disposable,  and  the  only  one  we  have  at  present  not  in  active 
and  important  service. 

I have  taken  all  the  powder  (said  to  be  45  tons)  just  arrived  by  the 
Vanderbilt  and  telegraphed  you  to  that  effect.  Please  have  it  inspected, 
so  as  to  be  sure  that  we  are  not  paying  such  an  enormous  price  as  $2  per 
pound  for  damaged  powder,  and  aid  the  owners  in  having  it  all  brought 

* Probably  those  of  December  29,  1861,  and  January  4,  1862,  pp.  789, 793. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  797 

for  distribution  to  New  Orleans,  except  5 tons  of  cannon  and  1 of  rifle 
powder,  which  I desire  sent  to  Galveston. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIK 
Secretary  of  War, 


Eichmond,  Va.,  January  G,  1862. 

Major-General  Loyell, 

New  Orleans^  La, : 

I have  taken  all  the  powder  by  the  Vanderbilt.  Arrange  with  the 
owners  for  bringing  it  all  to  New  Orleans,  except  5 tons  of  cannon  pow- 
der and  1 ton  of  rifle  powder,  ordered  to  Galveston. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

January  6,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond^  Ya,: 

My  Hear  Sir:  Your  private  and  confidential  dispatch  of  the  27th 
ultimo  reached  me  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  instant,  and  has  had  my 
most  earnest  consideration.  I could  not  reply  yesterday  by  telegraph, 
but  do  so  this  morning,  and  shall  anxiously  await  the  President’s 
decision. 

The  aspect  of  affairs  has  so  far  changed  within  my  present  command 
that  I feel  greatly  embarrassed  by  the  alternative  presented  and  the 
responsibility  imposed.  Had  the  President  issued  his  order  to  me,  I 
should  have  promptly  obeyed  without  a murmur;  but  the  alternative 
requires  that,  while  I make  no  objection,  I should  submit  a few  consid- 
erations which  impress  me,  and  which  the  Department  probably  did  not 
fully  know  at  the  date  of  the  dispatch. 

A portion  of  my  command  is  now  powerfully  menaced  by  a large  force, 
constantly  increasing.  Our  force,  at  best,  is  very  weak,  and  a part  of 
it  in  very  bad  condition,  so  that  I really  cannot  consider  the  city  of 
Mobile  perfectly  safe.  This  place,  to  which  you  seem  only  to  refer,  is 
in  no  danger,  unless  from  an  incompetent  commander;  a danger  we  have 
just  escaped.  But  it  will  take  time,  labor,  and  aU  the  influence  I can 
bring  to  bear  to  produce  so  good  a result  in  the  western  part  of  my 
department.  Much  valuable  time  is  already  lost  there,  and  but  little 
progress  is  now  being  made,  owing  to  the  means  I am  compelled  to  use. 
This  state  of  affairs  is  seen,  felt,  and  deplored  by  those  who  have  all  at 
stake.  A feverish  state  of  excitement  and  much  alarm  exists  in  Mobile, 
where  the  danger  is  greatest,  and  it  is  no  egotism  in  me  to  say  I am 
looked  to  as  their  hope  and  support.  The  influence  I have  gained  over 
the  minds  of  the  people  in  this  section  of  the  country,  as  weU  as  over 
my  troops,  is  considerable,  and  I do  not  believe  any  other  could  now  fill 
my  place  to  their  satisfaction.  You  will  readily  see,  then,  my  embar- 
rassment. 

The  field  to  which  you  invite  me  is  a most  important  one,  but,  under 
present  aspects,  not  enticing.  So  much  has  been  lost  there,  and  so  little 
done  in  organization  and  instruction,  that  the  prospect  of  retrieving  our 
^ound  is  most  gloomy.  Troops  so  long  accustomed  to  the  freedom  and 
license  they  have  enjoyed  will  be  more  difficult  to  command  than  raw 


798  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

men;  and  though  I have  succeeded  to  some  extent  in  making  soldiers 
here  of  raw  levies  of  volunteers,  and  at  the  same  time  retaining  their 
good  will  and  confidence,  I distrust  my  ability  to  accomplish  the  same 
in  the  new  field  offered  me. 

Without  a base  of  operations,  in  a country  poorly  supplied  at  best, 
and  now  exhausted  by  being  overrun  by  both  armies  in  mid-winter, 
with  an  unclad,  badly-fed,  and  badly-supplied  mass  of  men,  without 
instruction,  arms,  equipments,  or  officers,  it  is  certainly  a most  unpromis- 
ing field  for  operations.  But  should  the  President  decide  on  it,  after 
knowing  the  state  of  affairs  here,  I will  bend  all  my  energies  and  facul- 
ties to  the  task,  and  offer  myself  (as  a sacrifice,  if  necessary)  to  the 
great  cause  in  which  we  are  engaged. 

I shall  need  and  must  receive  from  the  Department  great  assistance 
in  the  way  of  staff  and  general  officers.  Upon  them  depends,  as  much 
as  upon  the  commander,  the  success  of  all  Ms  efforts.  Many  of  the  vol- 
unteers here  are  now  so  well  instructed  that  this  may  be  granted  with- 
out materially  weakening  this  department. 

Could  you  possibly  send  3,000  stand  of  arms  here  ? ' I should  desire 
to  take  from  this  army  Chalmers’  ]!:^inth  Mississippi,  Adams’  Louisiana 
Regulars,  and  Jackson’s  Fifth  Georgia  Regiments.  These  would  give  me 
a nucleus  upon  which  to  form,  would  set  an  example  of  discipline,  and 
would  give  me  the  support  of  excellent  officers,  who  know  and  trust  me, 
and  in  whom  I place  unlimited  confidence.  1 should  desire  Brigadier- 
General  Gladden  to  command  them ; Colonel  Chalmers  might  be  made 
a brigadier,  to  remain  here  in  place  of  Gladden,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Autrey  would  make  an  excellent  colonel  for  his  regiment,  now  nearly 
reorganized  for  the  war.  Jackson  I should  desire  to  see  advanced  to 
the  command  of  a brigade. 

Major  Slaughter,  my  acting  inspector- general,  is  on  a short  official 
visit  to  Richmond.  He  possesses  my  entire  confidence  in  every  respect, 
and  may  be  fully  and  freely  consulted  by  the  Department,  as  he  knows 
my  views  in  regard  to  matters  here,  and  is  as  fully  posted  as  I am. 

Most  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTO]&7  BRAGG, 

Major- Ge7ieral,  dbc. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Aeic  Orleans,  La.,  January  7,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : After  reading  the  letter  of  Mr.  McRae,  relative  to  the  use  of 
launches  on  the  coast  of  Mississippi  Sound,  I suggested  to  Commodore 
Hollins  to  make  some  arrangements  with  that  purpose  in  view.  Noth- 
ing has  been  done,  nor  is  it  likely  that  anything  will  be  done,  by  the 
Navy  Department  there  unless  under  orders  from  Richmond.  You  will 
recollect  our  conversation  the  evening  before  I left  Richmond,  in  which 
you  took  a different  view  from  myself.  I felt  satisfied  that  if  the  pro- 
tection of  the  navigable  streams  running  up  into  the  country  was 
removed  from  my  control  it  would  in  all  probability  not  be  properly 
arranged  in  connection  with  the  land  defenses,  while  the  general  com- 
manding the  department  would  be  considered  by  the  people  at  large  as 
responsible  for  inroads  into  the  territory  of  his  command.  This  is  just 
vwhat  has  happened. 

I should  have  had  light-draught  armed  vessels  or  launches  at  numer- 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  799 

ous  points  along  the  coast  had  I not  kept  in  view  your  expressed  wish 
that  all  clashing,  even  in  appearance,  should  be  avoided  between  the 
two  arms  of  service.  I have  now  on  Lake  Borgne  a larger  armed  force 
than  the  NTavy  has,  but  it  is  kept  up  under  the  name  of  supplying  our 
posts  on  the  sound,  it  being  necessary  that  the  vessels  should  be  armed 
for  their  own  protection.  I hope  that,  in  connection  with  Mr.  Mallory, 
you  may  be  able  to  devise  some  plan  by  which  either  the  entire  matter 
may  be  placed  under  my  control  or  the  naval  officer  in  command  may 
have  orders  to  afford  such  aid  as  I may  officially  require  .of  him.  The 
blame  of  want  of  protection  will  rest  upon  me  in  any  event,  and  I should 
therefore  have  some  power  to  say  what  should  be  done. 

EespectfuUy,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.^  January  8,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : Some  six  weeks  since,  at  the  urgent  call  of  an  officer  in  Ken- 
tucky, and  believing  that  I would  be  safe  from  attack  until  January, 
I sent  two  regiments  to  Columbus,  with  the  distinct  understanding  on 
my  iiart,  and  so  exjiressed  both  to  Generals  Johnston  and  Polk,  that 
when  the  enemy  appeared  here  they  should  be  returned.  General  Polk 
now,  in  answer  to  my  call,  telegraphs  me  that  he  has  asked  you  to  send 
me  other  troops,  and  you  have  consented.  I hope  that  this  is  not  so. 
The  troops  I sent  him  are  natives  of  this  part  of  the  country  and  can- 
not be  replaced  by  others.  The  Third  Mississippi  Eegiment  is  composed 
largely  of  the  fishermen,  oystermen,  and  sailors  of  Louis  Bay,  Biloxi, 
Ocean  Springs,  &c.,  and  are  well  acquainted  with  all  the  inlets,  bayous, 
and  soundings  of  that  intricate  and  difficult  coast,  and  can  be  of  more 
service  there  than  any  other  body  of  men.  I have  therefore  written 
to  General  Polk  to  insist  that  the  Third  Mississippi  Eegiment,  at  all 
events,  shall  be  sent  down.  They  can  as  well  be  replaced  there  as  here 
by  fresh  troops,  but  none  can  supply  their  place  to  me  on  the  Mississippi 
coast.  The  regiment  was  raised  particularly  for  that  service,  about  half 
of  it  being  amphibious,  and  I shall  want  to  put  a number  of  them  in 
boats.  The  country  troops  will  not  answer  my  purpose.  I beg,  there- 
fore, that  even  if  you  permit  General  Polk  to  retain  the  Thirteenth 
Louisiana  you  will  telegraph  him  to  send  me  the  Third  Mississippi  Eegi- 
ment immediately.  He  does  me  great  injustice  by  leaving  me  until  this 
late  hour  under  the  impression  that  when  I wanted  these  two  regiments 
they  should  be  returned,  and  I have  so  written  him. 

EespectfuUy,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 

Major-  General  Commandmg. 


Navy  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  January  9,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  * 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  6th  instant,  inclosing  two  communications  from  General  Bragg. 


800  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 

When  the  vessel  to  which  General  Bragg  refers  crossed  the  Mobile 
bar  the  Confederate  steamer  Florida  was  at  the  city,  30  miles  off,  and 
of  course  could  render  no  assistance. 

The  Florida  had  recently  gone  there  from  the  lake  after  an  engage- 
ment with  a Federal  steamer,  and  on  observing  her  arrival  in  the  public 
papers  I directed  Flag-Officer  Hollins  to  prevent  her  from  lying  at  the 
city  a moment  beyond  what  her  necessities  might  require. 

General  Bragg  complains  that  the  little  guard  boat  did  not  go  out  to 
the  vesseFs  assistance,  which  he  says  was  pursued  by  the  enemy’s 
gunboats.  This  is  a small  sailing  schooner,  mounting  one  gun,  com- 
manded by  an  active  and  zealous  young  naval  officer,  and  I trust  that 
he  would  have  sailed  out  against  the  enemy’s  gunboats  could  he  have 
rendered  any  service.  I will  call  upon  him  to  explain  his  apparent  neg- 
lect of  duty. 

I concur  with  you  in  the  necessity  of  securing  perfect  harmony  of 
action  between  the  land  and  naval  forces,  and  so  soon  as  the  stearoers 
now  nearly  completed  for  service  in  the  waters  near  Mobile  shall  go 
into  commission  I will  give  such  instructions  as  will,  I think,  certainly 
secure  it.  At  present  there  is  but  one  small  sailing  schooner  and  two 
barges.  The  naval  officer  in  charge,  and  who  is  reported  by  General 
Withers  as  unreliable  and  inefficient,”  Lieut.  Jas.  I).  Johnston,  is  re- 
garded by  the  service  and  the  Department  as  one  of  the  best  officers  of 
the  old  service.  Perhaps  the  cause  of  General  Withers’  report  may  be 
found  in  the  letter  of  Lieutenant  Johnston,  a copy  of  which  is  inclosed. 

General  Bragg’s  letters  are  herewith  returned. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  MALLOEY, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy, 


[Inclosures.  1 


Mobile,  December  9, 1861. 

Hon.  S.  E.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy,  Richmond : 

Sir  : On  the  morning  of  the  4th  instant  1 was  accosted  by  Brigadier- 
General  Withers,  commanding  this  military  division,  in  the  presence  of 
Major  Hessee  and  Lieutenant  Holt,  assistant  quartermaster  at  this  place, 
in  these  words:  Some  of  your  marines  have  been  overpowering  one  of 
my  sentinels  and  taking  coal  from  Hitchcock’s  press.”  I replied,  Yes, 
sir,  I have  heard  something  of  that,  and  intend  to  reprimand  Lieutenant 
Mills  for  it.”  To  this  General  Withers  replied,  ‘^Eeprimand  him,  sir  I 
You  must  arrest  him,  sir;  my  orders  to  you  are  to  arrest  him,  sir,  at 
once,”  using  a highly  excited  tone  and  manner.  I then  said,  “That 
is  a matter  for  me  to  attend  to,  general,  and  not  you.”  Whereupon  he 
replied,  “I  don’t  care,  sir ; my  instructions  to  you  are  to  investigate  the 
matter  and  to  arrest  him,  and  if  you  don’t  I’ll  arrest  the  whole  of  you;” 
and  then  left  me  without  waiting  for  a reply.  He  spoke  throughout  in 
an  exceedingly  angry  and  offensive  tone,  and  did  not  seem  disposed  to 
listen  to  anything  I had  to  say. 

I immediately  directed  Lieutenant  Mills  to  furnish  me  with  a written 
explanation  of  his  conduct  in  the  case ; and  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same 
day  I addressed  a communication,  inclosing  Lieutenant  Mills’  statement, 
to  General  Withers,  informing  him  that  I had*  investigated  the  circum- 
stances connected  with  the  occurrence  which  had  so  seriously  excited 
his  displeasure,  and  that  the  charge  made  against  Lieutenant  Mills  of 
having  overpowered  one  of  his  sentinels  was  entirely  groundless. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


801 


A copy  of  this  letter  is  herewith  inclosed;*  and  I have  only  to  say,  in 
addition  to  the  explanation  therein  given,  that  Lieutenant  Mills  was  en- 
tirely ignorant  of  the  fact  that  the  press  referred  to  was  under  military 
rule,  and  that  I had  informed  him  before  that  coal  was  stored  there  be- 
longing to  the  Navy  Department,  which  he  could  obtain  for  use  on 
board  the  receiving-ship  under  his  charge  when  he  required  it,  taking 
it  for  granted  that  with  his  knowledge  of  naval  regulations  he  would 
understand  the  necessity  of  making  a requisition  upon  me  for  the  coal 
before  sending  for  it.  His  conduct  in  going  to  the  press  with  a dozen 
armed  meu,  to  take  the  coal  by  force  if  resisted,  and  in  using  a dray 
and  bags  belonging  to  the  press  without  consent  of  the  agent  in  charge, 
was  certainly  reprehensible  and  altogether  unnecessary ; but  his  offense 
was  against  naval  and  not  military  rule,  as  he  encountered  no  sentinel, 
"nor  had  any  been  placed  over  the  coal,  as  1 am  confident  the  military 
authorities  were  not  even  aware  of  its  being  there. 

I have  made  a report  to  Flag-Officer  Hollins  of  the  whole  affair,  send- 
ing copies  of  my  letters  to  General  Withers  and  Mr.  Mills’  statement. 
No  one  can  regret  more  sincerely  than  myself  that  any  misunderstand- 
ing should  occur  between  officers  charged  with  the  duties  belonging  to 
the  separate  branches  of  the  public  defense  at  this  time;  and  I have  al- 
ways regarded  the  requests  of  General  Withers  as  of  equal  force  with 
his  orders  when  it  has  been  in  my  power  to  comply  with  them;  but 
when  he  threatened  to  arrest  me  and  the  whole  force  under  my  com- 
mand for  an  infraction  of  discipline  on  the  part  of  one  of  my  subordi- 
nates, and  that  without  even  giving  me  an  opportunity  to  investigate 
the  nature  of  this  offense,  I considered  it  my  duty,  not  only  to  myself 
but  to  the  service  to  which  I belong,  to  inform  him  that  I was  not  placed 
under  his  orders,  especially  as  1 received  on  the  9th  ultimo  an  order 
from  Flag-Officer  Hollins  to  obey  no  orders  but  those  coming  from  him, 
and  to  use  my  own  judgment  about  complying  with  the  requests  of 
General  Withers. 

Under  these  circumstances  I hope  the  Department  will  sustain  me  in 
having  made  what  I intended  as  a respectful  remonstrance  against  an 
unwarrantable  assumption  of  authority  and  a gross  violation  of  the  rule 
of  courtesy  which  should  govern  all  officers  in  their  official  intercourse. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfulty,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  D.  JOHNSTON, 
Lieutenant  in  Charge  of  Naval  Station. 

Mobile,  December  4,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Jones  M.  Withers, 

Commanding  Military  District  of  Alabama : 

Sir  : I inclose  herewith  the  statement  of  Lieut.  T.  B.  Mills  relative 
to  the  occurrence  at  Hitchcock’s  press,  of  which  you  took  occasion  to 
speak  to  me  this  morning  in  the  presence  of  two  officers  of  the  Armj^  in 
a manner  not  only  offensive  to  my  feelings  as  an  officer  and  a gentle- 
man, but  altogether  unwarrantable  between  officers  holding  our  relative 
positions. 

You  will  perceive  by  Lieutenant  Mills’  statement  that  the  charge 
you  made  against  him  of  having  overpowered  one  of  your  sentinels  and 
taken  coal  which  was  under  his  charge  is  entirely  groundless,  inasmuch 
as  the  coal  in  question  belongs  to  the  Navy  Department,  and  is  stored 
in  a part  of  the  warehouse  not  in  use  for  army  xmrposes  and  in  which 
no  sentinel  is  stationed. 

* Lieutenant  Mills’  letter  not  found. 

51  R R— YOL  Yl 


802  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chat.  XVL 

The  only  person  with  whom  Mr.  Mills  came  in  collision  was  a watch- 
man at  the  warehouse,  appointed  by  the  agent  of  the  owners  of  the 
press. 

The  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Mills  in  the  taking  of  an  armed  force  to 
procure  the  coal  and  making  use  of  property  belonging  to  the  press 
without  first  obtaining  the  consent  of  the  agent  was  highly  reprehen- 
sible and  altogether  unnecessary. 

I shall  make  an  official  report  of  the  facts  to  the  commandant  of  this 
naval  station,  located  at  New  Orleans,  under  whose  orders  I am  placed 
in  charge  of  naval  affairs  here. 

With  regard  to  your  threat  to  arrest  the  whole  of  us”  (meaning,  I 
suppose,  the  entire  naval  force  here),  I take  this  occasion  to  inform  you 
that,  although  you  may  be  clothed  with  the  military  power  to  execute 
it,  you  certainly  have  not  the  authority ; and  that,  while  I shall  always 
be  happy  to  comply  with  any  request  you  may  make  to  me,  I shall  by 
no  means  hold  myself  amenable  to  your  orders,  as  I am  attached  to  a 
branch  of  the  public  service  over  which  you  have  no  command. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  D.  JOHNSTON, 

Lieutenant^  (7.  S,  Navy,  in  Charge  of  Naval  Station. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Th.,  January  9,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg, 

Pensaeolay  Fla.: 

Sir  : Your  several  favors  of  the  3d*  and  4th  instants  are  before  me. 
I regret  very  much  to  hear  of  the  deficiencies  in  your  means  of  defense 
at  Mobile,  and  will  do  everything  I can  to  aid  you.  1 have  ordered  the 
Chief  of  Ordnance  to  forward  you  every  musket  he  can  gather  together 
as  fast  as  possible  j but  we  are  so  sadly  deficient,  that  I fear  it  will  be 
two  or  three  weeks  before  you  receive  a quantity  sufficient  to  arm  one 
or  two  regiments. 

I bought  all  the  powder  that  arrived  per  the  Vanderbilt,  and  hope 
soon  to  have  it  in  New  Orleans,  when  you  shall  have  enough  of  it  to 
relieve  your  most  iiressiug  wants.  I am  in  daily  hopes  of  a large 
additional  supply  from  another  source.  In  the  mean  time,  ff  the  attack 
is  made  on  you  first,  I shall  telegraph  General  Lovell  to  send  you  a 
part  of  his  stock,  to  be  replaced  when  that  by  the  Vanderbilt  reaches 
the  city. 

We  are  sadly  pressed  for  competent  officers,  and  I am  equally  sur- 
prised and  indignant  to  learn  of  the  conduct  of  General  Anderson,  and 
heartily  concur  in  your  decision. not  to  overlook  it.  * 

On  consultation  with  the  President,  and  after  a survey  of  all  our 
resources,  we  have  detached  General  Samuel  Jones  from  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac,  and  shall  order  him  at  once  to  report  to  you  for  service 
at  Pensacola.  1 think  you  will  feel  safe  when  compelled  to  absent 
yourself  from  Pensacola, 

To  aid  you  in  Mobile  we  have  nominated  Colonel  Jackson  brigadier- 
general,  as  recommended  by  you;  and,  although  he  is  ranked  of  course 
by  General  Walker,  you  will  find  means  to  give  him  such  command  as 
will  enable  him  to  relieve  you  of  much  anxiety  in  getting  your  troops  in 
proper  order. 


See  p.  497. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  803 

The  landing  of  the  enemy  in  force  in  yonr  neighborhood  of  course  puts 
an  end  to  all  idea  of  assigning  you  to  other  duty,  as  equally  unjust  to 
the  country  and  yourself;  and  in  this  connection  I will  remark  that  a 
petition  is  here  from  Mobile  asking  that  your  headquarters  be  changed 
to  that  city.  As  I consider  you  entirely  at  liberty  to  place  your  head- 
quarters where  you  deem  best  in  your  own  department,  1 make  no 
answer  to  this  petition. 

I have  ordered  Lieutenant  Slaughter  to  be  appointed  to  temporary 
rank  as  colonel,  to  be  assigned  to  duty  by  you. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN", 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fa.,  January  12,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Brago, 

Pensacola^  Fla. : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I have  received  yours  of  the  6th  instant,  and  antici- 
pated the  answer  a day  or  two  ago.  I merely  write  now  to  say  that  the 
President  requests  me  to  assure  you  of  his  appreciation  of  your  readi- 
ness to  serve  your  country  wherever  you  could  render  yourself  most 
useful,  and  that  neither  he  nor  myself  would  have  thought  of  rhakiug  to 
you  the  proposal  contained  in  my  letter  if  we  had  anticipated  that  the 
enemy  would  land  in  any  force  within  your  department. 

The  people  there  would  have  every  reason  to  complain  of  your  with- 
drawal under  such  circumstances,  and  the  dissatisfaction  would  be  such 
as  to  produce  a very  bad  state  of  feeling  as  regards  their  defense. 

We  have  concluded  to  send  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn  to  the  district 
west  of  the  Mississippi. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN!, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Executive  Department, 
Montgomery^  AZa.,  January  13,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  recently  visited  the  forts  and  encampments  of  our  troops 
at  and  near  Mobile,  and  deem  it  my  duty  to  the  people  of  Alabama  to 
report  to  your  Department  the  great  need  of  munitions  for  the  defence 
of  our  coast,  both  guns  for  the  fortifications  and  small-arms  for  the  land 
forces.  I hope  to  be  able  to  specify  at  an  early  day  the  description  and 
number  of  guns  needed  for  the  forts ; the  land  forces  there  are  now 
wanting  several  thousand  muskets  or  rifles. 

I beg  to  hand  you  inclosed  a letter  from  Hon.  P.  Hamilton,  chairman 
of  the  Executive  Committee  of  Safety  for  the  city  of  Mobile,  in  reference 
to  certain  arms  in  Havana,  and  to  call  your  attention  to  the  suggestions 
contained  in  it,  and  respectfully  to  ask  your  compliance  with  the  same. 
In  our  opinion  I am  sorry  to  say  that,  in  view  of , the  increasing  arma- 
ments and  numbers  of  the  enemy  in  the  Gulf  and  his  threatening  atti- 
tude towards  our  coast,  we  are  perhaps  as  unprepared,  for  want  of  guns 
and  arms,  for  his  reception  as  any  point  in  the  Confederacy. 

I hope  I may  be  pardoned  for  reminding  the  Department  of  the  many 


804  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

thousand  arms  which  Alabama  promptly  and  cheerfully  contributed  and 
sent  into  distant  States  in  the  hands  of  her  own  volunteers  for  the  com- 
mon defense,  and  for  further  advising  that,  under  the  recent  requisition 
of  General  A.  S.  Johnston,  we  have  forwarded  over  two  regiments  ol 
armed  troops  to  Tennessee  and  Kentucky.  We  make  no  boast  of  these 
achievements ; on  the  contrary,  we  profoundly  regret  that  we  had  it  not 
in  our  power  to  do  far  more  than  has  been  accomplished.  While,  how- 
ever, the  enemy  is  now  seriously  threatening  our  own  soil,  which  has 
thus  far  been  spared  the  pollution  of  his  foot-priut,  and  in  view  of  our 
own  destitution  by  reason  of  a surrender  of  arms  for  the  defense  of  other 
prior  exposed  localities,  I am  sure  you  will  most  favorably  consider  the 
sincere  and  urgent  appeal  I here  make.  I have  the  means  with  which 
to  procure  additional  arms  and  am  making  contracts  for  their  manu- 
facture within  the  State,  but  the  emergency  is  now  so  pressing  that  we 
are  unwilling  to  await  the  delays  of  delivery  months  hence,  and  have 
no  other  alternative  but  to  appeal  to  your  Department  to  afford  us 
prompt  and  timely  relief. 

Awaiting,  I trust,  your  early  and  favorable  response,  I am,  with  high 
regard,  your  obedient  servant, 

JKO.  GILL  SHOETER. 


[Inclosure:] 

Mobile,  January  9,  1862. 

To  His  Excellency  J.  G.  Shorter, 

Governor  of  Alabama  : 

Sir  : I learn  from  Mr.  Murrell,  who  derived  his  information  from  the 
master  of  a schooner  recently  from  Havana,  that  there  are  2,500  stand 
of  arms  at  that  place  awaiting  shipment  to  the  Confederate  States. 
They  are  the  property  of  the  Government,  and  might  have  reached  this 
place  before  now  by  some  of  the  schooners  recently  in  this  port  from 
Havana.  In  the  present  condition  of  things  here  may  it  not  be  in  your 
j)ower  to  procure  an  order  for  said  arms  being  shipped  to  Mobile  for  the 
use  of  troops  here  ? 

I respectfully  suggest  that  a representation  of  the  matter  from  you  to 
the  Secretary  of  War  might  secure  these  arms  for  this  point. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  HAMILTON, 

Chairman  Executive  Committee  of  Safety. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans j La.,  January  13,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Ya.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  in  reply  to  your  telegram,  that  the 
amount  of  powder  in  this  department,  in  round  numbers  of  pounds,  is 
as  follows : 

Pounds. 


At  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip 

At  Fort  Pike ^ 

At  Fort  Macomb 

At  Fort  Proctorsville 

At  Bien venue 

At  Tower  Dupr<^ 

At  Fort  Livingston *. 

At  Grand  Cailloii 


55, 000 
11, 500 
6,900 
750 
2,200 
500 
4,500 
1,350 


Chap.  XYL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


805 


Pounds. 

At  Fort  Berwick 1 , 100 

At  Fort  Ch^no 1, 100 

At  Fort  Guyon  or  Bayou  La  Fodicho 1, 000 

At  Calcasieu  Pass 8.j0 

In  magazine  iu  and  around  New  Orleans 30, 000 


Total 11(5,750 


The  quarterly  returns  are  coming  in  slowly,  and  when  received  will 
enable  me  to  report  exactly  the  quantity  of  powder  on  hand;  but  I have 
caused  the  above  estimate  to  be  made  out  carefully,  and  am  convinced 
that  it  will  not  vary  materially  from  the  aggregate  of  the  official  returns. 

Considering  New  Orleans  to  be  in  a condition  to  resist  an  attack,  I am 
turning  my  attention  particularly  to  the  coast  of  Mississippi.  I had 
received  no  notice  of  the  assignment  of  General  Trimble  to  my  com- 
mand. If  the  Third  Mississippi  Kegiment,  which  was  raised  mainly  on 
that  coast,  be  returned  to  me  from  Columbus,  I can  easily  provide  him 
with  a force  sufficient  to  prevent  communication  with  the  enemy  and 
repel  predatory  parties. 

The  water  communication  between  here  and  the  eastern  portion  of  this 
department  being  somewhat  precarious,  I have  organized  trains  for  sup- 
plying the  troops  to  be  located  in  that  section  by  land. 

I have  ordered  an  accurate  reconnaissance  and  topographical  map  to 
be  made  of  the  country  between  the  Jackson  Kailroad  and  Mississippi 
City,  which  will  enable  me  to  select  the  most  defensible  positions  for 
General  Trimble’s  command  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check  should  he 
attempt  to  push  up  to  the  Jackson  Railroad.  Meanwhile  I have  in  hand 
a well-organized  movable  column  (General  Ruggles’  brigade),  of  about 
5,000  men,  including  artillery,  which  I can  throw  over  Lake  Pontchar- 
train  at  a few  hours’ notice,  to  operate  against  his  column  should  he  be 
foolish  enough  to  attempt  such  a flank  movement. 

If,  however,  he  should  attempt  to  land  at  Pascagoula  and  strike  for 
Mobile,  I could  move  Trimble’s  brigade,  re-enforced  by  Ruggles’,  against 
his  base  of  operations  at  Pascagoula,  and  thus,  perhaps,  compel  an 
abandonment  of  the  attack.  These  movements  will,  of  course,  depend 
upon  my  ability  to  transport  troops  and  supplies  through  that  section 
of  country  by  land. 

I shall  probably  have  on  that  coast  two  batteries,  of  four  guns  each, 
and  two  mounted  companies — all  from  this  city;  and  if  the  naval  depart- 
ment will  give  me  half  a dozen  launches  to  place  in  Biloxi  Bay,  Bay 
Saint  Louis,  and  Pearl  River,  I think  we  can  obtain  all  necessary  results 
on  that  coast.  We  cannot,  of  course,  prevent  an  army  from  landing 
under  cover  of  their  gunboats. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General,  Commanding, 


New  Orleans,  La.,  January  13,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

A party  will  contract  to  deliver  here  75  tons  of  powder,  if  we  advance 
the  money,  under  bonds  satisfactory  to  me,  at  84  cents  per  pound,  specie, 
or  $1.14  in  Confederate  notes.  If  approved,  notify  and  enable  me  to 
raise  the  money. 


M.  LOVELL. 


806  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida,  ' 
Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  January  14,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

Sir  : I have  to  acknowledge  yours  of  the  5th  instant,  covering  a copy 
of  your  circular  regulations  based  on  the  law  for  encouraging  re-enlist- 
meuts. 

The  subject  shall  have  my  earliest  attention,  none  the  less  cordial 
because  I doubt  the  policy  of  parts  of  the  law.  And  I will  add,  that 
though  my  opinions  will  be  freely  expressed  at  all  times,  as  due  to  us 
both,  it  is  only  necessary  for  me  to  know  the  policy  of  the  Government 
to  secure  my  efforts  in  carrying  it  out.  In  no  other  way  can  military 
operations  be  successfully  conducted. 

From  what  I can  see  and  learn  there  seems  to  be  a prospect  of  reac- 
tion taking  place,  and  our  success  may  yet  be  greater  than  anticipated 
when  I last  wrote.  The  governor  of  Alabama  is  giving  me  cordial 
assistance,  and  the  people  at  home,  as  a general  rule,  are  prompting  their 
neighbors  and  friends  to  remain  in  the  service.  Many  who  had  gone  on 
furlough  are  back  before  their  times  are  up,  bringing  their  comrades  j the 
strongest  assurances  that  they  cannot  stay  at  home. 

We  confidently  rely,  then,  on  securing  eventually  a very  large  propor- 
tion of  all  we  have  had.  The  great  question  now  is  to  keep  up  their 
organization,  for  one  of  pur  well  organized  and  instructed  regiments, 
under  good  officers,  is  worth  any  two  which  could  be  made  up  of  a heter- 
ogeneous mass  fresh  from  the  country,  and  they  require  but  half  the 
number  of  arms. 

The  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed  in  regard  to  arms  impose 
upon  us  a sacred  duty  of  preserving  to  the  greatest  extent  those  we 
have.  New  troops  are  particularly  destructive,  and  the  closest  attention 
from  officers  of  all  grades  is  necessary  to  preserve  what  we  possess. 
The  officer  or  man  who  by  neglect  or  inattention  destroys  an  efficient 
weapon  now  does  the  cause  more  harm  than  if  he  abandoned  it  in  bat- 
tle. With  what  we  have  I cannot  but  regard  our  cause  as  safe,  though 
a larger  supply  would  render  its  vindication  less  tedious. 

In  nominating  the  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Twenty- seventh  Missis- 
sippi, I was  influenced  solely  by  the  reputation  that  officer  has  estab- 
lished here  in  his  nine  months^  service.  He  was  assigned  temporarily  to 
these  companies  on  their  arrival  here,  and  has  done  much  already  to- 
wards putting  them  in  shape.  He  is  an  excellent  disciplinarian,  a very 
good  drill  officer,  and  has  no  superior,  if  an  equal,  of  his  grade,  in  this 
army.  Of  his  antecedents  I know  nothing,  and  it  may  be  the  President 
there  finds  cause  to  object.  I intended  assigning  this  regiment,  thus 
admirably  officered,  to  Fort  McEee  and  adjacent  batteries,  to  replace 
Colonel  Villepigue’s  regiment,  which  will  not  be  reorganized  as  such,  the 
companies  being  from  three  different  States. 

I strongly  desire  to  retain  the  colonel,  with  his  present  rank,  as  chief 
of  artillery  and  engineers  on  my  staff,  in  place  of  Captain  Boggs,  re- 
signed. 

You  are  mistaken  in  regard  to  Colonel  Bullock’s  regiment.  It  was 
organized,  and  the  field  officers  appointed  by  the  President,  or  the  va- 
cancy would  at  once  have  been  filled,  as  in  other  cases,  under  the  State 
law.  The  lieutenant-colonel  (Shorter)  is  a gentleman  and  man  of  char- 
acter, and  will  faithfully  apply  himself  to  learn  and  discharge  his  duties. 
I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BEAGG, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORKESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


807 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 
Near  Pensacola^  Fla.j  January  14,  1802. 
Adjutant-General  C.  S.  Army, 

Richmond^  Ya.: 

Sir  : By  iuformation  from  Sliip  Island  to  the  llth  instant  we  learn 
the  enemy  are  quiet  and  making  no  attempt  yet  at  a location  on  the 
main-land.  But  few  vessels  remained  there,  and  the  number  of  troops 
was  not  as  large  as  had  been  supposed.  Their  gunboats  are  liovering 
about  Pascagoula,  Bayou  Labatre,  and  Grant’s  Pass,  i)robably  to  cut 
off  our  water  communication  with  the  troops  at  the  former  place. 

Should  they  make  a lodgment  anywhere  between  Pascagoula  and 
the  Eigolets,  it  can  only  be  for  the  mere  name  of  the  thing,  as  no  move- 
ment could  be  made  thence  against  any  assailable  point. 

Should  he  land  at  Pascagoula  or  east  of  it,  whatever  numbers,  I shall 
fight  him  at  the  earliest  possible  moment,  and  with  confidence  in  the 
result. 

1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major-  General.  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Neii)  Orleans j La.,  January  15,  18G2. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  two  letters 
of  the  5th  and  6th  instant. 

1 sent  you  on  December  5,  by  Col.  J.  Davis,  aide  to  the  President,  a 
map,  with  a descriptive  letter,  giving  a summary  of  the  defenses  of  the 
department  as  arranged  at  that  date.  I hope  it  reached  you  safely,  as 
it  has  important  information. 

In  my  letter  of  the  13th  instant  the  powder  in  this  department  was 
placed,  in  round  numbers,  at  115,000  pounds.  A considerable  quantity 
of  this  is  not  cannon  powder,  and,  by  reference  to  the  letter  of  the  5th 
ultimo,  you  will  see  that  there  are  more  than  300  heavy  guns  in  this 
department,  scattered  from  Calcasieu  to  Pearl  River.  I mention  this  in 
reference  to  the  distribution  of  the  powder  by  the  Vanderbilt. 

There  is  not  a single  10-inch  gun  in  this  department.  I can  have 
some  cast  here  in  a few  days,  provided  machinery  can  be  had  to  bore 
them.  The  Belleville  Foundery  has  two  lathes  large  enough  to  bore  12 
inches,  but  the  foundery  is  shut  up,  and  the  parties  will  neither  sell,  hire, 
nor  lend  the  lathes,  hoping  to  compel  the  Government  to  purchase  the 
works.  In  case  I fail  to  negotiate  for  them,  shall  I take  them,  appraise, 
and  pay  for  them  ? 

Through  Mr.  Dunn  and  other  sources  I have  collected  (by  purchase 
mainly)  about  900  small-arms,  half  of  which  are  double-barreled  shot- 
guns. After  perfecting  as  far  as  possible  the  arming  of  the  war  men, 
I should  propose  to  exchange  the  shot-guns  for  some  miserable  muskets 
and  carbines  in  the  hands  of  twelve-months’  troops.  It  would  look 
badly  to  go  into  action  with  poor  guns,  while  better  ones  were  in  our 
possession,  merely  because  the  men  were  not  enlisted  for  the  war. 
Besides,  the  war  men  generally  are  an  inferior  class  of  shots,  while  the 
twelve-months’  men  are  nearly  all  well  skilled  in  the  use  of  arms,  and 
should  be  intrusted  with  the  best  weapons.  The  rifles  that  I have  col- 


808  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

lected  have  been  cut  off  to  equal  leugths  and  bored  out  to  the  caliber  of 
the  old  United  States  rifle  (54th  of  an  inch).  [.54.] 

It  was  reported  yesterday  that  Lieutenant  Foster,  of  the  United  States 
Navy,  had  been  in  the  city  as  a spy  some  days  since.  Should  I arrest  a 
Federal  officer  under  such  circumstances  is  he  to  be  punished  with  death  ? 
I ask,  having  in  view  Tyler’s  case,  of  oar  Army,  who  was  arrested  in 
Cincinnati  last  summer,  but  has  never  been  tried  as  a spy. 

When  our  large  powder-mill  blew  up  we  got  to  work  upon  the 
machinery  of  the  mill  that  I ordered  to  be  removed  from  Handsborough, 
and  yesterday  a charge  was  put  in.  This  mill  turned  out  on  its  old  site 
about  1,200  or  1,500  pounds  per  day.  The  city  mill  has  had  a 20-horse- 
power engine  placed  in  it,  which  will  increase  its  capacity  considerably. 
I sent  Mr.  Thomas  B.  Lee,  of  this  city,  agent  to  Texas,  to  bring  over  the 
Vanderbilt  powder  as  soon  as  I got  your  dispatch. 

Feeling  satisfied  some  time  since  that  letters  were  being  sent  to  the 
United  States  conveying  intelligence  by  the  private  expresses  carrying 
mails  via  Havana  and  Mexico,  I ordered  all  such  letters  to  be  examined, 
and  appointed  Messrs.  Greenwood  and  Benochi,  two  gentlemen  of  high 
standing  here,  as  an  examining  committee. 

In  addition  to  the  defenses  stated  in  my  letter  of  the  5th  ultimo,  we 
are  now  erecting  eight  small  batteries  at  Manchac  and  on  the  lake  shore 
where  the  Jackson  Bailroad  skirts  the  water,  so  as  to  prevent  interrup- 
tions of  that  line  of  communication  by  the  enemy.  These  batteries  are 
for  two  guns  each — sixteen  in  all. 

Major  Bains  took  on  a proposition  from  me  about  the  steamer  Ten- 
nessee. He  telegraphed  that  you  approved  the  plan  j but  I have  had 
no  official  authority  to  guarantee  half  the  value  of  the  ship  or  to  raise 
funds  for  the  purchase  of  our  half  of  the  return  cargo. 

I am  engaged  in  organizing  the  independent  companies  into  two 
regiments,  and  will  send  on  the  names  of  the  officers  in  a few  days.  It 
is  difficult  to  find  good  officers  wIk)  will  take  the  positions  for  the  short 
time  (six  months)  that  these  troops  will  have  to  serve. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  Geiieralj  Commanding. 


Bichmond,  January  15,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans: 

I have  ordered  back  the  Third  Mississippi  Begiment,  but  cannot  take 
the  Louisiana  regiment  away  from  Columbus  at  this  moment. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Bichmond,  Va.,  January  15,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans.,  La. : 

Will  take  the  powder  if  delivered  at  an  early  day.  Will  let  you  know 
to-morrow  whether  we  will  send  you  specie  or  notes. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XVl.J 


809 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  January  IG,  18G2. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

One  hundred  and  ninety-five  thousand  dollars  will  be  placed  to  your 
credit  to-morrow  in  Treasury  notes  for  completing  the  contract  for  the 
75  tons  of  powder.  Make  the  contract  for  delivery  as  soon  as  possible, 
and  let  it  be  all  cannon  powder. 

J.  P.  BENTJAMlis, 

Secretary  of  ^Tar. 


Headquarters  Department  NTo.  1, 

New  Orleans.,  La.,  January  IG,  18G2. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  telegram,  I took  possession  yesterday 
of  the  following  steamers,  viz : Mexico,  Texas,  Orizaba,  Charles  Morgan, 
Florida,  Arizona,  William  Heines,  Atlantic,  Austin,  Magnolia,  Mata- 
gorda, William  H.  Webb,  Anglo  Saxon,  and  Anglo  Xorman — fourteen 
in  all.  Captain  Huger,  of  the  Navy,  who  accompanied  the  party  that 
took  possession  of  the  ships,  thinks  the  Atlantic  will  hardly  answer  as 
a war  vessel,  and  I telegraphed  yesterday  to  know  whether  I should 
substitute  the  Galveston  for  her.  After  the  ships  were  seized  I asked 
Commodore  Hollins  to  take  charge  of  them  until  further  orders. 

In  this  connection  permit  me  to  call  attention  to  Captain  Higgins, 
who  lately  resigned  with  a. view  of  fitting  out  some  of  these  vessels  for 
war  purposes  under  State  authority.  This  seizure  puts  an  end  to  his 
business.  He  is  an  officer  of  the  old  Navy,  of  experience,  skill,  and 
high  reputation  as  a bold  and  efficient  officer.  His  services  would  be 
of  great  value  in  assisting  to  fit  out  a fleet  here  and  in  fighting  it  after- 
wards. 

I see  various  reports  about  the  occupation  of  Biloxi  by  the  enemy. 
This  is  a mistake.  Some  GO  men  landed  there  last  week,  remained  for 
a few  hours,  doing  no  damage,  and  returned  to  the  fleet.  They  have 
no  footing  on  the  main  shore  as  yet. 

We  have  here  about  500  prisoners  of  war,  who  are  a serious  nuisance. 
Is  there  a prospect  of  exchanging  them  ? 

Eespectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General.,  Co mmanding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Near  Pensacola,  January  17,  18G2. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond,  Ya.: 

Sir  : I inclose  you  a copy  of  a letter  from  an  agent  in  Mobile,  who  is 
keeping  up  pretty  constant  communication  with  Ship  Island. 

No  doubt  the  enemy  gain  information  from  our  employes,  but  as  they 
get  the  same  anyhow  in  spite  of  us,  we  lose  nothing  by  employing  even 
doubtful  agents. 

The  first  report  of  the  enemy’s  strength  was  no  doubt  exaggerated,  and 
it  may  be  a portion  of  their  force  is  on  some  marauding  expedition. 
Should  Burnside’s  force  join  them  a demonstration  may  be  made 


810  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

against  us,  but  none  which  I can  now  look  upon  as  formidable,  unless 
they  are  willing  to  run  greater  risks  than  heretofore,  by  passing  our 
forts  and  batteries.  Such  an  attempt  is  hardly  probable,  and  any  move 
upon  Mobile  or  this  point  by  land  is  scarcely  within  the  bounds  of 
Yankee  enterprise. 

Affairs  about  Mobile  are  improving,  and  the  information  you  give  me 
in  yours  of  the  9th,  received  yesterday,  is  cheering.  With  the  cheerful 
and  cordial  aid  of  Governor  Shorter  we  shall  probably  get  out  at  least 
1,000  armed  militia — men  who  have  held  back,  but  will  come  out  rather 
than  give  up  their  army. 

On  the  arrival  of  General  Jones  I propose  turning  over  to  him  the 
immediate  command  here,  so  as  to  give  my  entire  time  to  the  affairs  of 
the  department.  But  I shall  be  much  here,  not  intending  to  change  my 
headquarters,  but  to  be  more  free  to  move  and  to  be  more  at  Mobile. 

General  Walker’s  superior  rank  to  General  Jackson  will  embarrass 
the  use  of  the  latter  somewhat,  but  I will  try  to  arrange  them  so  as  to 
make  both  as  serviceable  as  possible.  Jackson  is  a man  of  great  nerve 
and  energy,  and  with  a good  staff*,  which  I hope  to  give  him,  will  soon 
make  his  mark  on  any  raw  aommand. 

I am  happy  to  report  a decided  im]3rovement  in  our  prospects  of  re- 
enlisting the  twelve  months’  men.  So  far  as  I have  been  able  to  visit 
and  address  the  regiments  orally,  they  are  doing  finely.  It  will  be  con- 
tinued until  1 see  them  all.  One  thousand  will  be  allowed  to  be  absent 
at  a time,  and  their  arms  are  being  reserved  for  them — to  be  used,  of 
course,  in  case  of  emergency  by  the  unarmed  men  here.  This  seems  to 
be  a sine  qua  non^  and  has  more  effect  than  all  else  in  securing  them. 

' So  great  is  the  disposition  for  change,  that  but  few  would  remain  if  they 
felt  confidence  in  getting  arms  elsewhere. 

The  question  of  transferring  the  regiment,  Louisiana  infantry.  Colonel 
Adams,  for  the  balance  of  their  three  years,  from  the  State  to  the  Con- 
federate service,  is  exciting  much  interest  with  the  officers.  I trust  it 
may  soon  be  settled.  The  twelve-months’  men,  about  half  the  regiment, 
are  freely  re-enlisting. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BEAGG, 
Major- General j Cammanding. 


[In  closure.] 

Mobile,  January  14,  1862. 

My  Dear  General  : I wrote  you  on  the  11th  instant,  since  when 
the  first  two  men  we  sent  off  for  information  have  returned  and  con- 
firmed the  report  made  by  telegraph  from  Ocean  Springs,  particulars  of 
which  I gave  you  in  my  last,  and  they  further  state  that  on  their  way 
from  Ocean  Springs  they  landed  last  Saturday  on  Ship  Island,  some  6 
miles  to  the  eastward  of  the  Ship  Island  anchorage,  and  on  Sunday  were 
within  4 miles  of  the  west  end  of  Ship  Island ; that  but  four  vessels 
were  there ; these  were  war  steamers  j that  from  information  they  ob- 
tained from  the  sailors  of  the  launch  of  the  French  war  steamer  Milan, 
with  18  men  and  4 officers,  which  landed  at  Pass  Christian,  but  about 
6,(100  troops  were  then  on  the  island,  as  far  as  they  could  judge  from 
the  mast  head  of  their  vessel,  and  that  the  sailors  understood  that  much 
sickness  prevailed  among  the  Yankee  troops.  Our  men  speaking  French 
fluently,  the  Frenchmen  communicated  freely  with  them.  They  are 
much  exasperated  against  the  Yankees  for  firing  into  their  ship,  the  ball 
passing  through  both  wheel-houses,  causing  much  damage,  which  they 
are  repairing  at  Ship  Island  anchorage. 


Chap.  XVT.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  811 

The  object  of  the  French  launch  making  a landing  at  Pass  Christian 
was  to  communicate  with  the  French  consul  at  New  Orleans. 

The  officers  inform  our  men  that  some  twenty-two  war  vessels,  EngKsh 
and  French,  were  in  the  Gulf  and  on  our  coast. 

The  Yankee  transports  (large  sailing  ships)  being  towed  out  while 
the  wind  was  blowing  from  the  westward  would  seem  to  indicate  an 
eastward  destination. 

While  on  this  cruise  our  men  purchased  12,000  pounds  of  lead  back 
of  Biloxi,  at  8 cents  per  pound,  which  they  will  have  here  in  a few  days. 
They  return  to-day  for  this  lead  and  to  make  further  reconnaissance 
about  the  enemy’s  headquarters  on  Ship  Island. 

The  man  Frederic,  of  Pascagoula,  failed  in  his  first  trip  to  Ship  Island 
(could  not  get  there)  to  obtain  information  j but  he  returned  this  morn- 
ing to  the  island  with  two  old  fadies  of  Pascagoula,  who  go  over  for 
their  runaway  slaves.  He  expected  to  be  allowed  to  land  at  the  fort, 
and  will  be  back  in  a day  or  two  with  information  which  I will  rei)ort 
to  you. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[No  signature.] 


War  Department, 

Richmond^  Fu.,  January  19,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans,  La. : 

Sir  : A few  days  ago  I sent  you  a telegram  requesting  the  seizure  for 
account  of  the  Government  of  fourteen  steamships,  and  received  your 
reply  informing  me  that  the  request  had  been  complied  with. 

These  instructions  were  sent  you  in  consequence  of  the  passage  by 
Congress  of  two  laws,  Nos.  344  and  350,  herewith  forwarded,  providing 
$1,000,000  for  application  to  floating  defenses  for  the  Western  rivers,  to 
be  expended  at  the  discretion  of  the  President  by  the  Secretary  of  War 
or  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  as  he  shall  direct,  and  authorizing  a corps  of 
not  more  than  6,000  men  to  be  raised  for  temporary  and  special  service 
on  the  Western  waters. 

The  terms  of  the  acts  will  at  once  suggest  to  you  that  the  force  in- 
tended is  a peculiar  one.  It  is  not  to  be  part  of  the  Navy,  for  it  is  in- 
tended for  service  on  the  rivers,  and  will  be  composed  of  the  steamboat- 
men  of  the  Western  waters. 

It  will  be  subject  to  the  general  command  of  the  military  chief  of  the 
department  where  it  may  be  ordered  to  operate,  but  the  boats  will  be 
commanded  by  steamboat  captains  and  manned  by  steamboat  crews,  who 
wiU  be  armed  with  such  weapons  as  the  captains  may  choose,  and  the 
boats  will  be  fitted  out  as  the  respective  captains  may  desire.  The 
intention  and  design  are  to  strengthen  the  vessels  with  iron  casing  at 
the  bows,  and  to  use  them  at  high  speed  to  run  down  or  run  over  and 
sink,  if  possible,  the  gunboats  and  mortar  rafts  prepared  by  the  enemy 
for  attack  at  our  river  defenses.  These  gunboats  and  mortar  rafts  have 
been  so  far  protected  by  iron  plates  and  by  their  peculiar  construction 
as  to  offer,  in  the  judgment  of  the  President  and  of  Congress,  but  small 
chance  of  our  being  able  to  arrest  their  descent  of  the  river  by  shot  or 
shell,  while  at  the  same  time  their  weight,  their  unwieldy  construction, 
and  their  slow  movement,  together  with  the  fact  that  they  show  very 
little  surface  above  the  water  hue,  render  them  peculiarly  liable  to  the 
mode  of  attack  devised  by  the  enterprising  captains  who  have  under- 


812  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYL 

taken  to  effect  their  destruction  by  running  them  down,  if  provided 
with  swift  and  heavy  steamers,  so  strengthened  and  protected  at  the 
bows  as  to  allow  them  to  rush  on  the  descending  boats  without  being 
sunk  by  the  first  fire. 

Captains  Montgomery  and  Townsend  have  been  selected  by  the  Pres- 
ident as  two  of  those  who  are  to  command  these  boats.  Twelve  other 
captains  will  be  found  by  them  and  recommended  to  the  President  for 
appointment.  Each  captain  will  ship  his  own  crew,  fit  up  his  own  boat, 
and  get  ready  within  the  shortest  possible  delay.  It  is  not  proposed  to 
rely  on  canuon,  which  these  men  are  not  skilled  in  using,  nor  on  fire- 
arms. The  men  will  be  armed  with  cutlasses.  On  each  boat,  however, 
there  will  be  one  heavy  gun,  to  be  used  in  case  the  stern  of  any  of  the 
gunboats  should  be  exposed  to  fire,  for  they  are  entirely  unprotected 
behind,  and  if  attempting  to  escape  by  flight  would  be  very  vulnerable 
by  shot  from  a pursuing  vessel. 

I give  you  these  details  as  furnishing  a mere  outline  of  the  general 
plan  to  be  worked  out  by  the  brave  and  energetic  men  who  have  under- 
taken it.  Prompt  and  vigorous  preparation  is  indispensable.  The  De- 
partment relies  confidently  on  your  co-operation  in  rendering  eftective 
this  plan,  which  may,  perhaps,  not  only  be  of  vast  importance  for  the 
peculiar  service  now  hoped  for  on  the  Upper  Mississippi,  but  may  prove 
very  formidable  aids  to  your  future  operations  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
valley. 

I shall  at  once  place  to  your  credit  $300,00.0,  to  be  expended  for  the 
purpose  of  preparing  and  outfitting  these  vessels  as  rapidly  as  possible, 
and  shall  renew  the  remittances  as  far  as  required  while  the  appropria- 
tion will  permit.  It  is  expected  that  you  will  allow  a very  wide  latitude 
to  the  captains  in  the  preparation  of  these  vessels,  merely  exercising 
such  general  supervision  as  to  prevent  the  throwing  away  of  money  in 
purely  chimerical  experiments  and  checking  any  profligate  expenditure. 

Your  chief  quartermaster  can  keep  the  accounts,  so  as  to  relieve  you 
of  the  responsibility  of  a disbursing  officer,  and  you  can  discharge  your- 
self any  money  liability  by  simply  taking  his  receipt  as  your  voucher 
for  turning  over  this  money. 

To  a commander  of  your  intelligence  and  capacity  it  is  deemed  suffi- 
cient thus  generally  to  sketch  the  outline  of  a scheme  of  defense,  with- 
out attempting  to  lay  down  any  minute  rules  or  details  for  carrying 
out  what  is  necessarily  a novel  experiment,  yet  one  from  which  much  is 
hoped  by  the  Government. 

This  letter  will  be  delivered  to  you  by  Captain  Townsend  in  person, 
he  being  one  of  the  two  already  elected  by  the  President  for  the  com- 
mand of  boats. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENTJAMIY, 

Secretary  of  War, 


[Inclosnres.] 

Chap.  XXXIV. — AN  ACT  making  appropriations  for  certain  floating  defenses. 

Be  it  enacted  hy  the  Congress  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America, 
That  the  sum  of  one  million  of  dollars  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  ap- 
propriated for  floating  defenses  for  the  Western  rivers,  to  be  expended, 
at  the  discretion  of  the  President,  by  the  Secretary  of  War  or  Secre- 
tary of  the  ilavy,  as  he  shall  direct. 

Approved  January  9,  1862. 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  813 

Chap.  XLIII. — AN  ACT  supplementary  to  an  act  entitled  “An  act  to  authorize  the 
appointment  of  additional  officers  of  the  Navy,”  approved  December  twenty-fourth, 
ei<]jhteen  hundred  and  sixty-one. 

The  Congress  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America  do  enacts  That 
the  Presideut  is  authorized  to  appoint  officers  of  the  Eegular  Navy  to  any 
higher  grade  under  the  act  above  mentioned,  without  prejudice  to  their 
position  under  their  original  appointment. 

Approved  January  16,  1802. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  January  20,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  ‘‘unofficial’^ 
of  the  12th  instant,  and  this  evening,  by  Captain  Montgomery,  your 
note  of  the  1 3th.  I fear  I have  gone  almost  too  far  with  the  Tennessee 
matter  to  withdraw. 

On  December  17  Major  Pains  wrote  me  that  the  plan  proposed  was 
acceptable  to  the  President  and  yourself,  and  I authorized  the  parties 
to  go  to  work  at  once,  notifying  you  by  telegraph  and  also  by  letter. 
The  Tennessee  was  bought  for  $100,000,  of  which  we  are  to  guarantee 
one-half  in  case  of  capture.  Saltpeter  in  Europe  is  10  cents  per  pound, 
here  40  cents,  and  in  case  she  brought  us  only  100  tons,  we  should  save 
not  less  than  $60,000;  but  by  the  terms  of  the  proposed  agreement  we 
are  to  have  half  of  her  storage  on  the  return  voyage,  which,  in  case  of 
success,  will  net  us  a large  amount.  If  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  the 
necessary  credit  abroad,  I may  be  able  to  make  arrangements  with 
parties  here  to  make  the  i)urchases,  we  to  pay  them  at  such  rate  as,  in 
case  of  success,  to  reimburse  the  $50,000  which  we  risk  by  way  of  guar- 
antee. I inclose  you  a copy  of  a letter  received  from  Major  Pains  to- 
night, which  confirms  me  in  my  favorable  view  of  the  proposed  plan. 
Please  telegraph  me  on  receipt  of  this,  and  say  whether  I shall  make 
the  best  terms  I can,  taking  it  for  granted  that  it  will  be  impossible  to 
obtain  the  necessary  credits  abroad.  The  party  who  offered  to  bring  in 
75  tons  of  powder,  if  we  advance  the  'money,  under  bonds,  offers  E. 
Gautherin  & Co.,  of  New  Orleans,  as  bondsmen.  I objected  to  the 
security,  but  he  says  their  status  is  well  known  to  you  and  to  the  Presi- 
dent, and  wished  me  to  advise  with  you. 

Mr.  Lee,  whom  I sent  to  Texas  for  the  Vanderbilt  powder,  reports  that 
General  Hubert  had  taken  half  of  it  without  examination.  Acting  under 
orders  from  me,  he  examined  135  boxes  of  the  remainder,  rejecting  30 
boxes  as  being  some  wet,  some  damp,  and  others  lumpy.  When  he  gets 
through  with  half,  he  will  go  to  General  Hebert  to  carry  out  your  in- 
structions with  reference  to  the  balance  of  the  cargo.  The  part  that 
passed  inspection  was  shipped  to  me  on  the  13th  instant  from  Beaumont, 
Tex.,  via  New  Iberia. 

I was  in  Mississippi  Sound  yesterday ; made  a close  reconnaissance  of 
the  enemy’s  fleet,  and  found  twenty -four  vessels  at  the  island.  Two  of 
their  steamers  got  under  way  and  drove  us  back  to  Pass  Christian. 
Biloxi  is  not  and  never  has  been  occupied  by  the  enemy.  They  came 
ashore  with  60  men,  staid  for  a few  hours,  and  left.  The  reports  about 
outrages  and  communications  with  the  enemy  are  grossly  exaggerated. 
With  the  Third  Mississippi  Pegiment  and  a few  launches  I can  do  aU 
that  we  propose;  i.  e.,  prevent  marauding  parties  from  landing,  negroes 
from  escaping,  or  any  communication  with  the  enemy. 


814  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Cuai*.  XYl. 

Governor  Pettus,  under  authority  from  Eichmond,  is  mustering  in 
and  sending  here  some  companies  rather  poorly  armed  and  equipped. 
I shall  have  to  complete  them  from  the  Government  stores  in  such  man- 
ner as  to  make  them  effective.  I have  sent  one  of  my  staff  to  Jackson, 
to  endeavor  to  make  such  arrangements  with  the  governor  as  will  con- 
duce to  some  more  systematic  concert  of  action.  Some  of  the  State 
organizations  allow  more  officers  to  a company  than  the  Confederate  law 
permits,  and  where  the  companies  are  first  mustered  into  the  State  serv- 
ice and  then  transferred  we  are  compelled  to  drop  one  or  more  of  the 
officers.  I had  much  rather  send  an  officer  from  here  to  muster  iii  the 
companies,  as  it  saves  trouble  in  the  end. 

If  I do  not  need  the  $ 195,000  placed  to  my  credit  I will  advise  you  at 
once. 

I have  to  thank  you  for  your  prompt  and  considerate  attention  and 
assistance  in  my  duties  here.  It  gives  me  unbounded  satisfaction. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General,  G.  S.  Army» 


[Inclosure.] 

Nashville,  Tenn.,  January  17,  1862. 

Dear  L.  : I feel  very  anxious  about  a certain  matter.  The 
amounts  received  now  are  less  than  what  they  were  two  months  since. 
It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we  should  receive  supplies  from  other 
sources,  and  I trust  the  arrangements  to  that  effect  will  be  speedily  put 
into  operation.  I am  in  a better  position  to  know  the  situation  of  the 
Confederacy  in  the  matter  in  question  than  any  other  person,  and  you 
will  understand  me  when  I urge  the  absolute  necessity  of  increasing 
our  store.  It  is  in  vain  for  one  portion  of  the  country  to  be  placed  in 
a secure  state  of  defense  and  broad  openings  left  at  the  other  places. 
The  safety  of  each  part  depends  at  last  on  the  security  of  the  whole. 
You  may  feel  entirely  safe  from  successful  attack,  but  other  vital  points 
have  not  your  resources,  and  their  necessities  must  be  looked  after 
without  delay.  The  Secretary  gave  me  full  powers  to  tpake  and  au- 
thorize any  contract  I might  deem  necessary  in  my  department,  hut 
I have  seen  no  prospect  so  promising  wherever  I have  been  as  the  one 
we  spoke  of.  I trust  you  will  bring  your  energy  to  assist  in  the  matter. 
It  is  more  vital  to  the  country  than  anything  else  at  this  period.” 

[Indorsement.] 

The  ‘^certain  matter”  referred  to  in  the  beginning  of  the  above  ex- 
tract was  the  proposed  plan  for  obtaining  saltpeter,  which  I submitted 
to  you,  through  Major  Eains,  in  December. 

M.  L. 


New  Orleans  Arsenal,  La.,  January  24,  1862. 
Lieut.  Col.  J.  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance  G.  S.  Army,  Richmond : 

Colonel  : I am  instructed  by  Maj.  Gen.  M.  LoveU  to  request  that  you 
please  order  from  Nashville,  Tenn.,  10,000,000,  or  such  a number  as 
you  can  spare,  of  percussion  musket  caps,  which  are  absolutely  needed 
here,  there  being  none  on  hand  to  complete  the  cartridges  already  made. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EICHAED  LAMBERT, 
Military  Storekeeper,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XVI.  J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


815 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  y«.,  January  27,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

Sir:  The  overwhelming  pressure  of  business  in  this  Department 
causes  some  unavoidable  delay  in  corresi)ondence.  I now  acknowledge 
the  receipt  of  your  letters  of  13th,  15th,  16th,  and  17th  instant. 

1st.  Your  letter  of  the  13th  instant  disclosed  to  me  the  fact  that,  by 
some  unaccountable  hallucination,  1 used  the  name  of  General  Trimble 
instead  of  that  of  General  Euggles  in  my  letter  of  the  Gth  instant.  My 
intention  was  to  say  that  the  President  desired  you  to  place  General 
Euggles  in  command  of  the  Mississippi  coast,  and  I congratulate  my- 
self that  this  strange  error  of  mine  has  not  produced  any  disastrous 
result.  I have  read  in  the  same  letter  with  great  interest  your  plans 
for  the  defense  of  your  department,  and  am  rejoiced  to  find  that  your 
vigilance  leaves  no  exx)osed  point  without  protection.  Your  powder 
returns  show  less  supply  than  I had  hoped,  but  still  sufficient,  I think, 
to  relieve  us  of  apprehension  till  some  of  the  supplies  daily  ex^iected 
shall  reach  us  from  some  quarter. 

2d.  You  are  authorized  to  use  your  own  discretion  in  relation  to  the 
planing  machine  and  lathe  in  the  Belleville  Iron  Works.  If  the  owners 
are  unwilling  to  part  with  them  by  sale  or  hire,  they  must  be  imx)ressed, 
if  necessary  for  the  public  service,  and  on  impressment  you  should  give 
the  owners  the  choice  whether  the  impressment  shall  be  by  hire  or 
purchase.  If  the  owners  wish,  however,  to  use  these  machines  them- 
selves, I do  not  think  the  impressment  would  be  justifiable. 

3d.  The  map  and  letter  by  Colonel  Davis  were  duly  received,  and  I 
thought  I had  acknowledged  their  receipt  some  time  since. 

4th.  In  relation  to  the  distribution  of  arms  between  war  men  and 
twelve-months’  men,  although  as  a general  rule  we  desire  the  best  arms 
given  to  the  former,  we  do  not  intend  to  preclude  you  from  the  exercise 
of  a sound  discretion  in  any  exceptional  cases,  such  as  you  suggest. 

5th.  If  you  arrest  a Federal  officer  as  a spy  he  is  to  be  put  to  death 
without  the  slightest  hesitation,  in  accordance  with  the  Articles  of  War. 
Tyler’s  case,  to  which  you  refer,  was  not  that  of  a spy  j he  did  not  go 
to  a city  threatened  with  attack,  nor  for  any  hostile  purx)ose ; he  went 
simply  to  see  and  bring  away  his  wife,  and  it  would  have  been  a bar- 
barous outrage  to  have  considered  or  treated  him  as  a spy. 

Gth.  I have  instructed  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston  to  open  negotia- 
tions with  McClellan,  by  flag  of  truce,  for  a general  exchange  of  i)risoners. 
As  soon  as  I know  the  result  I will  try  to  relieve  you  of  your  prisoners. 

7th.  I have  organized  the  two  regiments,  and  made  the  nominations 
as  proposed  in  your  letter  of  the  17th  instant. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept.  Ala.  and  West  Fla., 

Eo.  23.  ) Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  January  27,  1862. 

I.  The  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Withers  will  in  future  be  known 
as  the  Army  of  Mobile,  to  include  all  troops  in  and  about  that  city  and 
south  of  it.  Brigadier-General  Withers  is  specially  charged  with  the 
defense  of  the  coast  from  Perdido  to  Pascagoula  Eivers. 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  L.  P.  Walker,  P.  A.,  is  relieved  from  his  present  duties 


816  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 

near  Mobile,  and  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  all  troops  at  and  near 
Montgomery,  where  he  will  select  a proper  location  and  establish  a 
depot  for  the  instruction  of  new  troops.  In  the  selection  of  a site,  the 
general  will  consult  convenience  for  transportatiou,  health,  and  economy. 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Gladden,  P.  A.,  is  relieved  from  duty  with  the 
Army  of  Pensacola,  and  will  proceed  to  Mobile,  Ala.,  and  report  to 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Withers,  commanding  Army  of  Mobile,  for  duty. 

lY.  Col.  J.  Villepigue,  Thirty-sixth  Eegiment  Georgia  Volunteers, 
is  announced  as  chief  of  artillery  and  engineers  on  the  staff  of  the  com- 
manding general,  in  place  of  Oapt.  Wm.  li.  Boggs,  C.  S.  Engineers, 
resigned. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg  : 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

No.  5.  ) Near  Pensacola^  Fla.^  January  27,  1862. 

*##***# 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  K.  Jackson  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  First 
Brigade,  and  will  immediately  relieve  Brigadier-General  Gladden. 

lY.  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones,  Provisional  Army,  having  reported  for 
duty,  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Army  of  Pensacola.  The  regret 
of  the  major-general  at  yielding  the  immediate  command  of  this  army, 
which  he  has  exercised  with  so  much  pleasure  and  pride,  is  lessened  by 
a knowledge  that  he  devolves  it  on  a tried  veteran,  every  way  worthy  of 
confidence. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg: 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headqjjarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  VrleanSj  La.,  January  28,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  19th  instant,  by  Captain  Townsend,  relative  to  thfe  plan  for  floating 
defenses  on  the  Western  waters. 

The  fourteen  vessels  named  in  your  telegram  were  seized  and  ap- 
praised by  a board  consisting  of  Messrs.  Bogart,  Stephenson,  Frost, 
Grinnel,  Milliken,  and  the  naval  constructor,  Porter.  Several  of  the 
vessels  were  costly  and  could  be  replaced  by  others  equally  well  adapted 
to  the  contemplated  service  at  much  less  expense.  I have  therefore 
caused  those  changes  to  be  made,  reducing  the  value  of  the  seizures 
from  $900,000  to  $620,000,  and  the  ships  we  have  are  as  good,  or  better, 
for  what  we  want,  than  those  named.  The  parties  owning  these  ships 
^are  anxious  to  be  paid  at  once,  as  in  some  instances  agreements  had 
been  made  for  their  sale.  Are  these  appraised  values  to  be  paid  out  of 
the  apiiropriation  of  $1,000,000  made  by  act  of  January  9,  1862,  or  is 
that,  money  to  be  expended  for  altering,  fitting  up,  payment,  and  sub- 
sistence of  officers  and  men?  If  the  latter,  how  shall  I pay  the  owners, 
who  are  clamorous  for  their  money?  If  tlie  former,  $1,000,000  is  not 
enough.  The  fourteen  vessels  named  in  your  telegram  would  alone  have 
cost  nearly  that  sum. 

I think  it  advisable  that  the  captains  should  recommend  to  the  Presi- 
dent some  competent  person  to  have  general  control  of  the  fleet  in  fit- 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  817 

ting  it  out,  and  making  general  rules  and  orders  for  its  control  and  man- 
agement. Fourteen  Mississi])i)i  River  captains  and  pilots  will  never 
agree  about  anything  after  they  once  get  under  way.  Moreover,  as 
each  ship  will  carry  one  gun,  there  will  be  some  necessary  arrangements 
for  munitions  of  war,  signals,  &c. 

They  have  already  got  to  work  upon  some  of  the  ships.  I will  send 
you  a list  of  their  names,  with  valuations,  as  soon  as  I receive  the  official 
report  of  the  appraisers. 

I sent  Mr.  Lee  to  Texas  for  the  Vanderbilt  powder.  General  Hebert, 
acting,  as  he  says,  under  necessity,  had  taken  half  the  powder,  and, 
taking  into  consideration  all  the  circumstances,  of  their  distance,  their 
want  of  local  means,  and  other  facilities,  I think  it  is  about  as  'well  that 
he  has  done  so.  The  other  half  is  en  route  for  this  point,  and  will  arrive 
in  a week  or  ten  days.  Some  forty  boxes  are  wet,  but  these  can  be 
worked  over  at  our  mills. 

The  securities  proposed  by  Mr.  Angoman  (Charles  Koch  & Co.)  have 
withdrawn  their  names,  as  they  consider  it  impossible  for  him  to  bring 
in  the  75  tons  of  x>owder. 

The  steamer  Calhoun,  on  her  way  here  from-  Havana,  with  50,000 
pounds  of  powder,  400  bags  of  coffee,  &c.,  was  abandoned  last  week 
near  the  mouth  of  the  river  most  unnecessarily^  and  timidly,  and  fell 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  She  will  prove  a great  pest  on  the  coast, 
as  she  is  very  fast  and  of  light  draught.  Her  crew  tried  to  set  her  on 
fire,  but  in  their  fright  and  haste  they  failed  to  do  so  effectively.  It 
was  an  unfortunate  piece  of  business. 

I sent  General  Johnston,  after  the  defeat  of  Crittenden,  200,000  car- 
tridges, 400  double-barreled  shot-guns,  and  IG  tons  of  lead,  as  he  tele- 
graphed me  that  he  was  out  of  that  article.  I will  also  send  up  to  hiln 
the  five  Mississippi  companies  that  Governor  Pettus  sent  me  for  coast 
defense  when  it  was  understood  that  General  Polk  had  declined  to  send 
back  the  Third  Mississippi  Regiment  as  soon  as  I can  have  them  put 
through  the  measles ; a process  which  they  are  now  undergoing,  one- 
half  of  them  now  being  sick. 

In  your  letter  of  the  6th  instant  you  indicated  particularly  the  duties 
which  it  was  proposed  to  assign  to  General  Trimble,  but  he  has  never 
made  his  appearance  here  as  yet.  The  nature  of  the  proposed  duty 
requires  a young  and  active  man,  but  I will  gladly  receive  any  assist- 
ance that  you  can  spare.  General  Cooper  telegraphs,  in  reply  to  my 
question,  that  no  order  has  been  issued  transferring  General  Trimble 
to  this  department.  There  must  be  some  mistake  about  it. 

I beg  that  you  will  advise  me  at  your  early  convenience  as  to  the  time 
and  means  of  paying  for  the  steamers  seized  here,  as  the  parties  annoy 
me  considerably. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding, 


Richmond,  Va.,  January  28,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

Your  letter  of  the  20th  received.  Make  the  best  arrangements  you 
can  for  the  Tennessee.  It  is  impossible  to  put  credits  abroad,  but  we 
can  make  any  proper  advances  on  this  side. 

J.  P.  BENTJAMIK, 

Secretary  of  War, 

52  R R — VOL  VI 


818  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 


New  Orleans,  La.,  January  30,  1862. 

Hod.  J.  P.  Benjamin; 

Can  the  Navy  Department  give  us  any  cutlasses  and  pistols  for  river 
flotilla 5 if  so,  how  many? 

M.  LOVELL. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  January  30,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

Eemittance  of  $195,000  is  now  on  the  way  to  you  to  pay  for  powder. 
I write  to-day. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  January  30,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Neio  Orleans^  La.: 

Sir  : I have  your  letters  of  the  20th  and  22d  instant.*  I sent  you  a 
dispatch  in  relation  to  the  Tennessee,  and  now  repeat  the  authority  to 
make  the  best  bargain  you  can  with  the  owners  for  sharing  in  the 
adventure,  so  that  we  may  have  half  of  the  return  tonnage  for  saltpeter. 
Let  me,  however,  caution  you  on  one  point.  If  they  have  all  the  proflts 
of  an  outward  cargo  of  cotton,  we  ought  not  to  be  expected  to  bear  any 
of  the  risk  of  going  out;  if  we  take  half  of  the  risk,  we  must  have  half 
of  the  profits.  If  we  are  to  share  onlj^  in  the  return  cargo,  we  must  only 
share  the  return  risk. 

Your  proposal  of  Charles  Koch  & Co.  for  sureties  for  the  contract  for 
liowder  is  quite  satisfactory.  Before  getting  your  letter  I had  drawn  in 
your  favor  for  $195,000  to  cover  cost  of  75  tons  of  powder,  and  the  money 
must  now  be  in  your  hands.  As,  however,  your  advance  is  only  $125,000, 
you  will  have  a surplus  of  $70,000,  most  of  which  you  will  require  for 
settlement  for  powder  per  Vanderbilt. 

I got  a letter  from  Mr.  Sumner,  proposing  to  receive  in  part  payment 
of  the  powder  per  Vanderbilt  $120,000  in  8 per  cent,  bonds.  This 
suits  us  much  better  than  issuing  Treasury  notes.  I accordingly  drew  a 
warrant  on  the  Treasury  in  your  favor  for  $127,500,  of  which  $120,000 
in  8 per  cent,  bonds  and  $7,500  in  Treasury  notes.  In  settling  with  the 
owners  of  the  Vanderbilt  powder,  therefore,  you  will  give  them  the 
bonds,  and  the  balance  only  in  Treasury  notes. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


*■  That  of  226.  not  found. 


Chap.  XVI.J  COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


819 


Abstract  from  return  of  Department  ATo.  1,  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell^  for 

January,  1862. 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

ArtUlery. 

OflSicers. 

Men. 

Heavy. 

Field. 

Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philin 

26 

682 

838 

892 

112 

5 

Fort  Pike,  La ......... 

8 

193 

245 

277 

32 

Fort  Livingston,  La 

9 

248 

275 

294 

12 

4 

Fort  at  Tiittlft  Tfimple,  La 

3 

80 

83 

96 

Camp  Beniamin,  New  Orleans 

204 

3,  231 

4,  060 

4 5^0 

6 

Arsenal,  New  Orleans 

2 

70 

79 

81 

Battalion  Mississippi  Volunteers,  New  Orleans... 

11 

124 

260 

291 

"Ratnn  Ron  gft  Barra, oka 

1 

4 

5 

5 

Fort  Guion 

8 

93 

• 110 

140 

2 

District  of  Lake  Borgne 

17 

398 

484 

513 

1 

District  of  Berwick 

42 

807 

' 943 

1,  040 

1 

Fort  Qaitman 

5 

137 

150 

157 

I 

Bay  Saint  Louis,  Miss 

34 

594 

750 

1,003 



1 

Handsborough,  Miss 

24 

386 

532 

896 

Calcasieu  Pass,  La 

2 

68 

83 

91 

I 

Total 

396 

7,115 

8,  897 

10,  296 

158 

15 

Abstract  from  field  return  of  the  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida,  commanded  by 
Maj,  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  February  1,  1862. 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

tn 

CJ 

S 

1 

Army  of  Pensacola,  Brig.  Gen.  Sam.  Jones,  commanding 

Army  of  Mobile,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Withers,  commanding 

377 

440 

5,  254 

6,  777 

6, 790 
9, 278 

8,150 
10,  056 

Grand  total 

817  1 12,031 

16,  068 

18,  206 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida., 
commanded  by  Maj,  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  February  1,  1862. 

Army  of  Pensacola.  ] Army  of  Mobile. 


Brig.  Gen.  Sam.  Jones,  commanding. 

Isfc  Alabama. 

17tb  Alabama. 

1st  Florida. 

5tli  Georgia. 

36th  Georgia. 

Ist  Louisiana. 

5th  Mississippi. 

8th  Mississippi. 

9th  Mississippi. 

10th  Mississippi. 

27th  Mississippi. 

Independent  Alabama  mounted  companies 

(2). 

Independent  Florida  mounted  company. 
Company  Alabama  State  artillery. 
Robertson’s  company  light  artillery. 
Detachment  C.  S.  Marines. 


Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  \Yithers,  commanding. 

2d  Alabama. 

18th  Alabama. 

19th  Alabama. 

20th  Alabama. 

21st  Alabama. 

22d  Alabama. 

23d  Alabama. 

24th  Alabama.. 

25th  Alabama. 

2d  Alabama  (Battalion). 

Alabama  infantry  (1  company). 

Battalion  Mississippi  volunteers. 
Mississippi  infantry  (1  company). 
Alabama  Mounted  volunteers  (6  com- 
panies). 

First  Battalion  Alabama  Artillery. 

Second  Battalion  Alaba  ma  Light  Artillery. 


820  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Cuav.  XVL 

* 

Headquarters  Departmknt  Ko.  1, 

Orleans^  La.,  February  1,  1862. 

Hou.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  ar  : 

Sir  : I received  a telegram  from  you  yesterday  stating  that  $195,000 
was  now  on  the  way  here  for  me  to  pay  for  powder.  The  fact  that  this 
, ]S  the  exact  amount  placed  to  my  credit  already,  in  answer  to  my  request 
for  money  to  carry  out  the  arrangement  with  the  steamer  Tennessee  for 
arms  and  powder,  iuduces  me  to  write  and  say  that  I have  already  en- 
tered into  the  arrangement  with  the  Tennessee,  and  that  this  sum  is  not 
available  to  pay  for  the  powder  by  the  Vanderbilt.  It  may  be  that  the 
coincidence  is  accidental  j but  I think  it  safest  to  advise  you.  I will  send 
on  a copy  of  my  agreement  with  the  owners  of  the  Tennessee  in  a few 
days,  by  which  you  will  see  that  we  got  $200,000  in  Havre  by  depositing 
$100,000  here  and  insuring  half  of  the  ship  ($50,000)  in  case  of  capture. 
On  the  return  cargo  we  take  the  risk  of  first  cost  and  half  the  value  of 
the  ship  in  case  of  capture,  the  powder  to  be  delivered  at  100  per  cent, 
and  the  arms  at  50  per  cent,  above  invoice  price.  As  a money  trans- 
action I have  calculated  that  it  results  in  our  favor  largely  more  thau 
in  risk. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding^ 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.^  February  1,  1862. 
Adjutant-Oeneral  C.  S.  Army, 

Richmond^  Va. : 

Sir  : As  you  will  perceive  by  my  orders  [February  27],  on  the  arrival 
of  Brigadier- General  Jones,  delayed  some  days  on  the  route  by  sickness,, 
the  immediate  command  of  the  troops  here  was  transferred  to  him. 
This  will  enable  me  to  devote  more  time  to  other  parts  of  my  command,, 
which,  I regret  to  say,  sadly  need  supervision.  From  General  Jones^ 
high  character  as  an  officer  and  his  experience  as  an  artillerist  there  is 
every  reason  to  hoi)e  for  entire  success  in  his  new  command,  which  is  in 
fine  order,  though  somewhat  disorganized  at  present  by  re-enlistments 
and  furloughs. 

Brigadier-General  Anderson  having  been  relieved,  another  to  com- 
mand his  brigade  is  necessary  here.  My  previous  recommendations  of 
Gols.  J.  E.  Slaughter,  and  J.  B.  Villepigue,  P.  A.,  and  J.  Patton  Anderson, 
First  Eegiment  Florida  Volunteers,  are  brought  to  your  notice.  The 
promotion  of  Col.  S.  A.  M.  Wood,  Seventh  Eegiment  Alabama  Volun- 
teers, over  Colonel  Anderson,  his  senior,  and  much  his  superior  as  a 
soldier,  has  been  very  mortifying  to  the  latter.  Colonel  Wood,  for  his 
opportunities,  is  a very  good  soldier,  and  no  doubt  made  a very  favor- 
able impression  in  Kentucky  with  his  well- drilled  and  well-equipped 
regiments  5 but  Colonel  Anderson  was  more  deserving  of  the  honor. 
Tq  enable  me  to  progress  at  all  in  my  labors  at  Mobile  it  was  necessary 
to  dispose  of  Brigadier-General  Walker,  whose  rank  rendered  him  an 
incumbrance.  You  will  see  he  was  sent  to  Montgomery,  to  command 
the  unarmed  men  concentrated  near  that  place.  I have  no  idea  he  will 
be  of  any  service;  but  he  can  do  less  harm  there.  To  command  his  im- 
X)ortant  brigade  at  Mobile  Brigadier-General  Gladden  was  ordered  to 
report  to  General  Withers.  From  his  energy,  zeal,  great  efficiency  as  a 


€hap.  XVL]  correspondence,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  821 

disciplinarian  and  infantry  instructor,  an  indomitable  will  to  execute 
what  he  knows  to  be  my  purpose,  I hope  for  the  liappiest  results.  Brig\ 
Gen.  J.  K.  Jackson,  at  whose  prompt  appointment  I felt  greatly  grati- 
hed,  replaces  General  Gladden  here,  and  will  fill  his  ])lace  witli  credit. 

I shall  in  a few  days  go  over  to  Mobile,  to  remain  some  two  or  three 
weeks,  with  a view  of  i)utting  things  in  a better  condition  there ; and  if 
necessary  shall  assume  the  immediate  command,  though  not  with  a view 
of  making  it  my  permanent  headquarters.  Such  action  miglit  look  like 
a violation  of  the  right  of  rank  in  case  of  General  Withers ; but,  as  in 
the  case  of  General  Walker,  if  the  i)ublic  good,  which  must  be  para- 
mount to  all  other  considerations  now,  demands  it,  my  action  will  be 
prompt  and  decided.  I trust,  however,  that  my  presence,  and  the  serv- 
ices of  Brigadier-General  Gladden,  with  the  excellent  staff  he  carried 
from  here,  strengthened  by  the  approval  the  Department  has  so  far  ex- 
tended to  my  exertions,  will  fully  accomplish  the  desired  object. 

Eecent  advices  from  Ship  Island  represent  the  enemy  as  having  some 
8,000  or  10,000  men,  but  making  no  preparations  for  a descent  on  us  at 
this  time.  Expeditions  are  apparentlj^  sent  from  there  to  other  points, 
and  probably  the  one  to  Cedar  Keys  was  of  the  number.  Should  no 
move  against  us  take  place  in  the  next*  four  weeks,  I shall  look  upon 
their  force  as  merely  intended  to  hold  us  in  check  by  threatening  our 
positions,  and  would  recommend  the  withdrawal  of  a portion  of  the 
oldest  and  best  forces  in  this  department  for  service  elsewhere.  Could 
such  an  assurance  be  given,  re-enlistments  in  our  twelve-months^  men 
would  be  greatly  stimulated. 

We  continue  to  receive  supplies  from  Havana  by  small  vessels  run- 
ning the  blockade,  both  here  and  at  Mobile.  A good  invoice  of  some 
very  essential  medicines  was  obtained  last  week  by  an  arrival  here. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTOK  BRAGG, 
Major-  General^  Commanding. 


[February  2,  1862. — Requisition  made  by  the  Confederate  Govern- 
ment upon  the  State  of  Louisiana  for  five  and  a half  war  regiments.” 
Requisition  appears  in  Series  IV,  Yol.  I.] 


Headquarters  Department  Ko.  1, 

New  Orleans.,  La..,  February  4,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : On  the  30th  ultimo  your  telegram  stated  that  $195,000  was  on 
its  way  to  me  to  pay  for  powder.  When  the  drafts  arrived  one  was  for 
$120,000  and  the  other  for  $7,500,  instead  of  $75,000,  the  sum  necessary 
to  make  iip  the  total  stated  by  you.  I have  no  doubt  that  it  was  the 
intention  to  make  it  the  latter  sum,  as  the  estimated  value  of  the  cargo 
of  the  Vanderbilt  was  more  than  $180,000,  which,  with  the  transporta- 
tion to  this  point,  would  bring  it  up  to  the  sum  named  by  you.  As 
General  H6bert  has  taken  half  of  the  powder,  I shall  not  pay  for  the 
whole  until  I hear  from  him  what  part  of  his  half  was  damaged.  In  the 
part  received  by  me  there  were  forty  boxes  more  or  less  damaged.  i 
The  draft  for  $120,000  was  drawn  upon  the  Treasurer  at  Richmond, 


822  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVl 

and  Mr.  Guirot  will  not,  of  course,  pay  it  here.  I return  it  to  Mr. 
Elmore  to-day. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding, 


O’Bannonville,  February  6,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones: 

Sir  : A large  naval  expedition  left  Hampton  Eoads  on  4th  with  addi- 
tional land  forces  for  the  Gulf  j supposed  destination  Mobile  and  Pen- 
sacola. Suspend  all  furloughs,  and  prepare  to  receive  them. 

BEAXTON  BEAGG. 


Headquarters  Department  Xo.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.^  February  6,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War 

Sir  : 1 have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letters  of 
the  27th  and  30th  ultimo. 

1st.  With  regard  to  General  Euggles’  assignment  to  the  duty  of  caring 
for  the  Mississippi  coast,  I think  it  would  be  exceedingly  unadvisable. 
His  services  in  organizing  a brigade  of  five  regiments  as  a movable 
force  to  any  point  of  the  department  are  more  valuable  than  they  would 
be  on  the  coast.  Xeither  his  age  nor  his  rank  are  exactly  in  conformity 
with  outpost  duty  in  command  of  two  regiments.  He  would  feel  mor- 
tified, I am  sure,  at  such  an  assignment.  I can  manage  matters  better 
by  leaving  them  as  at  present.  With  10,000  men  in  this  department, 
and  a long  extent  of  coast  to  guard,  I would  recommend  the  appoint- 
ment of  a brigadier- general  from  Mississippi  for  duty  on  that  part  of 
the  line.  I have  but  two  here,  while  in  the  Department  of  Mobile 
(General  Bragg’s)  I learn  there  are  not  less  than  five  or  six  officers  of 
that  grade. 

2d.  I have  just  received  the  first  installment  of  powder  by  the  Van- 
derbilt, and  on  testing  it  I found  it  much  below  range.  In  justice  to 
the  service  it  should  be  worked  over  again.  I will  probably  reject  itj 
certainly  at  $2  per  pound. 

3d.  The  Pederal  prisoners,  493  in  number,  will  leave  to-day  for  Salis- 
bury, X.  O.,  pursuant  to  telegraphic  order  from  General  Cooper. 

4th.  I look  daily  for  appointments  of  officers  in  the  new  regiments. 
Major  Lovell’s  resignation  has  been  accepted,  but  not  his  new  appoint- 
ment. As  he  is  constantly  on  important  duty,  giving  orders,  &c.,  it  is 
a little  awkward,  but  he  continues  at  work.  At  the  written  request  of 
Captains  Montgomery  and  Townsend  I have  placed  him  in  charge  of 
the  ordnance  and  disbursements  of  their  expedition. 

5th.  After  careful  search  and  inquiry  we  can  find  nothing  of  Capt.  W. 
E.  McLean,  alluded  to  in  your  letter  of  January  27.  When  found  I will 
act  as  advised  by  you. 

6th.  Your  impressions  about  the  arrangement  with  the  steamer  Ten- 
nessee are  not  quite  correct.  We  take  no  risk  on  the  cotton  at  all,  but 
guarantee  $50,000  on  the  ship  in  case  of  capture  on  outward  voyage  f 
and  in  case  she  arrives  in  Havre  (the  chances  of  which  are  largely  in 
our  favor)  we  receive  $50,000  in  the  shape  of  exchange,  as  the  parties 
buy  for  us  there  $200,000  worth  of  arms  and  munitions.  We  thus 


CiiAr.  xvi.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  82o 

risk  tlie  loss  of  $50,000  for  tlie  certain  receipt  of  that  amount  in  case  of 
success,  as  it  would  cost  us  that  sum  to  get  a credit  of  $200,000  in 
France.  On  the  return  we  take  a risk  of  $50,000  on  the  ship  and 
$200,000  on  the  cargo;  but  the  prices,  if  deliv^ered,  are  so  arranged  that 
in  case  of  success  we  should  save  more  than  $300,000  on  i)resent  prices 
of  arms  and  powder. 

7th.  I had  no  knowledge  of  the  arrangement  with  Mr.  Sumner  about 
the  bonds,  and  therefore  got  the  draft  for  $120,000  cashed  here.  No 
bonds  came  to  me,  nothing  but  two  drafts;  one  for  $7,500,  on  the  As- 
sistant Treasurer  here,  the  other  for  $120,000,  on  the  Treasurer  at  Rich- 
mond. There  must  have  been  a mistake  on  his  part  in  carrying  out 
your  views. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Eiehmond,  February  8, 18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lot  ell, 

Few  Orleans : 

Sir  : The  President  desires  that  as  soon  as  possible  on  receipt  of 
this  letter  you  dispatch  5,000  men  to  Columbus  to  re-enforce  that  point, 
sorely  threatened  by  largely  superior  forces.  The  menacing  aspect  of 
affairs  in  Kentucky  has  induced  the  withdrawal  from  points,  not  in  im- 
mediate danger,  of  every  man  that  can  be  spared  to  prevent  the  enemy 
from  penetrating  into  Tennessee  or  passing  Columbus.  A draff  has 
been  made  on  General  Bragg;  four  regiments  have  been  ordered  from 
Virginia,  together  with  several  batteries,  and  with  the  number  now  re- 
quired from  your  command  we  hope  to  stem  the  tide  till  the  new  levies 
called  out  from  the  State  shall  be  in  condition  to  take  the  field. 

New  Orleans  is  to  be  defended  from  above  by  defeating  the  enemy  at 
Columbus ; the  forces  now  withdrawn  from  you  are  for  the  defense  of 
your  own  command,  and  the  exigencies  of  the  public  defense  allow  us 
no  alternative. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Seeretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Fa.,  February  8,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragd, 

Mobile^  Ala. : 

Sir  : The  President  desires  that  you  wiU  as  soon  as  possible  send 
to  Knoxville  all  the  troops  you  can  spare  from  your  command  without 
immediate  danger,  and  he  hopes  that  the  number  will  be  at  least  four 
regiments.  The  condition  of  affairs  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  de- 
mands from  us  the  most  vigorous  effort  for  defense,  and  General  A.  S. 
Johnston  is  so  heavily  outnumbered,  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  for  him 
to  maintain  his  whole  line  without  large  additional  re-enforcements. 
We  have  ordered  to  his  aid  four  regiments  from  Virginia  and  5,000 
men  from  New  Orleans,  and  by  thus  subtracting  something  from  other 
points,  where  the  pressure  is  not  so  great,  we  hope  to  enable  him  to  de- 
fend his  lines  until  the  new  levies  ordered  from  all  the  States  shall  be 
in  condition  to  take  the  field. 


824  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

I am  liappy  to  iuform  you  that  the  President  has  ordered  the  nomi- 
nation of  J.  Patton  Anderson  to  he  brigadier-general,  as  well  as  that  of 
Colonel  Chalmers.  There  was  no  reason  for  any  sensitiveness  on  the 
part  of  Colonel  Anderson,  as  the  nomination  of  Col.  S.  A.  M.  Wood 
was  not  made  with  any  reference  to  the  comparative  merits  of  these 
gentlemen,  but  solely  from  the  portentous  circumstances  that  the  serv- 
ices of  a brigadier  were  urgently  needed  at  the  point  where  Colonel 
Wood  was  serving  and  not  so  with  you.  The  President  and  myself 
have  both  a very  high  opinion  of  the  merits  and  soldierly  qualities  of 
Colonel  Anderson. 

We  got  in  a small  cargo  the  other  day  on  the  Southern  coast  with 
6,000  rifles  and  50,000  pounds  of  powder,  together  with  other  valuable 
munitions.  I mention  this,  as  the  supply  of  powder  will  enable  us  to 
furnish  Generals  Lee  and  Huger  without  drawing  on  any  that  may  be 
received  in  JSTew  Orleans  or  made  in  Nashville.  I hope  ere  this  you 
have  had  your  supply  replenished  from  New  Orleans. 

Please  telegraph  me  what  troops  and  what  number  you  will  dispatch 
to  Knoxville  as  soon  as  you  receive  this  letter. 

• Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Kichmond,  Va.,  February  8,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Neio  Orleans^  La. : 

1 have  written  you  to-day,  by  the  President’s  direction,  to  send  im- 
mediately 5,000  of  your  best-equipped  men  to  Columbus,  to  re-enforce 
General  Beauregard. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Mobile,  February  10,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin  : 

Sir:  I send  a regiment  to-day  to  Decatur,  Ala.,  to  save  our  railroad 
bridge. 

If  Farragut  and  Butler  are  destined  for  this  point  my  force  is  too 
weak  to  spare  more. 

BKAXTON  BEAGG. 


[Confidential.] 

Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Mobile^  February  12,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding  Army  of  Pensacola  : 

Our  necessities  are  so  great  that  we  have  been  compelled  to  make 
large  drafts  on  your  command  and  may  have  to  reduce  you  still  more. 
The  President  has  called  on  me  for  four  regiments  for  Tennessee,  and, 
though  I am  not  yet  decided  to  send  them,  you  must  be  prepared  to 
spare  one  more,  the  Ninth  Mississippi,  in  case  I do. 

To  prepare  you  for  this,  and  also  to  secure  you  from  danger  by  too 
great  a dispersion  of  your  command,  I deem  it  prudent  to  withdraw  from 
Deer  Point  all  the  force  there  exceifl,  say,  two  companies,  to  act  as  a 
mere  picket,  in  conj  unction  with  your  gunboats.  A small  detachment 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  825 

of  mounted  men,  too,  would  be  well  there.  Your  largest  gunboat  (Brad- 
ford) should  be  at  or  near  this  position  every  night,  to  bring  off  this 
small  force  in  case  of  a heavy  attack.  Withdraw  the  two  guns,  one  8- 
inch  and  one  10-inch,  and  send  both  to  this  place,  with  carriages  and 
implements,  at  once. 

I have  information,  considered  perfectly  reliable,  that  the  enemy  will 
attack  this  place  by  a large  fleet  of  gunboats  in  a very  short  time. 
Forts  Gaines  and  Morgan,  3 miles  apart^  cannot  prevent  their  entrance 
of  a dark  night,  and  the  whole  width  is  open  to  them — 9 feet  water 
from  fort  to  fort.  We  are  erecting  some  batteries  around  the  city  and 
one  at  Blakely,  to  keep  them  off  in  case  they  enter,  and  preserve  our 
railroad  connection  with  you.  1 would  abandon  the  hospital  at  Deer 
Point  and  send  the  sick  daily  to  the  hospital  in  Pensacola,  putting  Sur- 
geon Gamble,  Florida  regiment,  in  charge.  Surgeon  Flewellen,  Fifth 
Georgia,  should  go  on  anti  join  his  regiment,  which  will  go  to  East  Ten- 
nessee as  soon  as  the  people  of  the  country  in  Korth  Alabama  can  be 
rallied  to  the  defense  of  their  own  homes. 

General  A.  S.  Johnston,  from  whom  I heard  yesterday,  feels  confident 
of  holding  Fort  Donelson  and  driviug  the  enemy  from  the  Tennessee 
soon.  Our  disaster  at  Eoanoke  Island  is  much  more  serious. 

Yours,  respectfully  and  trulv, 

BBAXTOY  BRAGG, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  Xo.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  February  12,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  W ar : 

Sir  : I received  yesterday  your  dispatch  directing  me  to  send  5,000 
men  to  Columbus.  I have  already  sent  one  (the  Thirteenth),  and  shall 
move  five  more  regiments  in  two  days  (Buggies^  entire  brigade)  with  a 
field  battery.  I shall  order  General  Buggies  to  go  on  in  command  of 
them,  and  shall  go  to  work  at  once  to  endeavor  to  organize  a force  for 
the  defense  of  the  interior  lines  from  the  volunteers  and  militia  of  this 
city  and  State.  Unfortunately,  the  legislature  passed  a law  at  its  late 
session  reorganizing  the  whole  militia,  which  has  to  be  done  at  a very 
inconvenient  moment,  but  I am  in  hopes  that  most  of  the  volunteeers 
will  elect  their  company  and  field  officers  on  the  instant,  so  that  we 
shall  soon  have  a force  on  hand.  I regret  the  necessity  of  sending  away 
my  only  force  at  this  particular  juncture,  and  feel  sure  that  it  will  create 
a great  panic  here,  but  will  do  my  best  to  restore  confidence  by  a show 
of  strength. 

You  have  never  sent  me  any  orders  about  the  distribution  of  the  Yan- 
derbilt’s  powder.  General  Hebert  has  one-half,  and  a iiart  of  the 
remainder  arrived  here  lately.  On  proof,  it  was  found  to  lack  15  per 
cent,  of  saltpeter]  but  I can  work  it  all  over  in  twelve  days  and  make 
it  into  good  powder.  We  shall  have  about  40,000  pounds.  I gave  Com- 
modore Hollins  3,500  pounds  of  my  own  stock  to  go  up  the  river,  and 
General  Bragg  has  sent  to  me  for  some  of  that  by  the  Yanderbilt.  I 
shall  make  it  go  as  far  as  I can. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

P.  S. — I borrowed  from  the  Xavy  two  launches,  armed  with  one  gun 
each,  which  I manned  with  crews  from  the  Third  Mississippi  Regiment, 


826  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVT. 

and  stationed  one  in  Bay  Saint  Louis  and  one  in  Biloxi  Bay.  The  Secre- 
tary of  the  ]^avy  requires  that  they  be  returned  to  Mobile,  whence  they 
came.  Such  accessories  are  very  necessary  on  that  coast,  and  I should 
like  to  have  authority  to  use  any  funds  that  may  be  in  my  hands  to 
construct  two  more,  to  replace  those  I have.  I can  get  no  assistance 
from  the  Navy,  as  they  have  no  funds. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Mobile^  Ala.^  February  15,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  Wur,  Bichmond,  Va. : 

Sir  : You  will  excuse  me,  at  this  time  of  great  danger  to  our  cause, 
for  presuming  to  depart  from  my  usual  course  and  to  offer  a few  sug- 
gestions on  our  future  military  policy. 

1.  Our  means  and  resources  are  too  much  scattered.  The  protection 
of  persons  and  property,  as  such,  should  be  abandoned,  and  all  our  means 
applied  to  the  Government  and  the  cause.  Important  strategic  points 
only  should  be  held.  All  means  not  necessary  to  secure  these  should  be 
concentrated  for  a heavy  blow  upon  the  enemy  where  we  can  best  assail 
him.  Kentucky  is  now  that  point.  On  the  Gulf  we  should  only  hold 
New  Orleans,  Mobile,  and  Pensacola  j all  other  points,  the  whole  of 
Texas  and  Florida,  should  be  abandoned,  and  our  means  there  made 
available  for  other  service.  A small  loss  of  property  would  result  from 
their  occupation  by  the  enemy  5 but  our  military  strength  would  not  be 
lessened  thereby,  whilst  the  enemy  would  be  weakened  by  dispersion. 
We  could  then  beat  him  in  detail,  instead  of  the  reverse.  The  same 
remark  applies  to  our  Atlantic  seaboard.  In  Missouri  the  same  rule 
can  be  applied  to  a great  extent.  Deploring  the  misfortunes  of  that 
gallant  people,  I can  but  think  their  relief  must  reach  them  through 
Kentucky. 

2.  The  want  of  success  with  our  artillery  everywhere  is  deplorable; 
but  I believe  it  can  be  explained  and  remedied.  This  arm  requires 
knowledge,  which  nothing  but  study  and  exxierience  combined  cau  give. 
Unfortunately,  many  of  our  higher  officers  and  a larger  proportion  of 
our  men  consider  there  is  no  duty  to  be  done  in  this  contest  but  to  fight. 
Gallant  to  a fault,  they  ignore  preparation,  and  exhaust  their  energies 
and  time  in  clamoring  for  this  fight.  Calamitous  results  teach  them  too 
late  the  unfortunate  error. 

The  enemy’s  light-draught  gunboats  require  of  us  different  defenses 
for  our  assailable  points.  An  old-fashioned  artillery  will  not  answer. 
We  must  have  long  range  guns  to  reach  them,  and  they  must  be  prop- 
erly mounted,  supplied,  and  served.  Our  8 and  10  inch  shell  guns  have 
my  preference.  The  rifle  gun  I consider  yet  an  experiment,  pot  a success, 
except  the  light  field  piece — bronze;  still  I use  them  as  an  auxiliary. 
Whenever  the  enemy  has  brought  his  shell  guns  against  our  lighter 
metal,  we  have  had  to  yield.  But  at  Pensacola  we  crippled  and  drove 
off  two  of  his  largest  and  heaviest  armed  ships  with  only  two  8-inch  guns 
in  an  open  sand  battery,  served,  it  is  true,  by  brave  men,  thoroughly 
instructed  and  directed  by  a competent  artillery  officer. 

We  must  then  oppose  the  enemy’s  heavy  metal  by  the  same,  and  put 
competent  men  to  mount,  supply,  and  serve  our  own  guns.  If  we  have 
not  the  guns,  it  is  better  to  yield  the  positions  than  to  sacrifice  our  men 
and  means  in  a futile  attempt  at  defense.  And  when  you  have  the  guns. 


Chap.  XVI.l 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


827 


it  is  equality  futile  if  tliey  are  liaudled  by  incompetent  troops.  From 
reports  which  reach  us,  it  would  appear  that  at  least  half  our  ^^uns  are 
rendered  useless  after  the  first  hour,  from  different  accidents,  not  attribu- 
table to  the  enemy,  but  to  a want  of  knowledg-e,  skill,  or  attention  on 
our  own  part. 

We  have  the  right  men,  and  the  crisis  upon  us  demands  they  should 
be  in  the  right  places.  Our  little  army  at  Pensacola  could  furnish  you 
hundreds  of  instructors  competent  to  build  batteries,  mount  guns,  and 
teach  the  use  of  them.  Our  commanders  are  learning  by  bitter  experi- 
ence the  necessity  of  teaching  their  troops  5 but  a want  of  instructors  m 
sadly  felt. 

Pardon  me  if  I have  been  too  free  in  the  expression  of  my  feelings 
and  opinions,  and  attribute  any  error  to  an  overzeal  in  the  great  cause 
we  all  have  at  heart. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major'  General^  Commanding » 


Richmond,  Ya.,  February  16,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Few  Orleans: 

Your  letter  of  the  6th  instant  received.  Your  course  in  relation  to 
General  Ruggles  approved.  If  you  have  not  yet  sent  the  troops  to  Co- 
lumbus, as  advised  by  my  dispatch,  let  them  stop  at  Memphis,  and  send 
telegram  so  informing  General  A.  S.  Johnston.  The  great  line  of  attack 
by  the  Cumberland  River  may  make  it  necessary  to  send  the  troops 
eastward  from  Memphis  instead  of  sending  them  to  Columbus. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIX, 
Secretary  of  War, 


Richmond,  Ya.,  February  16,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans : 

Send  every  musket  by  the  Yictoriaat  once  to  Grand  Junction,  subject 
to  orders  of  General  A.  S.  Johnston.  Send  an  agent  with  them  to  force 
them  forward  by  express.  Inform  General  Johnston  of  what  you  have 
done  and  of  the  kind  of  arms  and  such  details  as  will  enable  him  to 
prepare  ammunition  for  them  in  advance.  Inform  me  of  what  you  do 
and  the  number  of  arms  sent. 

J.  P.  BEXJAlVriN, 
Secretary  of  War, 


Richmond,  Ya.,  February  18,  1862. 

General  Braxton  Bragg, 

Mobile  : 

Your  dispatch  just  received.*  Commence  immediately  the  movement 
you  suggest  for  aiding  General  Johnston.  I will  send  you  our  views 
and  plans  by  messenger  to-morrow. 

J.  P.  BEXJAMIX, 
Secretary  of  War, 

, * See  p.  894. 


828  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI, 

War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fa.,  February  18,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg, 

Mobile^  Ala, : 

Sir  : The  heavy  blow  which  has  been  inflicted  on  us  by  the  recent 
operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  renders  necessary  a change  in 
our  whole  plan  of  campaign,  as  suggested  in  your  dispatch  of  this  date, 
just  received. 

We  had  had  in  contemplation  the  necessity  of  abandoning  the  sea- 
board in  order  to  defend  the  Tennessee  line,  which  is  vital  to  our  safety ; 
but  I am  still  without  any  satisfactory  information  from  General  A.  S. 
Johnston.  I know  not  the  nature  nor  extent  of  the  disaster  at  Fort 
Donelson,  nor  the  disposition  of  his  troops,  nor  his  plans,  and  am  only 
aware  of  the  very  large  loss  we  have  suffered  in  prisoners  through  the 
dispatches  in  the  Northern  papers. 

However,  all  this  is  beside  the  question.  The  decision  is  made,  and 
the  President  desires  that  you  proceed  as  promptly  as  possible  to  with- 
draw your  forces  from  Pensacola  and  Mobile  and  hasten  to  the  defense 
of  the  Tennessee  line.  In  doing  this,  of  course  the  first  care  will  be  to 
save,  as  far  as  possible,  all  our  artillery  and  munitions  of  war.  It  is  not 
feasible,  perhaps,  to  save  all  the  artillery,  but  the  munitions  are  inval- 
uable to  us. 

It  is  not  proposed  to  leave  any  force  at  all  at  Pensacola — a weak 
garrison  would  inevitably  be  captured — but  it  is  deemed  advisable  to 
leave  an  effective  garrison  in  the  forts  in  Mobile  Harbor  and  provide  an 
ample  supply  of  food  for  them.  The  continuance  of  the  occupation  of 
the  forts  would  probably  defer  for  some  time  a movement  against  Mobile, 
and  it  is  possible  might  prevent  the  capture  of  that  city  j but  the  risk 
of  its  capture  must  be  run  by  us. 

All  the  Confederate  forces  in  Mobile,  as  well  as  those  in  Pensacola, 
are  to  be  moved  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  the  Tennessee  line,  and  by  the 
time  you  can  reach  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Eailroad  we  will  be  able 
to  determine  towards  what  point  they  are  to  move. 

We  suppose  it  will  be  necessary  to  abandon  Columbus  and  fall  back 
to  Island  Ko.  10,  or  possibly  to  Memphis.  Five  thousand  men  have 
been  ordered  from  New  Orleans  to  the  latter  point.  Until  we  hear  from 
General  Johnston,  however,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  determine  upon 
this  retrograde  movement  from  Columbus.  It  is  almost  certain  that  he 
has  agreed  with  General  Beauregard  upon  the  movements  now  to  be 
made ; but  we  grope  in  the  dark  here,  and  this  uncertainty  renders  our 
own  counsels  undecided  and  prevents  that  promptness  of  action  which 
the  emergency  requires.  Enough,  however,  is  known  to  satisfy  us  that 
without  additional  supplies  of  arms  we  cannot  hold  our  entire  exposed 
coast  and  frontier,  and  we  must  withdraw  from  the  defense  of  the  whole 
Gulf  coast  “except  Kew  Orleans.  I shall  order  all  troops  from  Eastern 
Florida  also  to  Tennessee.  At  Savannah  an  immediate  attack  is  antici- 
pated, and  it  is  perhaps  best  to  endeavor  to  give  the  enemy  a decisive 
repulse  there  before  witlidrawing  the  troops  at  that  point. 

Your  obedient  servant,  J.  P.  BEKJAMIK, 

Secretary  of  War, 


V NTew  Orleans,  La.,  February  21,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

There  are  but  150  guns  and  20,000  pounds  of  powder  on  the  Yictoria. 
Have  sent  four  regiments  to  Corinth. 


M.  LOYELL. 


Chap.  XVLj 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


829 


New  Orleans,  La.,  February  21, 18G2. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

The  steamer  Miramon  has  arrived,  with  20,000  pounds  of  powder  and 
. 400  guns. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Mobile,  Ala.,  February  22,  18G2. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin; 

Dispatch  18th  received  this  evening.  Eailroads  washed  away.  Prompt 
movement  impQssihle. 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  February  23,  18G2. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans  J La.: 

Seize  all  the  powder  on  the  Victoria  and  Miramon,  paying  for  it  $2 
per  pound,  if  of  full  proof,  and  making  a ratable  deduction  if  not  proof. 
Send  20,000  pounds  of  cannon  powder  here  by  special  agent,  with  in- 
structions to  force  it  through  without  an  hour’s  delay. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

BicJimondy  Va.,  February  23,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans,  La.  : 

Sir  : .1  am  in  arrears  with  my  correspondence,  but  the  pressure  on 
this  Department  is  so  intense  that  I cannot  always  be  punctual.  I have 
your  letters  of  the  28th  ultimo  and  Gth  and  12th  instant.  I await  your 
returns  of  the  list  and  appraisement  of  the  steamers  prepared  for  the 
defense  of  the  Mississippi  River.  I will  then  take  immediate  measures 
for  payment.  Pray  let  me  know  immediately  on  receipt  of  this,  and  by 
telegraph,  if  necessary,  when  the  boats  will  be  ready,  and  if  they  have 
full  crews  and  their  armament  j also  the  names  of  commanders,  &c. 

2d.  The  change  you  have  made  in  regard  to  General  Ruggles  is  fully 
apiiroved.  The  orders  for  the  defense  of  the  Mississippi  coast  were 
issued  against  my  judgment,  but  the  urgency  of  the  members  from 
that  State  on  the  President  was  so  great  that  it  was  not  politic  to  refuse 
at  the  time  to  gratify  their  wish.  Events  have  shown  how  unreason- 
able was  their  demand,  and  we  must  dismiss  all  idea  of  scattering  our 
forces  in  defense  of  unimportant  points  and  concentrate  them  at  vital 
lines. 

3d.  The  appointments  of  the  officers  in  the  new  regiments  are  all 
complete,  but  the  number  submitted  to  Congress  and  confirmed  at  the 
last  session  was  so  great  that  I am  not  yet  able  to  send  them  all.  They 
are  confirmed,  however,  and  you  can  assign  to  them  their  commands. 

4th.  I am  very  much  pleased  with  your  arrangement  about  the  Ten- 
nessee, and  hope  she  has  got  out  safely. 

5th.  You  are  authorized  to  use  any  funds  in  your  hands  for  the  con- 
struction of  two  launches,  to  replace  those  borrowed  from  the  Navy,  for 
guarding  the  Mississippi  coast. 

Gth.  I dispatched  to-day  to  impress  all  powder  by  Miramon  and  Vic* 


830  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

toria.  I do  not  want  yon  to  let  an  ounce  of  powder,  any  arms,  or 
munitions  of  war  escape  you  at  any  time.  They  are  a matter  of  life  and 
death  to  us,  and  scarcely  any  price  is  too  much  to  pay  till  our  people 
are  armed,  although,  of  course,  I desire  to  save  every  dollar  we  can. 

I inclose  you  a letter  for  General  Hubert,  which  you  will  please  for- 
ward by  special  express.  I leave  it  open,  that  you  may  understand  the 
policy  of  the  Government. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMII^, 

Secretary  of  War, 

[Inclosure.] 

War  Department  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fa.,  February  23,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert, 

Galveston,  Tex, : 

Sir  : Our  recent  disaster  in  Tennessee  has  greatly  exposed  our  line 
of  communication  with  the  West,  and  the  importance  of  this  line  is 
so  great,  that  it  must  be  held  at  any  sacrifice.  You  are  therefore  in- 
structed at  once  to  send  forward  to  Little  Bock,  there  to  report  to  Maj. 
Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  all  the  troops  in  your  command,  for  the  defense 
of  the  coast,  except  such  as  are  necessary  to  man  your  batteries. 

No  invasion  of  Texas  is  deemed  probable,  but  if  any  occurs  its  effects 
must  be  hazarded,  and  our  entire  forces  must  be  thrown  towards  the 
Mississippi,  for  the  defense  of  that  river  and  of  the  Memphis  and  Charles- 
ton Eailroad. 

I do  not  desire  that  you  withdraw  such  troops  as  you  may  have  on 
the  Bio  Grande  or  western  frontier,  but  only  the  troops  you  may  have 
gathered  for  defending  the  Gulf  coast.  If  at  any  point  where  you  have 
batteries  you  deem  there  is  danger  of  losing  the  guns  by  the  withdrawal 
of  the  land  forces,  you  will  remove  the  guns ; but  the  troops  are  to  be 
pushed  forward  with  all  possible  rapidity  to  Little  Bock  by  such  routes 
as  you  deem  best. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


New  Orleans,  February  26,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Baising  .war  troops  is  extremely  difficult  and  slow.  If  Beauregard^s 
need  of  re-enforcements  be  as  great  as  we  here  consider  it,  and  you 
will  accept  volunteers  for  that  special  service  for  a few  months,  I can 
send  him  relief  immediately.  Answer  quickly,*  and  state  shortest 
time. 

THO.  O.  MOOBE. 


Executive  Office, 

Few  Orleans,  La,,  February  26,  1862. 
His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States,  Richmond,  Ya, : 

Sir  : This  letter  will  be  delivered  to  you  by  Mr.  William  Henderson, 
a citizen  of  this  place,  and  a gentleman  of  probity,  integrity,  and  excel- 


Answered  March  1,  p.  837. 


Chap.  XYL]  COERESPOXDEXCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  831 

leut  standiDg.  I have  deimted  him  as  a special  messenger  to  place  in 
your  hands  a memorial  from  the  Executive  Sub-committee  of  a Com- 
mittee of  Safety  appointed  by  the  city  council  to  render  sucli  aid  as  it 
may  be  able  to  the  State  and  Confederate  authorities  in  this  depart- 
ment. I refer  you  to  the  memorial  itself  for  its  design  and  to  Mr.  Hen- 
derson for  any  explanations  j’ou  may  desire  not  embodied  in  tlie  me- 
morial. 

I cannot  suppose  that  your  excellency  has  been  fully  apprised  of  the 
evils  which  the  memorial  presents  to  your  attention  and  consideration, 
and  I most  earnestlj^  recommend  it  to  you.  Your  excellency  will  no 
doubt  appreciate  the  necessity  for  immediate  action  to  i)reserve  not  only 
the  dignity  and  credit  of  the  Navy  Department,  but  also  to  provide  such 
defenses  as  we  are  in  absolute  and  immediate  need  of. 

Citizens  as  ’well  as  the  incorporated  banks  of  the  city  are  generous  in 
their  support  of  the  Government,  and  I have  no  fears  that  this  gener- 
osity will  be  abused. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

THO.  O.  MOORE, 

Governor  of  Louisiana. 


flnclosure.] 

New  Orleans,  La.,  February  26,  1862. 
To  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States: 

Sir:  In  the  present  disturbed  condition  of  our  country  it  has  been 
deemed  expedient  by  our  city  council  to  appoint  a committee  of  some 
sixty  persons,  to  be  styled  the  Committee  of  Safety. 

The  object  of  said  committee  is  to  aid  and  co-operate  with  the  State 
and  Government  authorities  in  rendering  this  department  as  complete 
and  effectual  as  possible.  The  committee  is  composed  of  gentlemen  of 
standing  and  influence,  and  who  have  appointed  the  undersigned  their 
executive  committee,  and  who  are  not  insensible  of  the  labors  and  re- 
sponsibilities placed  upon  them.  They  feel  that  your  excellency  will 
not  be  offended  at  their  desire  to  co-operate  with  the  constitutional 
authorities  in  this  our  struggle  for  liberty  and  independence. 

They  find,  from  investigation,  that  the  naval  department  at  this  sta- 
tion, as  far  as  finances  are  concerned,  is  in  a most  deplorable  condition, 
retarding  by  this  course  manufactures  of  all  kiuds  for  that  depart- 
ment j also  preventing  the  enlisting  of  men  for  that  branch  of  the 
public  service. 

The  undersigned  committee  have  been  led  to  believe  that  your  excel- 
lency could  not  be  aware  of  the  extent  to  which  the  naval  department 
at  this  station  has  been  reduced. 

They  therefore  beg  leave  respectfully  to  represent  some  of  the  bad 
effects  which  will  naturally  and  certainly  follow  in  case  this  defect  is 
not  promi)tly  remedied,  by  placing  an  adequate  amount  of  funds  at  the 
disposal  of  that  department  to  liquidate  its  present  indebtedness  and 
provide  for  future  contingencies. 

The  present  outstanding  indebtedness,  judging  from  facts  placed  before 
this  committee,  cannot  be  less  than  $600,000  or  $800,000.  A large  por- 
tion of  this  is  owing  to  the  founderies  for  shells,  fuses,  &c.,  to  the  ma- 
chine-shops, draymen,  &c.  Many  of  the  bills  have  been  approved  by 
the  proper  officers,  and  still  no  means  provided  for  their  payment, 
although  some  of  them  have  stood  over  for  four  or  six  months/  It  has 
come  to  the  positive  knowledge  of  this  committee  that  some  of  these 
establishments  (so  much  needed  in  the  present  emergency)  have  given 


832  OPERATION'S  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYL 

notice  that,  for  want  of  the  requisite  means,  they  are  forced  to  decline 
any  further  orders  from  the  Government. 

It  has  also  come  to  the  knowledge  of  this  committee  that  private  citi- 
zens have  repeatedly  been  forced  to  raise  funds  for  this  department  in 
order  to  prevent  the  mechanics  in  the  employ  of  tlie  Government  from 
stopping  work.  Indeed,  so  low  has  the  credit  of  that  particular  depart- 
ment sunk,  that  draymen,  whose  bills  are  yet  unpaid,  have  refused  to 
do  further  work. 

Your  excellency  will  doubtless  agree  with  the  committee  that  this  is 
a deplorable  state  of  things.  The  committee  have  been  careful  to  in- 
vestigate the  facts,  so  as  not  to  place  before  your  excellency  anything 
which  cannot  be  substantiated. 

For  months  and  months  a sign  has  been  hanging  over  the  paymas- 
ter’s office  of  that  department,  No  funds.”  The  committee  feel  confident 
that,  unless  the  proper  remedy  is  at  once  sux)plied,  workmen  cannot 
longer  be  had. 

The  committee  most  respectfully  submit  this  statement  of  facts  to 
your  consideration,  and  for  the  interest  of  our  common  cause  and  the 
safety  of  our  city  would  respectfully  request  that  you  will  give  our  citi- 
zens, through  this  committee,  some  assurance  that  the  present  state  of 
affairs  in  that  department  will  be  changed  for  the  better. 

S.  L.  JAMES. 

S.  O.  NELSON. 

J.  P.  HAERISON. 

R.  0.  CUMMINGS. 

T.  GREENFIELD. 

[Indorsement.  J 

Secretary  of  the  Navy,  for  prompt  attention  and  report. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans^  La.,  February  27,  1862, 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  since  my  last  letter  I have  sent  for- 
ward to  Tennessee  Ruggles’  brigade,  of  four  regiments,  with  a battery 
of  six  field  guns;  also  a new  company  of  artillery  (Yaiden’s),  with  six 
guns  and  their  harness  and  equipments.  Yesterday  the  Fourth  Louisi- 
ana and  to-day  the  Seventh  Mississippi  moved  to  the  same  destination. 
The  Twentieth  Louisiana  Regiment  was  mustered  for  State  service,  but, 
not  wishing  to  remain  behind,  eight  companies  have  reorganized  for  the 
war,  and  I shall  send  that  regiment  on  in  a few  days.  This  will  make  a 
total  of  eight  regiments  and  two  batteries  from  the  department,  besides 
a quantity  of  shot-guns  (500)  and  1,000,000  cartridges.  People  aie  begin- 
. niug  to  complain  that  I have  stripped  the  department  so  completely,  but 
I have  called  upon  Governor  Moore  for  10,000  volunteers  and  militia  for 
State  service.  Raw  troops,  with  double-barreled  shot-guns,  are  amply 
sufficient  to  hold  our  intrenchments  against  such  troops  as  the  enemy 
can  send  to  attack  them.  .Besides,  I regard  Butler’s  Ship  Island  expe- 
dition as  a harmless  men^e  so  far  as  New  Orleans  is  concerned.  A 
black  Republican  dynasty  will  never  give  an  old  Breckinridge  Demo- 
crat like  Butler  command  of  any  expedition  which  they  had  any  idea 
would  result  in  such  a glorious  success  as  the  capture  of  New  Orleans, 


Chap.  XVL]  COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  833 

He  will  not  have  10,000  men  for  a demonstration  by  land  upon  any  of 
the  Gulf  cities. 

2d.  Bowling  Green  has  been  turned  by  the  Cumberland  Biver,  as  I 
predicted,  in  the  plan  which  I submitted  to  you  early  in  October, 
although  at  that  time  they  had  no  such  men  there  as  IBiell  and  IJal- 
leck  to  command  such  an  operation. 

3d.  I transmitted  to  yon  in  January  a letter  of  Captain  Bnchel  in 
reference  to  a draft  that  he  had  drawn  in  Texas  for  supplies  to  subsist 
troops,  and  asked  your  instructions.  Since  then  the  draft  was  presented, 
and  I paid  it  in  specie  out  of  the  funds  in  my  hands.  Had  it  been  x)ro- 
tested,  our  troops  on  the  Eio  Grande  could  not  have  received  provisions. 
I hope  it  meets  your  approval. 

4th.  The  river  defense  expedition  is  progressing  favorably,  but  con- 
siderable dissatisfaction  has  been  expressed  here  at  some  of  the  appoint- 
ments made  by  Montgomery  and  Townsend.  The  matter  will  be  put 
before  you  by  some  citizens  of  this  place.  I have  disbursed  about  half 
of  the  $300,000  placed  to  my  credit  on  that  appropriation,  and  large 
amounts  are  due.  I trust  that  there  will  be  no  delay  from  want  of  funds 
to  keep  the  works  from  being  driven  forward  with  all  disjiatch.  Time 
is  an  important  element  at  this  juncture. 

5th.  In  view  of  the  constant  demands  from  all  points  upon  me  for 
munitions,  repairs  of  arms,  &c.,  and  the  defenseless  condition  of  our 
workshops  and  machinery  at  Nashville  and  Baton  Rouge,  I ordered 
preparations  at  the  new  Marine  Hosxiital  to  be  made  for  carrying  on  all 
such  operations  on  a considerable  scale,  and  directed  an  estimate  for 
funds  to  be  made  by  Captain  Lambert,  which  was  returned  by  Colonel 
Gorgas,  with  the  remark  that  he  did  not  contemx^late  having  a labo- 
ratory here.  The  necessities  of  the  public  service,  in  my  judgment, 
demand  all  and  much  more  than  I have  done  to  keep  pace  with  the 
requisitions  daily  made.  I have  fifteen  gunsmiths  at  work  putting  in 
order  the  old  weapons  of  all  kinds  collected  from  the  country,  and  am 
l)reparing  ammunition  and  implements  for  artillery,  which  I cannot  get 
elsewhere ; indeed,  I have  furnished  Generals  Johnston  and  Polk  with 
large  sux^xdies,  and  hope  that  nothing  will  be  xiermitted  to  interfere 
with  operations  so  necessary  to  our  salvation.  If  I cannot  get  the  funds 
from  Richmond  I must  throw  myself  n[)on  the  generosity  of  the  people 
of  the  city.  The  work  must  go  on  unless  you  order  it  to  be  suspended. 
Knowing  the  immense  pressure  upon  your  time,  and  trusting  that  you 
had  confidence  in  my  judgment,  I have  assumed  a good  deal  of  responsi- 
bility and  gone  on  with  matters  which  I conceived  to  be  important  for 
the  public  good  without  referring  every  trifle  to  you  for  consideration. 
If  you  wish  me  to  pursue  a different  course  please  indicate  your  view. 
Whatever  has  been  done  has  been  upon  i^rinciples  of  a sound  and  wise 
economy,  and  has  thus  far  produced  beneficial  results. 

6th.  The  Tennessee  has  been  unable  as  yet  to  get  out  of  the  river. 
The  Magnolia,  Florida,  Whitmore,  and  Vanderbilt  got  to  sea  last  week, 
but  one  of  them  (supposed  to  be  the  Magnolia)  has  been  cai^tured  and 
taken  to  Shqi  Island.  The  powder  by  the  Victoria  turns  out  to  be 
musket  powder,  although  iljfseems  to  be  of  good  quality.  That  by  the 
Miramon,  which  came  in  at  the  Grand  Caillou,  has  not  yet  reached  the 
city.  As  soon  as  I work  over  20,000  pounds  of  the  Vanderbilt  powder 
I will  dispatch  it  to  Richmond,  as  ordered  by  you  in  a telegram. 

7th.  Some  of  the  parties  who  met  with  heavy  losses  on  the  Calhoun, 
J.  L.  Day,  and  Magnolia  owned  several  of  the  boats  seized  by  us  for 
Montgomery's  fleet,  and  are  very  anxious,  in  their  straitened  circum- 
stances, to  be  paid  for  the  vessels  that  we  took.  Can  funds  be  placed 
53  R R— YOL  VI 


834  OPEEATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 

at  my  disposal  for  that  purpose  ? The  total  value  of  the  steamers  seized 
is  about  $600,000.  I will  inclose  a schedule  of  the  appraisements,  with 
the  remark  that  some  of  the  owners  have  protested  that  the  amounts 
allowed  are  not  a fair  price.  Those  objected  to  I had  reappraised,  and 
the  board  adhered  to  its  first  decision.  No  more  should  be  allowed. 

8th.  I turned  over  to  the  Navy  ten  42-pounders  to  arm  their  two  gun- 
boats for  lake  service,  and  hope  that  they  will  get  them  out  pretty  soon ; 
but  whether  from  want  of  funds  or  lack  of  systematic  expenditures  the 
credit  of  that  branch  of  the  public  service  here  is  so  bad  that  it  is  almost 
impossible  for  them  to  get  anything  done.  A few  days  since  I wanted 
a crew  for  a boat  to  work  on  the  lower  rafts,  but  could  not  get  a man 
until  they  were  satisfied  that  it  was  not  intended  for  service  in  the 
naval  department.  This  is  a serious  embarrassment  to  them  in  their 
work. 

9th.  With  some  funds  that  I got  from  the  city  I bought,  and  am  fit- 
ting up  as  launches,  with  one  light  gun  each,  twelve  luggers,  for  a coast 
guard,  to  watch  the  enemy  and  prevent  communication  with  the  shore. 

10th.  I am  a good  deal  delayed  by  the  want  of  competent  officers  to 
assist  me  in  the  laborious  details  of  this  department.  We  want  an  ord- 
nance officer  here  badly.  Many  things  are  necessarily  kept  back  by 
having  Major  Smith  perform  the  duties  of  engineer  and  ordnance  officer, 
either  one  of  which  would  tax  a competent  man  to  the  utmost.  It  is 
neither  justice  to  him  nor  to  the  service  to  make  him  responsible  for 
such  an  immense  and  varied  amount  of  detailed  work. 

With  much  rcvspect,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Mobile,  February  27,  1862. 

J.  P.  Benjaindn: 

Sir:  My  troops  are  pressing  forward.  I leave  to-morrow  to  join 
General  Beauregard.  There  is  the  great  danger. 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Mobile^  February  27,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : Tour  written  dispatch  of  the  18th,  by  tlie  hands  of  Major  Lewis, 
only  reached  me  this  morning,  four  days  at  least  behind  its  time,  and 
as  much  behind  others  who  left  Richmond  on  that  day.  The  major  tells 
me  he  did  not  start  till  the  21st,  and  as  he  is  at  best  a very  slow  man, 
perhaps  he  has  done  his  best.  Heavy  movements  of  troops  had  already 
been  made  as  far  as  our  damaged  roads  would  permit  j but  as  your 
telegram  did  not  indicate  the  extent  to  which  we  were  to  go,  no  arrange- 
ments had  been  made  for  abandoning  any  point. 

Instructions  to  General  Jones,  commanding  at  Pensacola,  go  over 
to-day,  and  he  will  be  urged  to  a hasty  execution  of  the  orders.  Every- 
thing, public  and  i)rivate,  is  ordered  to  be  destroyed  which  he  is  unable 
to  remove  and  which  might  prove  useful  to  the  enemy;  and  the  rail- 
road as  far  as  the  junction  to  this  city  is  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  iron 
sent  to  Montgomery.  By  this  means  we  may  hold  the  enemy  in  check 
for  some  weeks  at  least. 

Last  week  I sent  a messenger  to  confer  with  General  A.  S.  Johnston, 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


835 


that  I mi  gilt  be  able  to  act  with  some  knowledge  of  the  state  of  affairs. 
He  has  returned  this  morning,  and  I regret  to  hear  the  dei)lorable  state  of 
affairs.  As  he  is  an  officer  of  great  prudence,  caution,  and  good  judg- 
ment, I am  the  more  concerned  at  his  rei)ort.  Officers  of  lank  and 
standing  having  already  gone  on  to  lay  before  the  Department  this  in- 
formation, it  is  unnecessary,  perhaps  improper,  that  I should  enter  upon 
the  subject. 

The  past  we  cannot  recall,  but  it  will  be  a cruel  sacrifice  to  expose 
what  is  left  of  our  gallant  men  to  the  same  fate.  Coiffidence  is  lost  on 
all  hands,  from  the  private  to  the  major-general,  and  nothing  but  a 
change  can  restore  it. 

It  were  futile  to  waste  our  time  inquiring  whether  this  is  deserved. 
We  must  deal  with  facts  as  we  find  them,  i^romptly  and  energetically, 
or  we  are  lost. 

I propose  sending  my  heavy  guns  from  Pensacola  to  General  Beaure- 
gard, to  enable  us  to  hold  the  Mississippi,  reserving  only  such  as  may 
be  necessary  to  enable  me  to  give  some  confidence  to  the  ijeople  here 
and  in  the  interior  should  the  enemy  pass  our  forts. 

Very  respectfully  your  obedient  servant, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 
Major- General^  Commanding, 


Mobile,  February  27,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samtjel  Jones, 

Commanding  at  Pensacola: 

Sir  : In  the  great  strait  to  which  we  are  reduced  it  has  become  neces- 
sary to  concentrate  our  resources  even  at  the  cost  of  giving  up  some  of 
our  important  positions. 

You  will  malce  all  dispositions  at  the  earliest  moment,  tvorlcing  day  and 
night,  to  abandon  Pensacola.  Send  to  this  place  all  the  heavy  shell  guns, 
rifle  guns,  and  carriages,  &c.,  complete,  with  the  ammunition  for  them; 
all  other  supplies  to  Montgomery,  to  be  located  a few  miles  this  side, 
for  safety,  in  case  the  enemy  should  reach  there  by  gunboats. 

This  movement  should  be  made  with  all  the  secrecy  possible ; remov- 
ing your  guns  at  night,  and  masking  the  positions,  taking  the  most 
advanced  first.  Keep  sufficient  troops  in  position  to  deceive  the  enemy 
until  all  is  ready. 

As  you  can  do  so,  send  forward  all  bodies  which  can  be  spared,  only 
reserving  enough  to  do  the  work,  and  hold  your  positions  until  the  last, 
when  one  regiment  can  wind  up  all,  and  leave  by  the  railroad. 

I desire  you  particularly  to  leave  nothing  the  enemy  can  use ; burn 
all  from  Fort  McRee  to  the  junction  with  the  Mobile  road.  Save  the 
guns,  and  if  necessary  destroy  your  gunboats  and  all  other  boats.  They 
might  be  used  against  us.  Destroy  all  machinery,  &c.,  public  and  pri- 
vate, which  could  be  useful  to  the  enemy ; esjiecially  disable  the  saw- 
mills in  and  around  the  bay  and  burn  the  lumber.  Break  up  the  rail- 
road from  Pensacola  to  the  Junction,  carrying  the  iron  up  to  a safe 
point. 

Your  troops,  except  Captain  Amos’  mounted  company,  and  the  six 
companies  First  Confederate  Regiment,  ordered  here,  will  move  as 
rapidly  as  you  can  spare  them  to  Chattanooga,  Tenn.,  and  await  orders. 
All  that  you  can  spare  should  go  at  once.  The  enemy  is  not  in  condi- 
tion to  assail  you  at  this  point. 

Much  depends,  general,  on  active  and  prompt  measures.  Our  armies 
in  Tennessee,  are  fearfully  outnumbered,  and  I regret  to  say,  from  infor- 


836 


OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


mation  just  received,  utterly  demoralized,  having  no  confidence.  A 
timely  arrival  and  intermixture  of  our  troops  may  tend  to  restore  con- 
fidence. 

Yery  respectfully  and  truly,  BRAXTOK  BRAGG, 

3fajor-  General,  Commanding. 

Report  as  you  progress.  Seize  all  transportation  on  railroads. 
OaiDtain  Oladowski  comes  to  your  aid  in  ordnance  department. 


Mobile,  February  27,  1862. 

General  Beaureoarb  : 

My  Dear  General  : Hearing  by  telegraph  from  the  governor  of 
this  State  that  you  had  called  on  him  for  re-enforcements  to  be  sent  to 
Corinth,  Miss.,  1 directed  a portion  of  those  I was  sending  to  General 
A.  S.  Johnston,  and  inclose  you  a copy  of  my  order  directing  them  to 
rendezvous  at  Corinth.  I trust  they  will  be  of  timely  assistance  and 
lirove  worthy  of  your  command.  The  Louisiana  infantry  is  one  of  our 
regiments  of  regulars,  and  is  finely  equipped  and  instructed.  Brigadier- 
General  Ruggles  has  assumed  command,  at  my  request,  of  the  troops  of 
my  command  in  North  Alabama,  one  regiment  mounted  men  and  three 
companies  infantry.  These  I have  requested  him  to  call  into  Corinth 
and  hold  subject  to  your  order.  The  people  of  the  country  will  guard 
our  bridges. 

I am  acting  on  my  own  responsibility,  and  doing  what  it  seems  to  us 
ought  to  have  been  done  long  ago — concentrating  our  limited  means  at 
some  important  point  to  resist  a vital  blow.  We  should  cease  our  policy 
of  protecting  persons  and  property,  by  which  we  are  being  defeated  in 
detail. 

Wishing  you  all  success,  I am,  without  occupation,  restless  and  sad, 
but  hopeful. 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 

[Inclosnre.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept.  Ala.  and  West  Fla., 

No.  62.  ) Mobile,  Ala.,  February  26,  1862. 

* * * * * * * 

II.  The  regiment  of  Louisiana  infantry,  Colonel  Adams;  the  Eight- 
eenth and  Twenty-second  Regiments  of  Alabama  Volunteers,  Colonels 
Shorter  and  Deas,  will  immediately  proceed  to  Corinth,  Miss.,  there  to 
receive  further  orders. 

* * # * * * * 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg: 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept.  Ala.  and  West  Fla., 

No.  38.  ] Mobile,  Ala.,  February  28,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg  relinquishes  the  command  of  this  depart- 
ment to  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones.* 

By  command  of  Major-General  Bragg: 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

*Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones  seems  to  have  assumed  command,  under  this  order, 
March  3,  1862. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


837 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  March  1,  18G2. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans : 

You  may  accept  all  armed  men  that  will  go  to  re-enforce  General 
Beauregard  for  a term  of  six  months,  under  the  law  for  local  defense 
and  special  service. 

J.  P.  BENJAMINT, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

New  Orleans^  March  1,  1862. 

Major-General  Lewis, 

Commanding  Louisiana  State  Troops  : 

General:  The  following  troops  are  out  under  my  command  this  day 
in  obedience  to  your  order,  No.  19 : 

Continental  Regiment,  Colonel  Clark,  320  men. 

Jeff.  Davis  Regiment,  Colonel  Smith,  150  men. 

Beauregard  Regiment,  Colonel  Bartlett,  400  men. 

Sumter  Regiment,  Colonel  Breaux,  200  men. 

Lewis  Battalion,  Major  Tenbrink,  80  men. 

Washington  Artillery,  Captain  Hodgson,  140  men. 

Wilson  Cavalry,  Captain  Moore,  50  men. 

The  Crescent  Regiment  has  been  excused  from  parade. 

Colonel  Clark  has  five  companies  without  arms,  Colonel  Smith  has 
nine  companies  without  arms,  Colonel  Bartlett  has  six  companies  with- 
out arms,  Major  Tenbrink  has  two  companies  without  arms.  Colonel 
Breaux  has  three  companies  without  arms. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c., 

E.  L.  TRACY, 

By'igadier-  General. 
THOS.  F.  WALKER, 

Brigade  Inspector. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Mobile,  Ala.,  [March  11] 

General  Samuel  Jones: 

Sir  : Such  is  the  pressing  necessity  in  West  Tennessee  that  I have 
concluded,  at  the  request  of  General  Beauregard,  to  proceed  immedi- 
ately to  his  assistance.  Brigadier-General  Withers  having  been  relieved 
here,  you  will  assume  command  of  the  department,  remaining,  however, 
at  Pensacola  to  complete  the  work  there.  Press  forward  the  troops  and 
heavy  guns.  We  must  have  them  to  hold  the  Mississippi.  Should  you 
find  yourself  unable  to  accomplish  your  work  in  ten  days,  destroy  your 
smooth-bore  guns  and  send  me  your  troops.  1 would  not  thus  press  you, 
but  our  fate  may  depend  on  two  weeks  in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi. 

Colonel  Yillepigue  remains  to  complete  the  defenses  here.  Send  him 
to  me  as  soon  as  you  come  over,  and  if  you  can  relieve  Major  Hallon- 
quist  from  Fort  Gaines  I shall  be  much  pleased  to  have  him. 

With  every  confidence  in  your  zeal,  industry,  and  ability,  I part  with 
you  with  great  regret,  well  knowing  all  will  be  done  your  limited  means 
will  allow. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

BRAXTON  BRAGG, 

Major-  General,  Commanding, 


838  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Near  Pensacola^  Fla.,  March  4,  1862. 

Mr.  0.  L.  Le  Barron, 

Pensacola^  Fla. : 

Sir  : You  are  aware  that  a number  of  troops  have  been  recently  de- 
tached from  this  army.  It  is  important  that  I should  have  the  services 
of  every  available  soldier  on  this  side  of  Bayou  Grande.  It  is  also  im- 
portant that  I should  keep  a good  and  efiScient  guard  in  Pensacola.  I 
have  a battalion  of  volunteers  now  on  that  duty  in  Pensacola.  I am 
convinced  that  the  people  of  Pensacola  are  fully  able  to  guard  their  own 
town  quite  as  well  as  it  is  now  guarded  if  the  men  will  organize  and  ’ 
volunteer  for  that  service.  I desire  that  you  confer  with  the  mayor 
and  such  citizens  as  you  may  think  proper,  and  endeavor  to  organize  a 
sufficient  guard  for  the  town.  If  that  can  be  done,  I can  then  avail  my- 
self of  the  services  of  the  Fourth  Battalion  Alabama  Volunteers  here  to 
defend  the  most  important  point. 

Communicate  to  me  with  as  little  delay  as  possible  what  you  can  do  to 
carry  out  the  foregoing  suggestion. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JOKES, 
Brigadier-  General. 


[March  4,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  at  Jackson,  Tenn.,  issues 
an  order  resuming  command  of  the  Department  of  Alabama  and  West 
Florida,  and  assuming,  in  addition  thereto,  command  of  the  troops  in 
Korth  Mississippi  and  south  of  Jackson  in  West  Tennessee.  See  opera- 
tions, Kovember  19,  1861-March  4,  1862,  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  &c. 
Vol.  VII,  p.  920.] 


Hjdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Pensacola^  Fla.,  March  5,  1862. 

[General  Braog:] 

General  : My  movements  here  to  carry  out  your  orders  have  been 
greatly  retarded — ^more,  I presume,  than  you  apprehended — by  the  want 
of  transportation  and  the  necessary  facilities  for  moving  guns. 

The  first  train  of  cars  from  Pensacola  to  Mobile  since  the  damage  to 
the  road  started  yesterday,  and  both  the  road  to  Mobile  and  that  to 
Montgomery  are  in  such  bad  condition  that  cars  are  not  permitted  to  run 
on  them  at  night.  The  president  and  superintendent  of  the  Montgomery 
road,  who  came  here  this  morning  at  my  request  to  confer  with  me, 
promised  to  do  all  in  their  power  to  expedite  the  public  business.  I have 
directed  that  the  superintendent  of  the  Mobile  road  shall  remain  at  Pol- 
lard, to  direct  the  movements  on  all  the  roads  meeting  at  that  point.  I 
am  establishing  a depot  there,  and  will  after  to-day  have  a special  train 
twice  a day  from  Pensacola  to  that  place,  to  carry  such  stores  as  cannot 
be  immediately  sent  to  Montgomery  and  Mobile.  1 have  directed  some 
supplies  to  be  sent  to  Greenville,  and  will  deposit  others  at  Evergreen 
and  Brewton,  where  I can  procure  storage  temporarily,  with  a view  of 
collecting  them  at  the  most  suitable  point  as  soon  as  practicable.  The 
First  Alabama  Eegiment  is  now  in  Pensacola,  and  will  leave  for  Mem- 
phis via  Mobile  this  evening.  I will  send  forward  the  troops  ordered  to 
Corinth  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  I am  making  and  will  continue  to 


Chap.^XVL]  correspondence,  etc. CONFEDERATE.  839 

make  every  preparation  to  carry  out  fully  your  orders  respecting  this 
j^lace. 

I telegraphed  you  to-day  that  I had  sent  96  mules  by  wagon  road  to 
Hall’s  Landing,  thence  via  Mobile  to  Corinth.  I had  no  harness  or 
wagons  for  them.  I also  asked  to  be  allowed  to  retain  Colonel  Jones  and 
the  Twenty-seventh  Mississippi  Eegiment  a few  days  beyond  the  time 
you  have  allowed  me  to  accomplish  the  work  in  hand,  and  I trust  that 
you  will  allow  me  to  do  so.  My  reason  for  asking  this  I will  explain 
more  fully  in  another  letter,  probably  to-night.  The  mail  will  close  before 
I could  gi^^  my  reasons  in  this.  In  your  telegram  of  yesterday  for  32- 
130under  barbette  carriages  to  be  sent  to  Memphis  you  did  not  say  if  you 
wanted  the  guns  and  ammunition  with  them. 

Your  telegram  (the  only  one  I have  received  since  you  left  Mobile)  I 
received  late  last  night,  and  of  course  have  not  yet  forwarded  the  car- 
riages, as  it  was  necessary  to  dismount  the  guns  at  night. 

I shall  look  most  anxiously  for  news  from  West  Tennessee,  and  hope 
you  will  keep  me  advised  of  your  movements  in  that  quarter. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JOls'ES, 
Brigadier- General. 


O’Bannonville,  Fla.,  March  5,  1862. 

General  Braxton  Bra&o, 

Jackson j Tenn. : 

Shall  I send  with  the  32-pounder  barbette  carriages  the  guns  and 
ammunition  pertaining  to  them 

SAM.  JONES, 
Brigadier- Genera  1. 


O’Bannonville,  Fla.,  March  5,  1862. 

General  Braxton  Braoo, 

Jackson.,  Tenn. : 

Your  telegram  of  yesterday  received.  Barbette  carriages  and  all 
ordnance  and  stores  called  for  will  be  forwarded  as  rapidly  as  possible. 
No  railroad  communication  with  Mobile  until  yesterday.  First  Alabama 
started  to-day  for  Memphis.  Ninety-six  mules  left  yesterday  for  Corinth, 
Miss.  Negro  laborers  arrived  last  night  and  this  morning.  Do  let  me 
keep  Colonel  Jones  and  his  regiment  a few  days  at  least  beyond  the  time 
you  have  allowed  me.  My  movements  here  have  been  greatly  retarded 
by  want  of  transportation  and  laborers. 

SAM.  JONES, 
Brigadier-General. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  March  5,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Vanderbilt  powder  had  to  be  reworked,  Victoria  powder  was  all  mus- 
ket, and  Miramon  i>owder  not  arrived.  Shall  I send  musket  powder  I 

M.  LOVELL. 


840  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [CHAPt  XYI. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  March  5,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  • 

]^ew  Orleans,  La. : 

Your  (lispatcli  of  tlie  5tb  received.  Send  10,000  pounds  of  musket 
powder  and  10,000  i^oiiuds  of  cannon  iiowder,  with  an  agent,  to  force  it 
on  by  exj)ress. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Secretary  of  War, 


Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans,  La. : 
The  Nashville  brought  no  arms. 


Eichmond, 


J. 


Ya.,  March  6,  1862. 


P.  BENJAMIN,  . 
Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  March  6,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Braxton  Bragh, 

Jaclcson,  Tenn. : 

General:  I telegraphed  you  yesterday  asking  that  I might  be 
allowed  to  retain  the  Twenty-seventh  Eegiment  Mississippi  Yolunteers, 
Colonel  Jones,  a few  days  beyond  the  time  you  fixed  for  the  evacuation 
of  this  post,  and  mentioned  the  same  in  my  letter  of  yesterday,  but  had 
not  time  to  give  my  reasons.  I am  convinced  that  the  enemy  on  Santa 
Eosa  Island  is  not  prepared  to  attack  this  place  at  x>resent.  I have 
never  believed  the  force  as  large  as  reported,  and  I have  reason  to  believe 
it  has  been  recently  reduced.  A large  transport  steamer  came  in  some 
days  since  and  left  the  next  day.  A large  sailing  vessel  left  the  same 
day,  and  between  the  arrival  and  departure  of  the  steamer  a large  num- 
ber of  the  tents  on  the  island  were  struck.  I have  watched  the  island 
carefully,  and  see  very  few  men  there. 

I believe  if  we  keep  up  even  the  appearance  of  being  prepared  to  de- 
fend the  place  the  enemy  will  not  attack  it.  The  governor  of  Alabama 
informs  me  that  by  the  end  of  this  week  he  can  send  me  1,000  men  en- 
gaged to  serve  for  thirty  days,  and  by  the  middle  of  next  week  more, 
engaged  for  the  same  period,  and  before  their  time  expires  he  can  replace 
them  by  more  than  double  the  number  of  war  troops.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances I believe  that  Colonel  »Jones,  with  his  regiment  and  the  men 
who  can  be  collected  here  before  I can  possibly  send  off  all  the  troops 
you  have  called  for,  can  keep  up  such  an  appearance  of  preparation  to 
defend  the  place  as  to  deter  the  enemy  from  attacking.  The  importance 
of  holding  this  point  is  so  great  that  it  will,  I think,  justify  the  risk  of 
allowing  the  navy-yard  in  its  iiresent  dilapidated  condition  and  a few 
24, 32,  and  42  pounder  smooth-bore  guns  to  fall  uninjured  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy. 

Your  instructions  are,  that  I shall  destroy  the  guns,  except  the  shell 
and  rifled  guns,  and  burn  everything  from  Fort  McEee  to  the  Junction 
that  can  be  of  service  to  the  enemy.  These  guns  would  be  of  but  little 
value  to  an  enemy  who  has  an  abundance  of  much  better  guns,  and  the 
houses  could  only  contribute  a little  to  their  comfort,  and  you  knowhow 
readily  they  can  make  thousands  comfortable  at  this  place.  But  there 
is  no  reason  why  the  guns  and  houses  should  fall  uninjured  into  their 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


841 


hands.  I am  making  every  preparation  to  destroy  them,  so  tliat  when- 
ever an  attack  is  made,  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  retire,  a Icav  men 
can  disable  the  guns,  apply  the  torches,  do  the  work  of  destruction,  and 
escape  unhurt.  The  enemy  has  no  mounted  troops  on  the  island.  If 
they  had,  it  would  take  time  to  land  them,  and  if  the  men  lett  liere, 
nearly  all  unarmed,  could  not  escape,  I think  their  caj^ture  would  not  be 
a very  serious  loss  to  the  country. 

My  plan  only  diliers  from  your  instructions  to  me  in  this,  that  I shall 
withhold  from  you  Colonel  Jones  and  the  350  armed  men  he  has  for  duty, 
and  leave  the  work  of  destruction  to  be  done  when  an  overpowering 
attack  is  made,  instead  of  before  and  when  there  is  no  indication  of  an 
attack.  I have  explained  my  views  fully  to  General  Anderson  and  Colo- 
nel Jones,  and  they  approve  them.  Colonel  Jones  is  willing  to  under- 
take the  task  I propose  to  assign  him,  and  believes  he  can  manage  it 
successfully.  I submit  it  for  your  consideration. 

The  people  of  Pensacola  and  Mobile  and  all  Alabama  and  West  Flor- 
ida, I hear,  are  greatly  alarmed  at  the  report  that  this  i)lace  is  to  be 
abandoned  to  the  enemy.  I am  sorry  to  say  that  the  report  of  the  ih- 
tended  evacuation  reached  Pensacola  before  your  first  instructions  in 
the  matter  reached  me.  It  seems  impossible  to  keep  any  military  secrets 
in  this  country. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  Jt)NES, 
Brigadier-  General, 


Headquarters  Department  NTo.  1, 

]\^ew  Orleans,  La.,  March  6,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letters  of 
the  23d,  24th,  and  26th  ultimo,  which  reached  me  yesterday. 

1st.  The  river  expedition  is  progressing  well.  Seven  of  the  boats 
will  be  ready,  except  the  gun,  on  Saturday,  the  8th,  and  the  remainder 
in  a week  from  that  time.  We  are  working  under  many  disadvantages, 
but  no  time  is  being  lost.  I shall  be  out  of  funds  for  that  purpose  in  a 
few  days.  The  appraisement  of  the  ships  was  forwarded  in  my  letter 
of  the  "27th  ultimo. 

2d.  I received  your  telegram  directing  20,000  pounds  of  cannon  powder 
to  be  sent  to  Bichmond.  All  the  powder  that  came  in  the  Vanderbilt, 
Victoria,  and  Miramon  is  small-grained,  not  cannon  powder,  and  that 
by  the  first  and  last  of  those  vessels  requires  to  be  reworked,  with  an 
addition  of  15  jier  cent,  of  saltpeter.  This  department  is  being  com- 
pletely drained  of  everything,  and  I trust  that  the  arrival  of  the  Xash- 
ville  will  enable  you  to  leave  here  all  the  powder  that  we  have  on  hand. 
We  have  filled  requisitions  for  arms,  men,  and  munitions  until  NTew 
Orleans  is  about  defenseless.  In  return  we  get  nothing.  Mobile  and 
Pensacola — even  Galveston — are  defended  by  10-inch  columbiads,  while 
this  city  has  nothing  above  an  8-inch,  and  but  few  of  them.  The  forti- 
fied line  about  the  city  is  complete,  but  I have  taken  ten  of  the  guns 
for  the  NTavy  and  sixteen  for  the  vessels  that  we  are  fitting  up  for  the 
river  expedition.  My  reliance  to  defend  these  lines  will  be  upon  militia, 
with  double-barreled  guns  and  32-pounder  carronades.  If  now  you  take 
the  powder  from  me  we  shall  be  in  no  condition  to  resist.  The  only 
thing  to  provide  is  a sufficiency  of  powder  to  enable  us  to  resist  a pro- 
longed attack  by  shiiis  and  mortar  boats  upon  two  ^joints — Forts  Pike 


842  OPEEATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

and  Macomb  and  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip.  If  the  first  are 
l)assed  we  still  have  a land  defense  to  make  j if  the  last,  a fleet  can  pro- 
ceed at  once  to  the  city. 

3d.  I shall  send  up  this  week  the  Crescent  Eegiment,  the  Twentieth 
Regiment,  two  batteries  of  artillery,  four  companies  of  Mississippi  vol- 
unteers, besides  several  separate  companies,  which  will  make  eight  regi- 
ments, four  batteries  of  field  artillery,  and  several  companies,  armed, 
equipped,  and  provided  with  a good  supply  of  ammunition.  I cannot 
organize  the  militia  left  here  without  the  assistance  of  a general  ofli- 
cer  of  experience  and  detailed  knowledge.  The  circumstances  of  the 
case  render  it  imperative.  You  will  see  by  the  letter  accompanying 
this  that  I have  urged  upon  the  President  the  appointment  of  Major 
Smith  as  the  proper  person  to  fill  that  position.  His  engineer  duties 
are  drawing  towards  a condition  which  will  enable  him  to  be  of  great 
service  in  command  of  troops.  He  knows  the  whole  country  from  per- 
sonal observation,  and,  moreover,  is  fairly  entitled,  from  his  great  and 
faithful  labors,  to  be  put  more  nearly  on  a par  with  his  classmates  at 
the  Military  Academy,  all  of  whom  are  in  high  position — mostly  general 
officers.  He  is  willing  to  act  as  the  engineer  officer  of  the  depart- 
ment in  connection  with  a command  in  the  line.  My  desire  is  to  place 
him  in  charge  of  the  troops  intended  for  the  defenses  of  the  interior 
lines,  which  as  an  engineer  he  has  constructed,  and  as  ordnance  ofiicer 
armed  and  provided.  His  appointment  would  be  acknowledged  by  the 
community  here  as  a just  tribute  to  faithful  merit  and  valuable  services 
rendered.  They  feel  much  indebted  to  him  for  their  present  condition  of 
defense.  Major  Smith  is  a classmate  of  Smith,  Van  Dorn,  Longstreet, 
Anderson,  McLaws,  D.  H.  Hill,  A.  P.  Stewart,  myself,  and  others  higli  in 
rank.  He  alone,  one  of  the  first  in  the  field,  has  been  left  in  a position 
of  inferior  rank.  The  absence  of  General  Ruggles  demands  a brigadier 
here,  and  there  is  every  reason,  public  as  well  as  private,  that  Major 
Smith  should  receive  the  appointment.  I hope  you  will  urge  it  upon 
the  President,  and  let  me  know  by  telegraph  his  answer.  I want  the 
services  of  a general  officer  at  once. 

4th.  Several  persons  here  are  refusing  to  take  Confederate  notes. 
They  do  not  come  under  military  supervision  or  I would  put  an  end  to 
it  in  short  order.  What  do  you  think  should  be  done  ? I am  almost 
daily  urged  by  prominent  citizens  to  declare  martial  law  here.  It 
would,  however,  only  remedy  a few  evils,  while  causing  much  incon- 
venience. I think  that  every  desirable  end  could  be  attained  by  a mili- 
tary police  and  a registry  of  all  comers.  I would  like  to  have  your 
views  about  the  propriety  of  having  martial  law  here.  Thus  far  I have 
steadily  declined  to  do  so. 

5th.  After  the  disasters  in  Tennessee,  and  when  I became  satisfied 
that  Columbus  could  not  be  held,  I ordered  all  the  stores  on  hand  at 
Baton  Rouge  to  be  sent  here,  as  that  city  could  be  taken  and  all  the 
public  property  there  destroyed  by  half  a dozen  gunboats  at  a dash. 
Meanwhile  I am  enlarging  the  laboratory  and  arsenal  here,  so  as  to  be 
prepared,  in  some  small  measure,  in  case  the  Baton  Rouge  works  should 
be  destroyed.  It  does  not  seem  to  meet  with  the  approval  of  Colonel 
Gorgas,  who  regards  it  rather  with  the  eye  of  the  head  of  a bureau 
than  as  a military  commander.  Meanwhile  I must  go  ahead  with  prep- 
arations which  I consider  to  be  of  vital  importance  until  you  put  a 
stop  to  them.  I have  at  the  Marine  Hospital  a steam-engine  and  a large 
number  of  hands  employed  in  repairing  arms,  making  ammunition,  &c., 
and  had  it  not  been  for  this  we  never  could  have  forwarded  eight  regi- 


Chat.  XVI.  | 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


843 


ments  and  four  batteries  to  aid  them  in  Tennessee,  for  nothing  of  any 
description  has  been  sent  here  except  some  saltpeter. 

6th.  I am  hunting  all  over  the  Confederacy  to  procure  saltpeter  to 
rework  the  powder  lately  arrived  from  Cuba.  They  are  sending  it  from 
Memphis  to  Augusta.  I have,  however,  sent  an  agent  to  Texas  to  get 
some  that  I heard  was  at  Houston,  and  there  is  a lot  of  6,000  i)ounds 
en  route  here  from  Georgia.  Until  I get  some  the  i)Owder  must  remain 
in  statu  quo. 

7th.  Permit  me  again  to  urge  upon  you  the  necessity  of  sending  here 
an  officer  of  ordnance  to  attend  to  the  numerous  requisitions  constantly 
made  upon  this  dei)artment  from  all  quarters.  Much  delay  and  diffi- 
culty have  arisen  from  the  w^ant  of  such  a person  here.  This  duty  has 
been  performed  by  Major  Smith,  in  addition  to  his  other  duties  j but  by 
this  arrangement  injustice  is  done  both  to  him  and  to  the  public  service. 

8th.  I am  somewhat  fearful  that  a little  too  much  latitude  has  been 
given  to  the  steamboat  captains  and  pilots  in  charge  of  the  river  expe- 
dition. If  the  current  of  opinion  here  should  set  against  them  they  will 
be  unable  to  get  crews,  and  I would  recommend  a responsible  head  to 
the  expedition  when  it  is  ready  to  move,  otherwise  there  will  be  discus- 
sion, confusion,  and  consequent  inaction. 

9th.  The  Calhoun  runs  up  the  river  below  the  forts,  and  we  have 
nothing  to  keep  her  back.  I hope  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  will  keep 
at  least  one  vessel  here  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  making  reconnais- 
sances under  our  very  guns. 

10th.  I allow  no  arms  or  powder  arriving  to  escape  me,  but  have  no 
need  to  impress,  as  I will  not  give  a permit  to  go  out  until  I have  the 
promise  of  the  refusal  of  the  cargo.  The  arrangement  works  smoothly. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding, 


[Confidential.] 

Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Pensacola,  March  7,  1862. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Beard, 

First  Florida  Regiment,  Commanding  Deer  Point: 

Colonel  : The  brigadier-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that 
the  steamer  Tom  Murray  has  been  chartered  and  will  be  placed  under 
your  orders  at  Deer  Point.  You  will  hold  your  battalion  in  readiness 
to  move  at  a moments  warning.  Send  your  tents  and  heavy  baggage, 
in  charge  of  a commissioned  officer  and  3 men,  to  Brewton,  there  to  await 
further  orders  from  you.  You  will  keep  constantly  on  the  alert,  and  if 
attacked  by  an  overpowering  force,  or  if  you  should  discover  two  or 
more  buildings  in  the  navy -yard  to  be  on  fire,  you  will  take  your  men 
on  the  steamer,  first  firing  the  buildings,  if  possible,  and  proceed  imme- 
diately to  Bagdad  and  Milton,  and  there  burn  every  foot  of  lumber,  the 
saw-miUs,  and  boats,  including  the  steamer  Tom  Murray,  and  every- 
thing that  can  be  of  any  service  to  the  enemy.  If  the  saws  and  ma- 
chinery can  be  moved  to  the  interior,  it  may  be  done ; otherwise  the 
saws  and  machinery  must  be  broken  and  destroyed.  Having  accom- 
plished the  work  assigned  you,  you  will  march  your  command  to  Brewton 
and  there  await  further  orders.  You  will  keep  j our  battalion  supplied 


844  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

with  forty  roiiuds  of  ammunition  and  five  days’  rations,  three  of  which 
should  he  cooked. 

The  general  expects  that  you  will  not  hesitate  or  falter  an  instant  in 
carrying  out  thoroughly  and  efiectually  the  foregoing  instructions,  in 
order  that,  if  we  are  forced  to  abandon  this  place,  nothing  of  value, 
except  the  position  itself,  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

It  is  presumed  that  you  have  already  moved  the  8-inch  columbiad, 
with  carriage,  ammunition,  and  implements,  to  Pensacola,  as  directed 
some  days  since.  If  not,  you  will  lose  no  time  in  so  doing. 

This  communication  you  will  regard  as  strictly  confidential. 

I am,  colonel,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

CHARLES  S.  STRIKGFELLOW, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Pensacola^  March  7,  1862. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Conoley, 

Fourth  Alabama  Battalion^  Commanding  at  Pensacola: 

Colonel  : The  brigadier-general  commanding  directs  that  you  hold 
your  battalion  in  readiness  to  move  at  the  shortest  notice  out  of  Pensa- 
cola, either  by  railroad  or  marching  on  the  Mill  road  towards  Pollard, 
as  circumstances  may  require.  You  will  send  your  heavy  baggage  to 
Pollard  as  soon  as  you  can  do  so  without  retarding  the  transportation 
of  troops  and  ordnance  stores  ordered  to  Mobile  and  Montgomery.  On 
receiving  an  order  from  the  general  or  officer  commanding  here  to  retire, 
whether  such  order  may  be  in  writing  or  through  a staff  officer,  you 
will  immediately  destroy  and  burn  all  public  buildings,  including  the 
railroad  depot,  and  all  factories,  machine-shops,  machinery,  boats,  and 
lumber,  whether  public  or  private,  and  then  retire,  destroying  the  rail- 
road, and  removing  the  iron  to  the  interior.  A sufficient  number  of 
laborers  and  an  engine  and  platform  cars  will  be  placed  at  your  disposal 
to  do  this  latter  work.  The  destruction  of  property  in  Pensacola  must 
be  done  by  your  own  men. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  S.  STRINGFELLOW, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

(These  instructions  were  given  in  compliance  with  orders  from  General 
Bragg.) 


NTavy  Department, 
Eichmo7idj  F<%.,  March  8,  1862. 

To  the  President: 

Sir  : For  your  information  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following 
statement  in  reference  to  the  communicjation  of  the  Committee  of  Safety 
of  New  Orleans,*  submitted  to  me  this  day : 

The  credit  of  the  Government  has  doubtless  suffered  in  New  Orleans 
from  the  failure  of  the  Treasury  to  meet  the  requisitions  of  the  Depart- 
ment, and  this  has  been  a constant  source  of  embarrassment  to  the 
Department  and  of  annoyance  to  its  creditors  and  disbursing  agents  in 
tliat  city.  I have  repeatedly  brought  the  subject  to  the  attention  of 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and  invoked  prompt  payment,  though  I 


Of  February  26.  See  j).  831. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


845 


have  felt  that  with  his  limited  power  to  produce  Treasury  notes  and 
under  the  rule  adopted  giving  priority  to  certain  disbursements  for  the 
Army  he  was  powerless  to  correct  the  evil.  Ilere  is  my  last  letter  to 
him  upon  the  subject.  (Letter  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  dated 
February  22, 18G2.) 

The  requisitions  of  this  Department  upon  the  Treasury  for  money  to 
meet  payments  in  IS’ew  Orleans  have  usually  been  made  immediately 
upon  hearing  from  its  disbursing  officers  the  amount  required,  and 
always,  I think,  within  twenty-four  hours  thereafter ; but  the  delay  of 
the  Treasury  in  paying  them  has  been  from  twenty-live  to  forty  days. 
In  some  cases  the  Treasury  Department  has,  after  long  delay,  instead 
of  sending  notes  for  which  our  creditors  were  wailing,  sent  drafts  for 
Confederate  bonds  payable  in  Richmond,  and  which  drafts  were  useless 
to  our  agents  and  creditors  there,  and  which  therefore  had  to  be  returned 
to  Richmond  for  payment  and  then  sent  to  New  Orleans,  thus  still  fur- 
ther protracting  i^ayment. 

This  has  been  a source  of  great  embarrassment  to  this  Department 
and  complaint  of  its  creditors.  In  one  of  these  cases  a requisition  for 
$42,000  was  dated  December  24, 1801,  payable  to  Navy  Agent  William 
B.  Howell  on  February  6, 1862.  He  received  a draft — one-half  in  notes 
and  one-half  in  bonds — at  Richmond.  His  letter  of  advice  was  received 
February  15,  and  on  February  17  I called  upon  the  Treasurer  for  the 
requisition — forty -eight  days  afterwards. 

When  the  Department  draws  its  requisition  in  favor  of  its  creditors 
upon  an  existing  appropriation  its  duty  and  its  power  are  alike  ex- 
hausted, and  though  the  Department  has  endured  the  embarrassment 
consequent  upon  these  delays,  and  which  it  had  not  the  power  to  avert, 
it  has  felt  that  the  condition  of  the  Treasury  rendered  them  inevitable, 
and  that  the  responsibility  for  them  was  with  that  Department.  Our 
agents  are  instructed  to  make  all  contracts  they  can  payable  partly  in 
bonds,  and  they  do  so,  and  in  such  cases  our  requisition  calls  for  the 
amount  of  bonds  to  be  sent ; but  the  Treasury,  as  you  will  see  by  the 
Secretary’s  letter,  deems  it  proper  to  send  bonds  when  not  required  and 
when  we  cannot  use  them,  and  embarrassment  to  the  Department  and 
losses  to  creditors  inevitably  follow.  Our  agents,  from  the  nature  of 
their  disbursement,  can  dispose  of  bonds  only  to  a very  limited  extent. 

The  following  telegram  from  our  Navy  agent  and  the  Treasury  com- 
ments thereon  will  thus  show  the  character  of  these  transactions : 

[Telegram.] 

Ordnance  money  received ; one-half  in  drafts  on  Richmond,  payable  in  bonds,  which 
I cannot  use.  Shall  I pay  for  what  stores  received,  as  advised  you  in  my  letter  of  Feb- 
ruary 8 ? 

ANSWER  OF  SECRETARY. 

I return  you  the  telegram  of  Navy  Agent  Howell.  If  you  will  examine  the  acts  of 
Congress  yon  will  find  that  a large  amount  of  the  means  famished  by  Congress  to  [lay 
the  expenditures  consists  of  bonds.  These  must  be  distributed  among  these  expendi- 
tures, for  which  alone  they  can  be  used,  and  I see  no  remedy  but  to  require  your  agents 
to  make  their  contracts  accordingly.  It  is  not  possible  to  supply  the  means,  except  in 
the  form  provided  by  Congress,  and  if  the  agents,  instead  of  complaining,  would  set 
themselves  to  aid  the  Government  by  di8X)osing  of  the  bonds  there  would  be  no  diffi- 
culty. 

Similar  cases  are  constantly  occurring,  and  this  day  I am  notified  by 
telegram  that  upon  a requisition  to  pay  a debt  due  in  notes  drawn  by 
me  one  month  ago  one-third  of  the  amount  was  sent  to  New  Orleans  in 
bonds,  which  of  course  the  creditor  declines  to  receive. 


846  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYI. 

Embarrassment  to  creditors  has  also  arisen  in  NTew  Orleans  from  the 
following  circumstances : Captain  Hollins,  without  the  knowledge  or 
authority  of  the  Department,  without  acquainting  it  with  his  actions, 
and  when  no  appropriation  existed  for  meeting  the  payment,  made  con- 
tracts for  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  amounting  to  about  $500,000. 
The  amount  of  these  contracts  was  for  a long  time  unknown  to  the 
Department,  and  information  of  their  extent  was  first  acquired  through 
the  contractors  themselves.  The  navy  agent  and  an  officer  sent  espe- 
cially for  the  purpose  were  instructed  to  ascertain  their  amount,  and  an 
estimate  was  submitted  to  Congress  and  an  appropriation  obtained  to 
pay  them  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  thereafter,  and  on  the  very 
day  I received  the  act  of  Congress  I made  a requisition  for  the  funds, 
and  they  have  been  placed  in  NTew  Orleans  to  meet  all  demands  which 
have  come  to  hand. 

The  statement  of  the  Committee  of  Safety  as  to  the  amount  of  indebt- 
edness is  totally  incorrect.  I^'o  such  amount  as  from  $600,000  to  $800,000 
has  been  outstanding,  and  if  the  Treasury  Department  has  sent  to  the 
disbursing  agents  of  this  Department  the  money  for  its  requisition  of 
March  1 for  $300,000,  they  have  funds  in  hand  more  than  sufficient  to 
meet  every  cent  due  by  the  Department  and  of  which  it  has  any  knowl- 
edge. I annex  copies  of  my  letters  to  the  Treasury  Department,*  and 
herewith  return  the  communication  of  the  Committee  of  Safety. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  K.  MALLOET, 

Secretary  of  the  Wavy. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  March  6,  1862. 

A copy  of  the  foregoing  report  was  forwarded  to  the  Committee  of 
Safety,  by  the  President’s  direction,  by  his  private  secretary,  as  soon  as 
received. 

BUETO^iT  N.  HAEEISON, 

Private  Secretary. 


Hdqrs.  DepartjMent  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Pensacola^  Fla.^  March  8,  1862. 

Capt.  Thomas  W.  Brent,  C.  S.  H., 

Pensacola^  Fla.: 

Sir  : The  naval  storekeeper  in  Pensacola  was  informed  on  the  4th 
instant,  by  my  direction,  that  the  naval  stores  in  Pensacola  should  be 
removed  to  the  interior  and  those  now  15  miles  out  of  town  could  remain 
where  they  are  for  the  present.  All  the  transportation  at  my  disposal 
has  been  for  some  days  and  is  now  required  to  move  troops  and  mili- 
tary stores  to  points  where  they  are  needed.  I suggest,  therefore,  that 
you  put  such  naval  stores  now  in  Pensacola  as  you  can  on  the  steamer 
Time.  They  can  be  placed  on  her  while  she  is  at  the  wharf  in  Pensa- 
cola, and  continue  to  perform  the  service  she  is  now  engaged  in.  If  it 
becomes  necessary  to  evacuate  this  place  (and  I trust  no  such  necessity 
will  arrive),  the  captain  of  the  Time  has  been  ordered  to  run  his  boat  as 
far  up  the  Escambia  as  possible.  At  present  and  for  some  weeks  it  is 
believed  that  he  can  run  her  to  within  a few  miles  of  the  State  line,  to 
a point  within  a mile  or  two  of  the  railroad.  From  that  point  the  naval 
stores  could  be  moved  to  the  railroad  for  transportation  elsewhere  if 
necessary.  The  stores  15  miles  from  Pensacola  should  be  moved 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  847 

farther  to  the  interior  as  soon  as  transportation  by  railroad  can  be 
provided. 

I hear  that  an  officer  of  the  Navy  has  been  for  some  time  engaged  in 
building  two  gunboats  at  or  near  Milton,  and  that  they  are  now  nearly 
ready  for  service.  He  should  be  immediately  informed  of  tlie  condition 
of  things  as  you  know  them  to  be  here,  and  warned  to  be  constantly  on 
the  alert,  to  prevent  them  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enejny.  If  he 
cannot  take  them  up  the  Escambia  or  place  them  beyond  the  reach  of 
the  enemy,  he  should  burn  them  as  soon  as  he  hears  tliat  this  place  has 
fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  measures  should  be  taken  to 
give  him  the  earliest  possible  information  on  the  subject. 

It  is  probable  that  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  run  the  Bradford  and 
Nelms  into  Mobile  Bay,  and  it  maybe  that  they  could  tow  the  two  gun- 
boats on  a dark  night  into  Mobile  Bay.  You  are  better  able  to  judge 
of  that  than  I can.  Under  no  circumstances  should  they  be  allowed  to 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

• No  time  should  be  lost  in  carrying  out  the  foregoing  suggestions. 
The  quartermaster  in  Pensacola  will  give  you  all  the  aid  he  can  in  mov- 
ing the  naval  stores. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JONES, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  March  9,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  your  orders,  I have  sent  forward  to  Tennessee, 
besides  the  Thirteenth  Louisiana,  already  detached,  the  following  regi- 
ments, viz:  the  Sixteenth,  Seventeenth,  Eighteenth,  Nineteenth,  and 
Fourth  Louisiana,  and  the  Seventh  Mississippi  Eegiments.  The  Twen- 
tieth will  leave  on  Tuesday.  Gibson’s  and  Vaiden’s  field  batteries  have 
also  gone  forward.  In  addition.  Governor  Moore  has  sent  the  Crescent 
Eegiment  and  Fifth  Company  Washington  Artillery,  and  the  Orleans 
Guard  Battery,  with  three  companies  of  that  battalion,  will  go  in  a few 
days,  all  nominally  for  ninety  days;  but  there  is  every  reason  to  believe 
that  once  in  the  field  they  will  remain.  These  troops  have  all  been 
fitted  out  completely  by  the  State.  I have  only  furnished  ammunition, 
subsistence,  and  transportation.  One  or  two  independent  companies 
will  probably  join  Beauregard  in  the  same  manner. 

The  four  Mississippi  companies  of  Hardcastle’s  battalion  which  were 
here  I have  ordered  to  join  their  own  corps,  now  with  General  A.  S. 
Johnston. 

You  will  thus  perceive  that  this  department  has  been  completely 
stripped  of  every  organized  body  of  troops.  To  replace  them  I have 
called  upon  Governor  Moore  for  10,000  volunteers  and  militia  for  the 
defense  of  the  lines  about  New  Orleans,  which  call,  I hope,  will  meet 
with  the  approval  of  the  Government.  Persons  are  found  here  who 
assert  that  1 am  sending  away  all  troops  so  that  the  city  may  fall  an 
easy  prey  to  the  enemy. 

All  requisitions  for  ammunition  have  been  filled  until  I have  none  left 
except  what  is  in  the  hands  of  troops  ; neither  have  I funds  ifiaced  at 
my  disposal  to  create  supifiies  in  place  of  those  sent  off. 

If  the  enemy  intends  an  attack  here  he  will  make  it  soon,  and  I trust 


848  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

no  further  calls  will  be  made  until  we  are  i)laced  in  a defensible  condi- 
tion. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General^  Commanding. 


HdQRS.  DEPARTJilENT  ALABAMA  AND  WEST  FLORIDA, 

Pensacola.,  Fla.,  March  9,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones: 

Sir:  You  will  receive  with  this  an  order  assigning  you  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  troops  remaining  here.  You  are  aware  that  by  instructions 
from  Major-General  Bragg  preparations  have  been  made  to  evacuate 
this  post. 

I have  ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Conoley,  commanding  Fourth  Bat- 
talion Alabama  Volunteers  in  Pensacola,  on  receiving  an  order  from 
the  commanding  officer  here,  or  if  attacked  by  an  overpowering  force, 
or  on  discovering  buildings  of  the  navy-yard  to  be  on  fire,  immediately 
to  burn  and  destroy  all  public  buildings,  including  the  railroad  depot, 
all  machinery  and  machine-shops,  cotton,  lumber,  the  wharves,  and  all 
boats  of  every  description  in  Pensacola,  then  retire  to  Pollard,  destroy- 
ing as  far  as  possible  the  railroad,  and  moving  the  iron  to  the  interior. 
An  engine  and  sufficient  number  of  platform  cars  will  be  placed  at  his 
command  for  this  service. 

I have  ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Beard,  commanding  battalion  Flori- 
da regiment  at  Deer  Point,  if  attacked  in  force,  or  if  he  should  discover 
two  or  more  buildings  in  the  navy-yard  to  be  on  fire,  immediately 
to  fire  his  huts,  take  his  men  on  tlie  steamer  Tom  Murray,  which  is 
placed  at  his  disposal  and  ordered  to  remain  at  Deer  Point  constantly 
subject  to  his  orders,  proceed  to  Crigler,  Bagdad,  and  Milton,  burn  the 
Tom  Murray  and  all  boats  of  every  description,  every  foot  of  lumber 
and  the  saw-mills,  breaking  and  destroying  the  machinery,  then  to  march 
across  the  country  to  Brewton,  7 miles  above  Pollard,  on  the  railroad, 
and  there  await  further  orders.  Preparations  have  been  made  for  burn- 
ing all  the  buildings  of  any  value  from  Fort  McEee  to  Pensacola,  and 
for  disabling  all  the  guns  and  their  carriages.  You  will  keep  constantly 
on  the  alert,  and,  if  attacked  in  such  force  as  to  render  it  impossible 
in  your  judgment  to  defend  the  place,  you  will  immediately  cause  the 
guns  remaining  in  the  batteries  to  be  disabled  and  all  the  buildings 
fired  *,  then  retire  with  all  your  troops,  and  proceed  as  rapidly  as  pos- 
sible to  Mobile.  Florida  Eailroad  aud  rolling  stock  are  at  your  command. 
In  the  mean  time  you  will  continue  with  all  possible  dispatch  to  dis- 
mount the  remaining  shell  and  rifled  guns,  and  send  them,  with  the  car- 
riages, ammunition,  and  implements,  to  Pensacola,  for  transportation  to 
Mobile,  and  all  other  guns  and  supplies  to  Montgomery. 

You  are  aware  that  I still  have  some  hope  of  being  able  to  hold  this 
place.  The  governor  of  Alabama  has  promised  to  send  here  by  the 
middle  or  end  of  this  week  about  1,500  men.  Fire  hundred  are  ex- 
X>ected  to  arrive  to-night.  As  they  arrive  they  will  report  to  you.  By 
distributing  them  judiciously  at  the  different  batteries  you  may  prevent 
the  enemy  from  discovering  that  other  troops  have  been  withdrawn. 

The  Eighth  Eegiment  of  Mississippi  Volunteers  has  been  ordered  to 
proceed  on  Tuesday  next,  the  11th  instant,  to  Corinth,  Miss.  As  soon 
thereafter  as  transportation  can  be  provided  you  will  send  first  the 
Mississippi  Battalion,  then  the  Florida  Battalion,  then  the  Fourth  Ala- 


Chap.  XVI.J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  —CONFEDERATE. 


849 


bania  Battalion  to  Corintli,  Miss.,  to  report  to  the  commanding  officer 
at  that  place.  If  the  Florida  Battalion  moves  before  it  becomes  neces- 
sary to  evacuate  this  place,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Beard  will  hand  over 
his  written  instructions  in  regard  to  the  destruction  of  proi)erty  at 
Alii  ton  and  other  places  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Conoley,  who  will  assign 
that  duty  to  two  comi)anies  of  his  battalion. 

1 f,  as  I trust  will  not  be  the  case,  you  are  forced  to  evacuate  the 
place,  you  will  proceed  with  your  command  as  rapidly  as  possible  to 
Mobile,  and  thence  to  Corinth,  Aliss.,  and  report  to  the  commanding 
officer  at  that  place. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JOKES, 
Brigadier-  General. 


[Inclosure.] 


Special  Orders,  > Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Ko.  62.  ) Near  Pensacola^  Fla.j  March  8,  1862. 

#####** 

II.  Col.  Thos.  AI.  Jones,  Twenty-seventh  Eegiment  Mississippi  Vol- 
unteers, is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  First  Brigade.  Staff  officers 
will  reiiort  to  him  accordingly. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  Jones  : 

CHAS.  S.  STRIKGFELLOW, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Pensacola^  Fla.,  March  10,  1862. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Beard, 

First  Florida  Regiment,  Beer  Point: 

Sir  : You  will  proceed  to-night  to  execute  the  orders  given  you  in  my 
letter  of  instructions  a few  daj^s  since.*  You  will  take  only  100  men, 
the  best  and  most  reliable  you  have,  with  three  officers.  You  will  start 
in  time  to  reach  the  Point,  where  your  work  is  to  begin,  by  daylight  to- 
morrow morning,  and  will  not  commence  the  work  of  destruction  until 
it  is  light,  lest  some  injury  might  result  to  persons  not  aware  of  your 
mission.  You  will  burn  every  saw-mill,  planing-mill,  sash  factory,  every 
foot  of  lumber,  and  all  boats  of  every  description.  If  there  is  any  cotton 
at  any  of  the  places  you  will  not  fail  to  destroy  it. 

You  will  communicate  with  the  officer  or  agent  having  charge  of  the 
gunboats,  and  deliver  a letter  which  I will  send  you.  If  those  can  be 
towed  up  the  Escambia,  you  will,  after  having  completed  thoroughly 
the  destruction  of  the  property  I have  mentioned,  give  such  assistance 
in  towing  them  out  of  danger  up  the  Escambia  as  you  can.  If  that  can- 
not be  done  you  will  destroy  the  gunboats  also. 

Instead  of  burning  the  Tom  Murray,  as  directed  in  my  former  letter, 
you  will,  after  having  burned  all  the  property  I have  mentioned,  pro- 
ceed with  your  command  in  the  Tom  Murray  up  the  Escambia  as  near 
to  Pollard  as  you  can  approach,  leave  the  steamer,  and  go  to  Pollard, 
to  act  as  a guard  temporarily  of  the  public  property  at  that  place. 

Take  four  daj^s’  rations,  and  as  many  more  as  you  may  have  on  hand, 
and  40  rounds  nt  ammunition.  It  is  not  supposed  that  you  will  meet 
with  any  opposition,  but  should  there  be,  you  will  carry  out  your  orders 
by  force  of  arms.  I rely  upon  you  so  to  execute  your  orders  that  nothing 
of  material  value  to  the  enemy  shall  be  left  in  that  ^dcinity. 

^ See  p.  843,  Stringfellow  to  Beard,  March  7. 

54  R R— YOL  YI 


850  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  mills  as  far  as  I can  ascertain  them  : * 

The  remainder  of  your  force  you  will  leave  at  Deer  Point  for  to-night, 
with  orders,  if  attacked  in  force,  to  burn  the  hut  and  come  to  this  side 
in  the  Bradford,  which  will  be  near  the  Point  all  night. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JOKEIS, 

Brigadier- GeneraL 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans j La.,  March  10,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : The  steamer  Tennessee  has  been  unable  to  get  out  of  the  river 
so  far.  When  she  went  down  to  make  the  attempt,  it  was  understood 
that  she  would  be  assisted  to  the  extent  of  calling  off  the  attention  of 
the  block aders  by  one  of  our  gunboats.  These,  however,  have  all  been 
ordered  up  the  river,  and  she  still  remains  at  the  lower  forts. 

Since  the  river  exi)edition  (Montgomery’s)  was  set  on  foot  circum- 
stances have  so  materially  changed  as  to  require,  in  my  judgment,  at 
least  a temporary  change  in  the  programme.  The  evacuation  of  Colum- 
bus puts  an  end  to  any  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  fleet  at  Cairo.  Still,  I 
should  have  sent  the  whole  number,  fourteen,  up  as  soon  as  they  were 
ready,  notwithstanding  the  Secretary  of  the  'Navj  had  ordered  every 
gun  afloat  up  the  river,  had  not  the  heavy  drift  and  current  broken  up,^ 
in  a great  measure,  the  river  obstructions  at  Fort  Jackson.  Under 
these  circumstances,  with  the  enemy’s  fleet  collecting  and  beginning  to 
enter  the  mouths  of  the  river  with  boldness,  and  having  an  open  iias- 
sage  to  New  Orleans  if  the  batteries  below  are  passed,  I have  written 
to  General  Polk  that  I could  put  no  guns  on  the  boats  of  the  expedition, 
and  that  until  I could  replace  some  obstructions  in  the  river  I should 
feel  compelled  to  keep  here  six  of  the  steamers.  The  fleet  threatening 
us  below  is  much  more  formidable  than  that  above,  and  I object  strongly 
to  sending  every  armed  vessel  away  from  New  Orleans  at  this  time. 
This  city  has  been  already  too  much  weakened  by  the  detachments  of 
all  kinds.  Loud  complaints  are  made  on  all  hands,  and  until  we  are 
placed  in  security  below  I do  not  think  it  advisable  to  draw  anything 
further  from  this  point  except  the  eight  ships,  strengthened  and  pre- 
pared for  their  guns,  which  can  be  furnished  above  as  well  as  here. 

Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Eleventh  Brigade,  M.  L.  T.  fL.  M.  T.'?], 

Bastrop,  La.,  March  10,  1862. 

Major-General  Lewis, 

New  Orleans : 

General  : I am  in  receipt  of  your  General  Orders,  No.  14,  referring 
to  Order  191  of  the  governor  and  commander  in-chief,  exempting  from 
militia  duty  one  white  man  on  each  plantation  in  the  parish  where  there 
are  slaves. 

* List  omitted,  as  well  as  an  accompanying  “ estimate  ” of  the  value  ($764,500)  of  thfr 
property  to  b©  destroyed. 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  851 

I shall  endeavor  to  organize  the  militia  in  this  brigade  and  give  due 
effect  to  the  exemption  therein  prescribed,  but  iiermit  me  most  resjiect- 
fully  to  suggest  that  I fear  the  task  will  prove  a fruitless  one,  and  for 
these  reasons : The  population  subject  under  the  law  to  militia  duty 
(male  between  the  ages  of  18  and  45),  in  the  parishes  composing  this 
brigade,  with  the  exception  of  the  two  parishes  lying  west  of  the  Oua- 
chita Eiver,  consists  chiefly  of  planters  who  are  slave-owners,  their  sons, 
and  the  overseers  on  the  larger  plantations ; the  non-slave-owners  (not 
including  overseers),  comprising  but  a small  class  of  the  population. 
All  these  parishes  have  contributed  most  liberally  in  volunteers  for  the 
war,  and  the  number  subject  to  militia  duty  is  now  greatly  reduced. 

The  volunteers  have  been  drawn  from  all  classes  of  our  citizens,  but 
the  non-slaveholders  are  most  largely  represented  in  the  Army.  The 
young  or  single  men  of  all  classes  have  nearly  all  gone,  and  such  has 
been  the  drain  on  our  population,  that  you  can  now  rarely  find  any  one 
plantation  with  two  able-bodied  men  upon  it. 

Under  these  circumstances  1 apprehend  that  the  exemption  referred 
to  would  cover  a large  majority  of  those  otherwise  subject  to  duty,  and 
its  enforcement  would,  I fear,  defeat  anything  like  a general  or  efficient 
organization  of  the  militia.  In  some  parishes  of  the  brigade  1 doubt 
whether  a single  company  could  be  raised  of  persons  not  entitled  to  the 
exemption,  and  in  only  two  of  them  could  a sufficient  number  be  enrolled 
to  form  a regiment. 

The  planters  and  their  overseers  would  in  a large  majority  of  instances 
be  exempt,  and  the  burden  of  militia  duty  would  fall  almost  exclusively 
upon  the  non-slaveholders;  a class  least  able  to  bear  the  sacrifice  of 
time  and  labor  required,  and  whose  numbers  are  already  greatly  reduced 
by  their  patriotic  contributions  of  soldiers  for  the  war.  Should  such  be 
the  effect  of  it,  this  class  might  be  impressed  with  the  inequality  if  not 
injustice  of  its  operation,  and  this  might  tend  to  defeat  that  harmony 
and  cordial  co-operation  for  the  public  defense  among  all  classes  so  very 
necessary  in  the  present  great  emergency.  This  1 deem  an  im])ortant 
consideration.  I have,  besides,  some  practical  experience  in  regard  to 
the  working  of  this  exemption.  Up  to  the  time  of  my  recent  appoint- 
ment as  brigadier- general  I was  colonel  of  the  Morehouse  Regiment  of 
Militia.  Notwithstanding  the  defects  in  the  law  of  1853, 1 had  succeeded 
in  effecting  a thorough  organization  of  the  regiment,  and  was  progressing 
rapidly  in  perfecting  the  militia  of  the  parish  both  in  the  comi)aiiy  and 
battalion  drill.  After  the  order  of  the  governor  referred  to  was  issued 
I could  never  secure  a sufficent  ^‘turn-out”  for  a battalion  drill,  and  in 
several  of  the  company  beats  the  companies  were  completely  broken 
up,  owing  entirely  to  the  number  of  persons  claiming  exemption  under 
this  order.  In  short,  the  regiment  was  disorganized.  Such,  1 fear,  would 
bo  the  practical  effect  of  the  exemption  in  nearly  every  other  j^arish  in 
the  brigade. 

I hope  these  considerations  may  lead  to  a rescinding  of  the  order.  I 
am  duly  sensible  that  the  order  was  prompted  by  a desire  to  secure  the 
slave-holding  communities  from  the  dangers  arising  from  insubordina- 
tion among  the  slaves,  and  the  apprehension  lest  the  absence  of  the 
owner  or  overseer  from  the  plantation  on  militia  duty  might  tend  to 
produce  such  insubordination.  This  consideration  would,  perhaps,  make 
some  provision  of  the  kind  necessary,  in  case  the  militia  Is  called  into 
active  service,  but  even  in  such  a case  I do  not  think  the  exemption 
need  be  as  broad  as  that  provided  by  the  order.  Many  plantations  are 
very  small  and  have  but  few  slaves  upon  them,  and  m many  instances 
one  man  could  conveniently  take  charge  of  several  of  them ; but  until 


852  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

the  contingency  referred  to  arises  I am  fully  satisfied,  from. actual  obser- 
vation, that  the  mustering  and  drilling  of  the  entire  militia  force,  not- 
withstanding the  temporary  absence  of  the  owners  and  overseers  from 
the  plantations  it  would  involve,  so  far  from  having  a tendency  to 
encourage  a spirit  of  insubordination  among  the  slaves,  would  have  the 
contrary  effect,  to  keep  them  in  awe  and  subjection;  and  to  these  military 
displays  and  the  drilling  of  volunteer  and  militia  troops  I attribute  in 
a great  measure  that  remarkable  state  of  discipline  and  subordination 
that  has  been  observed  among  the  slave  population  in  this  section  since 
the  commencement  of  the  war. 

Military  rule  of  implicit  obedience  to  the  orders  of  superiors  debars, 
perhaps,  the  privilege  of  in  any  manner  questioning  the  propriety  of 
those  orders,  and  if  I have  seemingly  departed  from  it  in  this  instance, 
1 trust  I shall  be  pardoned  for  the  motive  that  prompts  it ; which  is  the 
extreme  anxiety  felt  to  see  the  proper  strength  and  efficiency  imparted 
to  the  militia  system,  now  so  important  an  arm  of  the  public  defense. 

Your  communication  of  the  3d  instant,  with  the  accompanying  order, 
was  also  received,  and  shall  be  promptly  attended  to. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  TODD. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  March  11,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Quartermaster,  commissary,  river  defense,  engineer,  and  medical  funds 
exhausted.  Time  is  important.  Cannot  move  rapidly  without  money. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Jackson,  March  11,  1862. 

General  Jones: 

Believe  Colonel  Villepigue  and  send  him  here  as  soon  as  possible. 

BEAXTON  BEAGG, 

Major-  General, 


Pensacola,  Fla.,  March  11,  1862. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General j G,^8.  Army: 

Sir:  You  know,  I presume.  General  Bragg’s  instructions  to  me. 
There  is  a large  quantity  of  most  valuable  war  material  here  yet,  includ- 
ing several  rifled  and  shell  guns,  and  machinery  in  the  navy-yard,  which 
can  be  moved  and  used  in  making  guns^  I am  convinced  the  enemy’s 
force  on  Santa  Eosa  Island  is  much  smaller  than  has  been  supposed. 
All  seems  quiet  there.  1 believe  Col.  T.  M.  Jones,  with  from  700  to  1,000 
armed  men,  with  the  volunteers  who  are  coming  in,  can  hold  the  place 
long  enough  to  move  all  that  is  particularly  worth  moving,  and  perhaps 
much  longer.  He  agrees  with  me,  and  desires  to  undertake  it.  May  I 
make  the  necessary  arrangements  and  try  it?  If  not,  our  loss  of  ma- 
terial will  be  heg^vy. 

SAM.  JONES, 
Brigadier-  General, 


Chap.  XVL] 


853 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Pensacola^  Fla.,  March  12,  18G2. 

Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones: 

Sir  : I have  just  received  the  following  telegram  from  the  Adjutant 
and  Inspector  General  0.  S.  Army  : 

Richmond,  March  12,  1862. 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  just  received.  You  are  fully  authorized  to  use  your  own 
discretion,  making  all  necessary  arrangements  for  the  safety  of  material  referred  to 
by  you. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Let  me  know  by  Lieutenant  NToble,  who  will  hand  you  this,  the  num- 
ber of  armed  men,  as  shown  by  your  morning  report  of  this  morning.. 
Do  not  include  any  of  the  Fourth  Alabama  Battalion.  The  few  arms 
they  have  belong  to  the  Florida  regiment,  and  the  lieutenant-colonel  is 
ordered  to  turn  them  over.  You  will  keep  the  battalion  as  so  many 
over  and  above  the  number  of  armed  men  left  you.  The  governor  of 
Alabama  has  just  telegraphed  me  that  five  companies  will  leave  Mont- 
gomery for  Pensacola  to-morrow,  and  he  will  send  1,000  here. 

Make  your  arrangements  as  we  agreed  on  last  evening.  Encourage 
your  men ; tell  them  they  are  engaged  in  most  important  service.  If 
they  can  hold  Pensacola  even  long  enough  to  save  the  jiublic  property 
and  move  it  to  a place  of  security  they  will  have  rendered  most  valuable 
service,  which  will  not  fail  to  be  properly  noticed  and  appreciated.  If 
they  can  hold  it  permanently  they  will  immortalize  themselves. 

Put  some  men  with  axes  to  cutting  up  all  the  masts  and  spars  of  the 
Fulton  and  all  such.  They  are  in  one  of  the  store-houses  of  the  navy- 
yard,  and  some  of  them  are  i)iled  against  the  wall  near  the  officers^ 
quarters.  In  arranging  for  the  destruction  of  machinery,  do  not  forget 
to  overlook  that  used  for  drawing  vessels  into  the  dock. 

. General  Bragg  telegraphed  me  last  night  again  to  relieve  Yillepigue 
and  send  him  to  him.  I must  therefore  go  to  Mobile.  Will  lea  ve 
to-morrow  if  the  road  is  practicable.  I leave  most  important  and 
responsible  duties  to  you,  and  have  full  faith  in  your  ability  and  will 
to  perform  them  if  they  can  be  performed. 

Do  all  you  can  to  quiet  and  reassure  your  officers  and  men.  Kepre- 
sent  to  them — what  is  really  the  case,  I believe — that  from  the  apparent 
condition  of  things  on  Santa  Eosa  the  enemy  is  not  prepared  to  make 
a serious  attack  j that  from  reports  which  they  may  have  heard  of  the 
movements  here  they  may  attempt  to  feel  us  to  ascertain  our  true  con- 
dition, and  if  met  boldly  and  repelled  all  will  be  quiet,  at  least  until 
they  are  strongly  re-enforced. 

In  haste,  respectfully,  &c.,  SAM.  JONES, 

Brigadier-General. 


War  Department, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  March  12,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans.,  La.: 

Sir  : I have  your  letter  of  the  27th  ultimo,  together  with  its  inclo- 
sures. I have  also  received  several  communications  in  relation  to  the 
command  of  the  river  steamer  defenses,  and  both  the  President  and  my- 
self have  felt  much  embarrassed  by  them.  The  expedition  was  planned 
and  gotten  up  by  Captains  Montgomery  and  Townsend,  recommended 
by  the  whole  Mississippi  delegation  and  General  Polk,  and  the  objections 


854  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

made  to  them  now  appear  to  us  of  the  most  vague  and  inconclusive 
character. 

Tlie  President  has  great  confidence  in  Oapt.  T.  P.  Leathers,  and  if  he 
can  be  induced  to  go  as  commander  of  the  expedition  you  are  requested 
to  put  him  in  command  of  the  whole,  Captain  Montgomery  second. 
Captain  Townsend  third,  and  the  remainder  in  such  order  as  may  be  fixed 
by  Captain  Montgomery. 

The  list  of  captains  recommended  by  Montgomery  and  Townsend  is 
as  follows,  viz: 

January  15,  Capt.  John  A.  Stephenson. 

January  2G,  Isaac  Hooper. 

January  27,  Burdett  Paris. 

January  28,  John  H.  Burke.* 

January  29,  James  Beverly  Smith. 

January  30,  James  C.  Delaney. 

January  31,  Joseph  Davis  McCoy. 

February  1,  William  H.  H.  Leonard.*  ‘ 

February  2,  James  Henry  Hurt. 

February  3,  George  Willholland  Phillips. 

February  4,  William  W.  Lamb. 

February  5,  Joseph  A.  Sturtevant.* 

The  three  against  whose  names  stars  (*)  have  been  placed  are  said 
by  some  of  the  citizens  of  li^^ew  Orleans  to  be  unreliable.  If  you  could 
replace  them  (the  last  especially)  by  some  captains  acceptable  to  our 
people,  with  the  consent  of  Montgomery  and  Townsend,  it  would  be 
well.  I do  not  myself  find  sufficient  reason  for  distrusting  the  parties, 
but  public  opinion  ought  to  be  satisfied  if  i^ossible.  In  relation  to  these 
three  parties  you  will  use  your  own  discretion. 

The  expedition  ought  to  go  as  promptly  as  possible,  subject  to  the 
orders  of  General  Beauregard  as  regards  the  service  required  of  it  (but 
of  course  without  any  interference  in  their  organization),  and  the  rela- 
tive rank  of  each  officer  settled  in  a general  order,  which  you  are  hereby 
authorized  and  requested  to  issue  to  them  in  conformity  with  the  fore- 
going instructions. 

I have  sent  you  $300,000  on  account  of  the  expenses  of  this  expedi- 
tion, and  will  send  you  further  remittances  very  i)romi)tly.  As  soon  as 
I can  get  one  moment  I will  answer  the  rest  of  your  letter  5 but  I con- 
clude by  saying  that  your  whole  conduct  of  your  department  justifies 
the  confidence  reposed,  in  you,  and  that  I have  not  yet  found  a single 
act  of  yours  which  I disapprove  in  the  smallest  degree. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BEKJAMIhT, 

Secretary  of  War. 

P.  S. — If  Captain  Leathers  will  not  go,  then  give  the  command  to 
Montgomery.  If  you  can  get  Captain  Holmes  to  take  charge  of  one  of 
the  boats  I would  be  gratified.  He  is  an  excellent  officer.  The  expe- 
dition is  in  no  event  to  be  put  under  control  of  officers  of  the  Navy. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Grand  Division,  Army  of  the  Miss  , 

Jackson j Tenn.,  March  12,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones, 

Gomdg.  Dept.  Ala.  and  West  Fla.^  near  Pensacola.^  Fla. : 
General  : Your  letter  of  the  5th  instant  was  not  received  until  this 
morning.  Owing  to  a heavy  pressure  of  business  the  general  has  in- 
structed me  to  reply. 


Chap.  XVT.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  855 

He  feels  confident  everything  has  been  done  hy  you  to  carry  out  his 
instructions.  lie  is  aware  of  the  many  difiiculties  under  whicli  you  are 
laboring.  With  the  utmost  confidence  in  your  ability,  zeal,  and  industry, 
the  general  knows  nothing  will  be  neglected  by  you  which  can  i)ossibly 
be  i)erformed. 

Ue  directs  that  by  all  means  the  large  shell  guns,  ammunition,  and 
implements,  with  the  most  important  stores,  be  collected  and  saved. 
Abandon  nothing  that  can  possibly  be  secured. 

Also  that  you  relieve  Colonel  Villepigue,  Captain  Gibbs,  and  Lieut. 
W.  F.  Johnson,  C.  S.  Marine  Corps,  as  soon  as  you  can  spare  them,  and 
direct  them  to  report  here.  The  services  of  Colonel  Villepigue  are  much 
needed.  Would  it  not  be  well  to  relieve  him  immediately,  and  assign 
Col.  W.  L.  Powell,  at  present  commanding  Second  Brigade,  to  the  tem- 
porary command  of  the  Army  of  Mobile? 

You  can  retain  such  forces  as  you  deem  necessary  to  carry  out  instruc- 
tions. 

The  general  has  the  pleasure  of  knowing  that  you  have  been  nomi- 
nated for  a major-general.  As  soon  as  the  appointment  is  received  you 
will  be  assigned  to  the  command  of  one  of  the  divisions  of  this  army. 

We  shall  endeavor  to  keep  you  advised  of  important  events  trans- 
piring in  this  quarter. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  G.  GAEi^ER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  Army  of  Pensacola, 

Pensacola^  Fla.,,  March  12,  1862. 

Capt.  F.  J.  Myers, 

First  Florida  Regiment,  Commanding  at  Deer  Point: 

Captain  : You  must  not  suppose  that  you  and  the  companies  with 
you  are  left  at  Deer  Point  merely  to  let  the  enemy  see  that  the  Point  is 
still  held,  and  to  retreat  on  the  first  demonstration  of  an  attack.  A 
much  smaller  guard  would  betler  serve  that  jiurpose. 

I am  convinced  that  the  enemy  on  Santa  Rosa  is  by  no  means  so 
strong  as  has  been  supposed,  and  I do  not  believe  they  are  prepared  to 
make  a serious  attack  on  us.  It  is  not  improbable  that  they  have 
received  reports  of  our  movements  here  which  will  induce  them  to 
reconnoiter  and  perhaps  feel  you,  without  any  intention  of  attacking 
seriously,  but  only  to  ascertain  the  condition  of  things.  If  they  are 
met  boldly  and  driven  ofi’  they  will  let  you  alone,  at  least  until  they 
are  strongly  re-enforced.  You  must  not  give  up  your  iiosition  unless 
attacked  by  overpowering  numbers.  Your  position  is  such  that  the 
enemy  can  only  a^iproach  you  by  boats  or  by  crossing  high  up  and 
coming  down  the  beach,  which  is  so  narrow  that  a few  men  judiciously 
placed,  sheltered  by  sand  hills  and  trees,  can  drive  off  five  times  their 
numbers  if  they  will  keep  cool  and  fight  bravely.  Extend  your  sen- 
tinels 3 or  4 miles  up  the  beach,  as  far  as  Live  Oak  Plantation  if  jirac- 
ticable,  so  as  to  give  you  timely  warning  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy 
if  he.presents  himself,  and  be  sure  they  are  too  many  for  you  before  you 
retreat. 

The  Floridians  at  Deer  Point  have  an  important  duty  to  perform,  and 
I expect  them  so  to  perform  it  as  to  reflect  credit  upon  themselves  and 
their  State.  You  will  be  withdrawn  and  your. places  supplied  in  a day 
or  two. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  SAM.  JONES, 

Brigadier  ■ General. 


856  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  3farch  13,  1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

jVew  Orleans,  La.: 

You  are  requested  to  proclaim  martial  law  in  my  name  over  tlie 
parishes  of  Orleans,  Jefferson,  Saint  Bernard,  and  Plaquemine. 

JEFFEESOK  DAVIS. 

[Eepeated  March  15.] 


Fort  Morgan,  March  14,  18G2. 

General  Samuel  Jones: 

The  temporary  command  of  the  Army  of  Mobile  having  been  turned 
over  to  me  by  Colonel  Villepi^aby  telegraph,  I respectfully  report  the 
same  and  await  your  instructions. 

W.  L.  POWELL, 

Colonel,  &c. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Mobile, 

Mobile,  Ala.,  March  15,  1862 

General  Braxton  Bragg, 

Jachson,  Tenn.: 

General  : On  the  receipt  of  your  telegram  ordering  me  to  relieve 
Colonel  Yillepigue  and  send  him  to  you  as  soon  as  possible  I left  Pen- 
sacola on  the  morning  of  the  13th,  and  arrived  here  about  midnight. 
Colonel  Yillepigue,  to  whom  I telegraphed  my  intention  of  starting  on 
the  13th,  left  here  en  route  for  your  headquarters  a few  hours  before  I 
arrived. 

1 left  Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones  at  Pensacola  to  carry  out  your  instruc- 
tions, ordering  him  to  hold  the  place,  if  possible,  until  all  the  public 
property  is  removed.  The  damage  to  the  railroads,  and  the  panic  pro- 
duced in  the  community  by  the  report  that  the  place  was  to  be  evacu- 
ated, which  got  abroad  before  your  instructions  reached  me,  greatly 
retarded  my  operations.  I trust  that  Colonel  Jones  will  be  able  to 
move  all  the  most  valuable  stores  remaining  there  when  1 left.  Besides 
the  ordnance  and  other  stores  that  you  directed  to  be  first  moved  there 
was  in  Pensacola  and  about  15  miles  out  of  town  a quantity  of  very 
valuable  navy  stores,  the  loss  of  which  could  probably  not  be  supplied, 
which  I thought  it  proper  to  remove ; also  a quantity  of  valuable  ma- 
chinery in  the  navy-yard,  which,  if  moved  to  a place  of  security,  might 
be  used  in  the  manufacture  of  guns,  which  I was  removing.  As  the  rail- 
road could  not  furnish  sufficient  transportation,  the  steamer  Time  was 
loaded  and  sent  up  the  Escambia,  which  was  so  unusually  high  as  to 
enable  the  steamer  to  reach  Bluff  Springs  on  the  13th  in  about  forty 
hours  from  Pensacola.  She  would  return  and  carry  up  another  load. 
All  necessary  preparations  were  made  before  I left  to  disable  the  guns, 
burn  all  the  buildings,  and  carry  out  fully  the  work  of  destruction  you 
directed.  On  the  night  of  the  10th  I ordered  Lieutenant  Colonel  Beard, 
of  the  First  Florida  Eegiment,  to  take  with  him  100  men  of  his  regiment 
and  proceed  by  steamboat  up  to  East  Bay,  Blackwater,  and  the  Escam- 
bia, and  burn  and  destroy  all  saw-mills,  lumber,  and  boats  that  he  could 
fin(l.  I directed  him  not  to  commence  burning  the  mills  until  after 
daylight  on  the  11th.  He  was  ordered  to  communicate  with  the  officer 
having  charge  of  the  two  gunboats  nearly  completed  at  or  near  Milton, 
and,  if  practicable,  tow  them  up  the  Escambia,  but  if  that  could  not  be 


Chap.  XVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


857 


done,  and  ILe  officer  having  charge  of  them  had  any  doubt  of  his  ability 
to  destroy  the  boats  if  necessary  to  prevent  them  falling  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy,  then  to  burn  them  also.  Having  performed  this  duty. 
Colonel  Beard  was  ordered  to  take  his  command  to  Brewton,  on  the 
railroad,  about  7 miles  above  Pollard,  where  his  regiment  would  be 
concentrated  and  then  ordered  to  Corinth. 

You  are  aware  that  a very  small  number  of  the  men  of  the  First  Flor- 
ida Regiment  were  with  the  army  when  you  left.  The  interruption  to 
travel  and  excessive  rains  retarded  the  Floridians  somewhat  in  rejoin- 
ing the  regiment.  Most  of  them  had  returned  the  day  before  I left,  and 
as  soon  as  they  could  collect  their  arms,  which  had  been  issued  to  other 
troops,  they  would  go-  to  Brewton  and  Pollard.  As  only  about  320  of 
the  Twenty-seventh  and  450  of  the  Eighth  Mississippi  Regiments  were 
present  for  duty,  it  was  necessary  to  leave  the  latter  with  Colonel  Jones 
or  give  up  all  idea  of  moving  the  remaining  stores.  They  will  be 
ordered  to  you  as  soon  as  possible.  The  telegraphic  communication 
with  Pensacola  is  interrupted  by  the  storm  of  last  night,  or  I would 
order  them  to  start  immediately.  Failing  to  hear  from  you  in  reply  to 
my  letter  of  the  6th,  and  as  your  telegrams  were  very  long  on  the  way, 
I took  the  liberty  of  telegraphing  the  Adjutant-General,  i)resuming,  of 
course,  that  he  was  informed  of  the  instructions  under  which  I was  act- 
ing, and  asked  if  I could  be  permitted  to  leave  from  700  to  1,000  armed 
men  with  Colonel  Jones,  to  hold  the  place  as  long  as  jmssible,  and  move, 
as  far  - as  practicable,  all  the  remaining  war  material.  He  replied 
promptly,  telling  me  to  use  my  discretion,  and  make  the  necessary  ar- 
rangements for  saving  the  war  material  remaining  at  Pensacola. 

I write  in  great  haste  to  get  this  off  by  a special  express,  which  starts 
with  a part  only  of  the  small  ammunition,  all  I could  furnish,  called  for 
by  Colonel  Slaughter’s  telegram  of  the  13th,  which  I received  about  12 
o’clock  to-day. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JONES, 
Brigadier-OeneraL 


Jackson,  March  15,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones: 

Tour  letter  of  6th  received.  Suggestions  approved.  Carry  them  out. 
Where  is  Florida  regiment  and  Eighth  Mississippi 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

No.  10.  1 New  Orleans,  La.,  March  15,  1862. 

By  authority  of  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States,  and  in  his 
name,  martial  law  is  hereby  declared  in  the  parishes  of  Orleans,  Jeffer- 
son, Saint  Bernard,  and  Plaquemine. 

All  grown  white  males  in  the  aforesaid  parishes,  except  unnatural- 
ized foreigners,  will  be  required  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the 
Confederate  States,  and  all  persons,  whether  foreigners  or  not,  who  are 
unfriendly  to  our  cause,  are  notified  to  leave  the  district  embraced  by 
this  order  without  delay. 

A system  of  registry  and  passport  will  be  established,  and  no  one  will 
be  permitted  to  sojourn  in  the  above-mentioned  parishes  without  satis- 
fying the  provost-marshals  of  their  loyalty ; and  all  good  citizens  are 


858  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

requested  to  report  to  those  officers  all  who  are  susi)ected  of  hostility 
to  tlie  Government. 

All  places  for  the  sale  of  liquor  will  be  closed  by  8 o’clock  p.  m.  Any 
found  open  after  that  hour  will  be  closed  permanently  and  the  liquor 
seized. 

A number  of  persons  who  have  no  ostensible  business,  nor  any  inter- 
ests in  the  city  or  State,  have  recently  arrived  in  New  Orleans.  They 
must  satisfy  the  provost-marshals  of  their  good  intentions  and  objects 
here  or  leave  immediately. 

The  following-named  persons  are  appointed  provost-marshals  for 
Orleans  Parish ; 

William  Freret,  first  district 5 Cyprian  Dufour,  second  district  j Hon.. 
Pierre  Souffi,  third  district;  Col.  H.  D.  Ogden,  fourth  district.  For 
Algiers,  Capt.  Norbert  Trepagnier;  for  Jefferson  Parish,  Judge  Victor 
Burthe; — who  will  enter  upon  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  their  offices 
immediately. 

The  provost-marshals  for  the  parishes  of  Plaquemine  and  Saint 
Bernard  will  be  announced  in  a few  days. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Lovell : 

J.  G.  PICKETT, 
Assistant  A djutant^  General, 


Headquarters  Army  of  Mobile, 

Mobile,  March  16,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones, 

Commanding,  Pensacola  : 

Colonel  : Before  leaving  Pensacola  I directed  Captain  Bird  and  a 
sergeant  of  Captain  McDowell’s  company.  First  Florida  Eegiment,  to 
take  the  men  of  their  respective  companies,  which  had  just  arrived,  to 
Brewton,  and  report  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Beard,  commanding  the  reg- 
iment, who  I supposed  would  have  arrived  there  with  100  men  of  his 
regiment,  which  he  had  taken  with  him  on  special  service,  by  the  14th 
instant.  I had  intended  to  order  the  eight  organized  companies  of  that 
regiment  to  assemble  at  Brewton  or  Pollard  as  soon  as  they  had  col- 
lected their  arms  which  had  been  issued  to  other  troops,  but  in  the 
pressure  of  business  on  me  I omitted  to  give  the  order.  Send  the  four 
com])anies  of  that  regiment  (two  at  Deer  Point  and  Captains  Gee’s  and 
Cropps’)  to  report  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Beard  as  soon  as  possible,  and 
order  him  as  soon  as  his  companies  are  together  to  proceed  to  Corinth, 
Miss.,  and  report  to  the  commanding  officer  there. 

It  will  not  do  as  yet  to  leave  Deer  Point  entirely  unguarded.  Direct 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Conoley  to  keep  a guard  of  about  30  men  of  his  battal- 
ion there,  having  a steamer  always  ready  near  at  hand  to  bring  them  off 
if  attacked  in  such  force  that  they  cannot  hold  the  Point.  The  .guard 
can  be  relieved  as  often  as  you  think  proper,  only  be  sure  to  have  a guard 
always  there.  They  should  keep  up  camp-fires  enough  to  indicate  300 
or  400  men  were  in  the  camp,  and  they  should  use  the  material  of  which 
the  huts  are  built  as  fuel,  pulling  the  huts  down  for  the  purpose,  but 
they  must  not  make  anything  like  a conflagration. 

Continue  to  send  forward  as  rapidly  as  you  can  the  guns  you  do  not 
absolutely  need  to  keep  up  appearances.  If  there  are  any  more  rifled 
or  shell  guns,  send  them  here ; also  the  10-inch  mortars.  The  smooth- 


CiiAP.  XYL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  859 

hope  we  may  be  able  to  hold  it.  But  you  will  not  want  the  10-incli 
mortars  or  the  guns  in  the  redoubt.  After  all  the  columbiads,  rifled 
guns,  and  sea-coast  howitzers  are  moved  move  the  mortars,  then  the 
smooth-bore  guns. 

Captain  Merchant  says  there  are  several  bars  of  lead  at  the  store- 
house by  the  magazine,  and  some  more  about  the  quartermaster's  office 
or  store  house  j if  so,  send  it  all  here  by  the  first  train ; it  is  greatly 
needed  5 and  have  the  roofs  of  the  houses  in  the  navy-yard  and  hospital 
examined,  and  if  any  lead  can  be  found  send  it  here. 

Telegraphic  communication  with  Pensacola  and  Montgomery  has 
been  cut  off  for  two  days,  and  I therefore  do  not  know  how  many  vol- 
unteers you  have  received.  If  you  want  more,  telegraph  Governor 
Shorter,  and  ask  him  to  send  them.  There  are  reports  here  of  fighting 
in  West  Tennessee,  but  nothing  positive. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  &c., 

SAM.  JONES, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Pensacola,  March  16,  1862. 

Oapt.  C.  S.  Stringfellow, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Oener al : 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  orders  from 
you  by  letters  dated  respectively  the  7th  and  10th  instant,*  I proceeded 
with  two  companies  (Captains  Means’  and  Baker’s)  of  the  First  Regi- 
ment Florida  Yolunteers,  in  the  steamer  Tom  Murray,  from  Deer  Point, 
at  8 o’clock  p.  m.  on  the  10th,  arriving  at  Miller’s  Mills,  in  East  Bay,  at 
11  o’clock.  I called  at  once  on  Colonel  Miller,  but  not  finding  him  at 
home,  I advised  Mrs.  Miller  of  the  object  of  my  mission.  At  daylight 
I commenced  the  execution  of  your  orders  by  firing  the  mills  and  other 
property,  boats,  &c. 

Having  finished  here,  I proceeded  without  delay  up  the  Blackwater 
River,  destroying  everything  in  my  route  embraced  in  my  instructions 
until  I reached  Milton.  There,  at  the  earnest  soUcitatioh  of  the  citi- 
zens, I deferred  burning  anything  until  my  return  from  General  Jack- 
son  Morton’s,  at  the  head  of  Blackwater,  they  thinking  that  they  could 
destroy  one  of  the  mills,  the  burning  of  which  at  that  time  would  have 
endangered  a large  portion  of  the  city,  and  it  making  no  material,  if 
any,  difference  whether  destroyed  then  or  on  my  return.  Returning,  I 
destroyed  everything  at  Milton  embraced  in  your  order. 

I reached  the  mouth  of  the  Escambia  about  11  o’clock  a.  m.  on  Wed- 
nesday, and  proceeded  up  the  river,  burning  as  I went  all  that  could  be 
burned.  A large  amount  of  square  (ship)  timber  which  could  not  be 
burned  was  turned  adrift.  I found  it  necessary  to  burn  the  gunboats 
at  Bagdad  and  Milton,  it  being  impracticable  to  tow  them  u})  the 
Escambia,  as  they  could  not  pass  the  bar;  in  fact,  only  one  of  them  was 
launched. 

I reached  Bluff  Springs  at  about  10  o’clock  a.  m.  on  Saturday,  after 
a fatiguing  and  unremitting  labor  in  the  performance  of  my  duties.  At 
this  point  I received  your  note  from  Pollard,  dated  the  13th.  The 
duties  had  required  so  much  longer  time  than  had  been  anticipated 
that  our  provisions  were  entirely  out  on  reaching  the  Springs ; indeed, 
they  gave  out  on  Tuesday  evening,  and  it  became  necessary  to  purchase 
supplies,  which  I did  at  Milton.  But  these  again  gave  out,  and  I had  to 


Letter  of  the  7th  not  found. 


860  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap,  xvl 

get  some  at  another  point  on  the  river,  hut  was  only  able  to  procure  a 
small  quantity.  Being  entirely  out  of  provisions,  I marched  my  men  to 
Pollard,  and  on  arriving  there  could  obtain  none,  so  was  forced  to  go 
on  to  Brewton.  I took  to-day  10  men  and  a sergeant,  under  a lieu- 
tenant, and  placed  them  on  the  steamer  Murray  at  Bluff  Springs,  with 
order  to  proceed  immediately  to  Deer  Point,  to  await  further  orders. 

For  particulars  of  the  property  destroyed  I beg  to  refer  you  to  the 
accompanying  paper,  marked  Exhibit  A.*  This,  of  course,  could  not 
be  perfect,  as  much  of  my  work  was  done  after  night,  and  again  so  hur- 
riedly that  a correct  statement  could  not  be  made.  It  will  afford  you 
some  idea  of  the  extent  of  my  operations,  and  account  for  the  time  con- 
sumed in  the  execution  of  your  orders. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  remarking  upon  the  sacrificing 
patriotism  of  those  whose  property — in  many  cases  all  they  had — was 
destroyed.  While  they  regretted  the  necessity  none  shrank  from  the 
sacrifice,  and  in  many  cases  were  prepared  themselves  to  apply  the 
torch  to  all  they  possessed.  A more  loyal  and  spirited  people  I have 
not  met  during  our  troubles.  I am  happy  in  being  able  to  state  that  no 
dwelling  or  property  other  than  that  embraced  in  your  order  was 
destroyed,  except  at  Bagdad,  where  the  proximity  of  the  dwellings  to 
the  mills  caused  three  houses — Overman's,  Simpson’s,  and  Bushnell’s — 
to  be  burned.  The  furniture,  I believe,  was  saved,  as  I had  a detail 
from  my  command  to  aid  in  removing  it,  though  of  course  damaged  to 
some  extent. 

My  command  conducted  themselves  with  marked  decorum,  being 
sensible  of  the  delicate  and  unpleasant  duty  in  which  they  were 
engaged.  I am  much  indebted  to  Mr.  A.  McYoy,  who  accompanied  me 
throughout,  and  without  whose  assistance  I could  not  have  carried  out 
my  orders,  being  unacquainted  with  the  topography  of  the  country  and 
the  location  of  the  mills.  He  was  otherwise  of  great  assistance  to  me. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  K.  BEAKD, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  First  Fla.  Eegt.^  Commanding  Expedition. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  FTo.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

FTo.  11.  / New  Orleans^  La.,  March  18,  1862, 

In  order  to  carry  into  effective  operations  the  requirements  of  General 
Orders,  No.  10,  current  series,  from  these  headquarters,  the  provost- 
marshals  will  each  establish  an  office  in  their  respective  districts  for  the 
transaction  of  business.  Due  notice  of  the  localities  will  be  given  in  the 
public  prints. 

Each  office  will  be  provided  with  such  assistants  and  clerks  as  may 
be  necessary  for  the  transaction  of  business. 

Every  white  male  above  the  age  of  sixteen  years,  residing  tempora- 
rily or  otherwise  in  the  parishes  of  Orleans  and  Jefferson,  whether  he 
be  a citizen  of  the  Confederate  States  or  an  alien,  shall,  within  six  days 
from  the  publication  of  this  order,  present  himself  before  the  provost- 
marshal  of  this  district,  to  have  his  name  registered  and  to  furnish  as 
far  as  able  such  information  as  may  be  required. 

Those  who  claim  to  be  citizens  of  the  Confederate  States,  by  birth  or 
otherwise,  shall  be  required  to  subscribe  an  unconditional  oath  of  alle- 

* Exhibit  omitted.  Among  its  more  important  items  are  two  gunboats,  four  other 
steamboats,  and  a number  of  sailing  vessels. 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE.  861 

giaiice  to  said  States,  and  such  as  claim  to  be  aliens  shall  be  sworn  to 
the  effect  that  they  will  abide  by  the  laws  of  this  State  and  of  the  Con- 
federate States  as  long  as  they  are  permitted  to  reside  therein,  and  that 
they  will,  under  no  circumstances,  convey  to  our  enemies  any  informa- 
tion relative  to  the  military  or  political  affairs  of  the  country. 

I’evsons  who  came  to  this  city  or  State  since  the  21st  of  May,  18G1, 
from  any  of  the  States  at  war  with  the  Confederate  States,  shall  be 
subject  to  arrest  and  imprisonment,  unless  they  procure  within  six  days 
from  the  date  hereof  a permit  to  remain,  signed  by  the  commanding 
general  or  the  provost marshal  of  the  district  in  which  they  reside,  which 
permit  will  be  renewed  from  time  to  time  by  an  indorsement  setting 
forth  the  time  of  extension. 

The  foregoing  recpiirements  will  go  into  effect  as  above  in  the  parishes 
of  Saint  Bernard  and  Plaquemine  within  six  days  after  the  ai)pointment 
of  the  provost-marshals  of  those  parishes.  Every  person  who  desires 
to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  the  aforesaid  districts  or  parishes  shall  ])ro- 
vide  himself  with  a passport  signed  by  the  commanding  general  or  the 
provost-marshals  of  the  district  or  parish  in  which  said  person  resides. 

All  orders  issued  by  provost-marshals  in  the  execution  of  their  offices 
will  be  promptly  obeyed,  and  any  disobedience  of  summons  emanating 
from  any  of  them  will  be  dealt  with  summarily,  and  all  officers  in  com- 
mand of  trooj^s  are  hereby  directed  to  comply  promptly  with  any  requi- 
sitions made  on  them  by  the  provost-marshals,  and  to  furnish  them  such 
aid  and  assistance  as  they  may  require.  The  police  of  the  city  will  in 
like  manner,  render  every  assistance  in  their  power  when  called  on. 

The  commanding  general  confidently  expects  that  the  friends  of  order, 
all  those  who  have  at  heart  the  success  of  our  glorious  cause,  will  cordially 
co-operate  with  the  provost-marshals  and  furnish  them  every  i^ossible 
assistance  in  the  performance  of  the  onerous  duties  devolved  upon  them 
for  the  general  welfare.  Circumstances  have  rendered  these  measures 
necessary  for  our  safety  and  success,  and  it  becomes  each  and  every 
good  citizen  to  contribute  all  in  his  power  to  the  promotion  of  such 
desirable  ends. 

Martial  law  has  not  been  declared  for  the  purpose  of  annoying  unnec- 
essarily the  true  and  loyal  citizens.  No  greater  restrictions  will  be  im- 
posed upon  the  community  than  are  deemed  absolutely  necessary  by 
i those  in  authority  to  attain  the  objects  in  view,  which  are  mainly  to 
\ ascertain  and  remove  from  among  us  those  who,  acting  under  the  insti- 
gation of  the  enemy,  are  endeavoring  by  word  and  deed  to  impede  our 
• onward  progress  towards  independence  and  self-government,  and  to  rid 
ourselves  of  able-bodied  loyal  men  liable  to  military  duty,  who  have  fled 
to  New  Orleans  from  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  leaving  others  to  perform 
the  duty  which  they  are  seeking  to  avoid. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Lovell : 

E.  A.  PALFEET, 

Major j and  Asiistant  Adjutant- General, 


Corinth,  March  18,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones: 

Your  letters  of  6th  and  15th  received.  All  dispositions  approved. 
Transportation  coming  back  for  all  stores.  Send  forward  medicines 
and  hospital  property  and  heavy  guns. 


BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


862  OPEEATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVt 


Headquarters  Army  of  Mobile, 

Mobile^  March  21,  1862. 

General  Braxton  Brago  : 


General  : Colonel  Jones  has  not  yet  informed  me  if  all  the  rifled 
and  shell  guns  at  Pensacola  have  been  dismounted  and  forwarded  as 
you  directed,  but  I presume  it  has  all  been  done  by  this  time.  The  bad 
condition  of  the  roads,  and  the  fact  that  I was  obliged  to  send  a few  of 
the  guns  you  want  up  the  Escambia  and  land  them  a mile  or  two  from 
the  railroad,  have  caused  some  delay  in  the  delivery  of  the  guns  and 
ammunition  at  Corinth.  I have  made  every  effort  to  forward  with  the 
least  possible  delay  all  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  called  for  by  you. 

I am  glad  to  learn  by  your  telegram  received  yesterday  that  my  sug- 
gestions and  operations  communicated  to  you  in  my  letters  of  the  6th  and 
15th  instant  met  with  your  approbation.  I have  never  been  entirely 
without  hope  of  holding  Pensacola,  even  with  the  very  limited  means 
left  me,  until  some  favorable  change  in  our  affairs  should  enable  us  to 
gather  a sufficient  force  there  to  hold  it  permanently.  The  governor  of 
Alabama  has  sent  there  something  over  a thousand  volunteers,  and  will 
send  more.  Colonel  Joues  wrote  me  on  the  16th  instant  that  all  was 
going  on' well ; that  the  new  troops,  though  unarmed,  were  full  of  energy 
and  zeal,  and  he  adds,  With  the  army  I now  have,  had  I arms,  I could 
defy  the  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  dislodge  me.^^  The  colonel,  you  see, 
enters  upon  his  work  with  spirit.  Since  he  wrote,  the  governor  of  Ala- 
bama has  sent  him  300  arms,  and  I have  strong  hope  of  being  able  to 
send  him  a sufficient  number  to  arm  nearly  all  the  new  troops.  I am 
more  and  more  convinced  that  the  enemy’s  force  in  the  Gulf,  and  espe- 
cially on  Santa  Rosa,  has  been  greatly  overestimated.  When  I left  Pen 
sacola  only  96  tents  could  be  seen  on  the  island.  The  season  for  opera- 
tions on  a large  scale  on  the  Gulf  is  fast  passing  away,  and  if  we  cau 
hold  our  ground  a month  or  two  longer  all  may  yet  be  well  on  the  Gulf 
coast. 


In  view  of  all  the  circumstances  I respectfully  suggest  and  urge  upon 
you  to  permit  all  the  smooth-bore  guns  and  the  troojis  now  at  Pensacola 
to  remain  there,  hold  the  place  as  long  as  possible,  and  never  give  it 
up  without  a fight.  If  forced  to  abandon  it,  the  guns,  which  would  be 
of  little  value  to  the  enemy,  can  be  first  disabled,  and  the  other  work 
of  destruction  carried  out  as  directed  by  you.  I feel  so  deeply  the  impor- 
tance of  this  matter  that  I venture  to  urge  it  upon  your  consideration, 
notwithstanding  the  pressure  of  business  immediately  around  you. 

Most  respectfully,  &c., 

SAM.  JONES, 
Brigadier-  General, 


Mobile,  Ala.,  March  22,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin^ 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond^  Va. : 

Your  telegram  of  yesterday  received.  The  powder  delivered  to  Flag- 
Officer  Randolph.  Would  like  much  to  have  it  replaced.  Supply  here 
very  inadequate ; only  a small  quantity  remaining  at  Pensacola.  Rail- 
road communication  with  Pensacola  will  not  be  open  sooner  than  eight 
or  ten  days.  I believe  enemy’s  force  in  the  Gulf,  especially  on  Santa 
Rosa,  greatly  overestimated.  Governor  Shorter  has  sent  about  2,000 
volunteers  to  Pensacola  and  can  send  more.  If  permitted  to  keep  the 
troops  and  ordnance  now  there,  we  may  be  able  to  hold  the  place  perma- 
nently. Colonel  Jones  says  he  can  hold  it  if  700  or  800  muskets  or  rifles 
are  sent  him.  I have  some  hope  of  getting  them  for  him.  Have  Ordered 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  8G3- 

liim  not  to  abandon  the  place  unless  forced.  Shall  we  go  on  dismount- 
ing all  smooth-bore  guns  and  sending  them  to  Montgomery  and  then 
abandon  the  place,  or  shall  we  hold  it  as  long  as  possible  ? Beg  you  to 
excuse  my  telegraphing  you  directly.  It  is  difficult  and  takes  time  to 
communicate  through  General  Bragg.  A\ill  inform  him  that  I have 
telegraphed  you.  Telegraph. 

SAM.  JONES. 
Brigadier- General, 


War  Department, 
Richmond^  Ya.j  March  22,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans,  La,: 

Sir:  Before  turning  over  the  affairs  of  this  Department  to  my  suc- 
cessor 1 am  anxious  to  give  you  full  replies  to  your  letters  of  the  0th, 
9th,  and  10th  instant,  as  well  as  those  remaining  unanswered  in  your 
letter  of  the  27th  ultimo. 

1st.  I send  you  a remittance  of  $350,000,  which  will  enable  you  to  pay 
60  per  cent,  of  the  value  of  the  fourteen  steamers  seized  for  the  public 
use.  I applied  to  Congress  for  a further  appropriation  of  $500,000,, 
which  will,  it  is  hoped,  suffice  to  comi)lete  all  payments  for  these  vessels. 

2d.  I have  seen  Colonel  Gorgas  on  the  subject  of  the  works  at  the 
Marine  Hospital.  Your  action  in  this  matter  is  fully  approved,  and 
nothing  is  more  gratifying  than  the  zeal  and  activity  you  have  so  intel- 
ligently applied  to  remedying  the  deficiency  under  which  we  labor  in 
the  conduct  of  this  war.  Exercise  your  discretion  in  concentrating  all 
our  resources  for  the  public  defense,  and  feel  assured  of  executive  sup- 
port and  approval. 

3d.  The  nomination  of  Colonel  Smith  as  brigadier- general  was  sent  to 
tbe  Senate  more  than  a week  ago,  but  from  some  cause  it  has  not  yet 
been  confirmed.  I shall  inquire  into  the  difficulty  immediately. 

4th.  No  more  calls  will  be  made  on  you  for  any  supplies.  Your  as- 
sistance to  the  army  in  Tennessee  has  been  most  timely  and  valuable, 
and  exceeded  what  I had  hoped.  I informed  you  by  telegraph  this 
morning  that  I had  ordered  44,000  pounds  of  powder  from  Columbus 
to  you.  This  is  part  of  the  cargo  of  the  Florida,  which  brought  64,000 
pounds.  The  remaining  20,000  pounds  have  been  sent  to  Mobile,  so  that 
the  whole  cargo  goes  to  the  Gulf.  My  main  purpose  in  sending  it  was 
to  enable  you  to  supply  the  new  iron-clad  steamers  just  about  to  be  com- 
pleted. From  the  recent  experiment  of  the  Virginia  and  what  I hear 
of  the  steamers  at  New  Orleans  I feel  confident  that,  if  even  one  of 
them  can  be  got  ready  before  you  are  attacked,  she  will  disperse  and 
destroy  any  fleet  the  enemy  can  gather  in  the  river  above  or  below. 
The  naval  officers  say  that  Tift’s  steamer  is  far  superior  to  the  Virginia, 
and  the  Virginia’s  performances  were  more  extraordinary  than  the 
printed  reports  exhibit.  If  she  had  only  drawn  5 feet  less  water  she 
would  certainly  have  captured  the  Minnesota.  She  is  in  perfect  order 
and  will  soon  make  another  dash,  and  our  officers  are  confident  of  tak- 
ing or  sinking  the  Monitor. 

5th.  We  have  received  from  the  Gladiator  and  Economist  altogether 
190,000  pounds  of  powder.  The  Florida’s  I send  to  New  Orleans  and 
Mobile.  A large  quantity  of  powder,  nearly  100,000  pounds,  was  lost 
in  our  disasters  at  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson  and  the  evacuation  of 
NashviUe.  If,  with  the  powder  from  the  Florida,  you  are  still  short,  I 
must  try  and  have  part  of  that  received  from  England  forwarded  to  you  j 
but  I hope  this  will  not  be  necessary.  We  have  contracts  out  for  sev. 


864 


OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA. 


S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 


eral  thousand  tons  of  saltpeter,  and  ought  now  very  soon  to  receive  one 
or  two  cargoes.  This  would  put  us  on  our  legs  completely.  There  is 
saltpeter  in  Mexico,  and  Mr.  Oliver  came  here  to  make  contracts  with 
me,  but  I could  do  nothing  with  him.  lie  wanted  large  advances  and 
to  bind  himself  to  nothing.  He  was  so  fearful  of  responsibilities,  that  it 
was  impossible  to  agree  on  anything.  See  his  agents,  Messrs.  Avendain 
Brothers,  in  New  Orleans.  They  may,  perhaps,  procure  you  promptly 
a saltpeter  supply. 

Gth.  I ought  to  have  mentioned,  in  regard  to  powder  by  the  Florida, 
that  the  parties  telegraphed  that  they  required  for  it  $2  a pound,  cash, 
delivered  in  Marianna,  Fla.,  the  Department  to  take  the  risk  and  expense 
of  getting  it  to  Columbus.  I consider  this  extortionate,  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  they  had  called  on  the  Government  for  help  to  save  it  and  get 
it  to  Columbus.  I ordered  General  Pemberton  to  impress  it  at  that 
rate.  I advise  you  of  these  facts  for  information.  The  parties  complain 
that  they  have  only  received  $120,000  on  account  of  the  powder  per 
Vanderbilt.  Pray  settle  up  with  them  for  that  cargo. 

7th.  Your  call  on  Governor  Moore  for  troops  to  replace  those  sent  to 
Tennessee  is  approved.  i 

8th.  In  view  of  the  great  extent  to  which  you  have  been  weakened  by 
sending  aid  up  the  river  you  are  right  in  retaining  some  of  the  steam- 
boat fleet  below.  I hope,  however,  that  the  iron-clad  boats  will  soon  be 
under  way  and  relieve  you  from  all  fear  of  a river  attack. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War, 


New  Orleans,  La.,  March  22,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Please  order  General  Jones,  at  Mobile,  to  send  me  some  10-inch 
columbiads  and  sea-coast  mortars  promptly. 

M.  LOVELL. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  March  22,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Seven  vessels  of  the  enemy  inside  of  the  mouth  of  the  river.  All 
naval  ships  at  Memphis.  I wiU  have  to  retain  six  of  Montgomery’s  fleet 
for  service  below. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  March  22,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  12th  relative  to  Montgomery’s  expedition.  The  evacuation  of  Co- 
lumbus overturns  his  original  intentions  of  destro;ying  the  enemy’s  fleet 
at  Cairo,  and  in  my  judgment  they  can  now  be  used  only  as  assistants 
to  the  land  and  naval  forces  in  defending  our  own  i)Ositions.  The  peo- 
ple of  New  Orleans  thought  it  strange  that  all  the  vessels  of  the  Navy 
should  be  sent  up  the  river,  and  were  disposed  to  find  fault  with  send- 
ing in  addition  fourteen  steamers,  leaving  this  «ity  without  a single 


Chap.  XVI.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  8G5 

vessel  for  protection  against  tlie  enemy,  who  was  collecting  lieavy  fleets 
near  the  month  of  the  river.  Within  the  past  few  days  they  have  had 
thirteen  ships  near  the  month,  and  have  succeeded  in  towing  inside 
several  large  steamers,  which  in  my  opinion  only  await  the  arrival  of  the 
mortar  fleet  to  attempt  to  comenp  the  river  to  New  Orleans  and  operate 
as  a diversion  for  the  column  descending  from  Cairo.  Under  these 
circumstances  I shall  retain  here  six  of  Montgomery’s  shi^FS  to  assist  in 
repelling  any  attack  upon  the  forts  below. 

At  my  request  Governor  Moore  is  also  fitting  up  with  bulkheads  of 
cotton  two  vessels,  which  will  give  ns  eight  here.  This  will  be  of  ma- 
terial service  and  will  quiet  the  people,  who  think  that  they  have  been 
too  much  neglected.  In  guns  of  large  caliber  we  are  greatly  deficient, 
as  1 have  mentioned  before.  It  was  to  be  hoped  that  in  the  evacuation  of 
Pensacola  some  10-inch  columbiads  would  be  sent  here,  but  I have  only 
succeeded  in  getting  one,  and  that  by  sending  a persevering  ofiicer  after  it. 

I inclose  you  two  orders  on  the  subject  of  martial  law.*  Affairs  here 
have  reached  a crisis  (which  Mr.  Yancey  will  explain  to  the  President), 
and  it  became  necessary  for  some  one  to  seize  the  helm  with  a strong 
hand,  or  we  should  have  had  trouble,  perhaps  bloodshed,  between  men 
who  were  all  friendly  to  the  cause.  A city  composed  of  such  heteroge- 
neous elements  as  this,  with  an  excitable  population,  who  are  easily  led 
into  excesses,  is  difiicult  to  govern,  as  there  are  so  many  interests  to 
consult,  each  jealous  of  the  other.  This  rendered  the  appointment  of 
provost-marshals  a matter  of  great  diflSculty,  more  especially  as  I knew 
that  there  were  large  and  influential  associations  in  existence  whose  leaders 
were  desirous  to  take  control.  The  universal  approval  of  my  appoint- 
ments throughout  the  city  and  the  satisfaction  and  quiet  so  apparent  to 
all  lead  me  to  infer  that  the  difficulty  has  been  entirely  solved,  and 
everything  seems  to  have  settled  back  into  its  proper  channel.  We 
shall  encourage  our  friends,  root  out  our  enemies,  guard  the  public  in- 
terests, and  keep  the  speculators  well  in  hand.  No  movement  has  been 
made  since  martial  law  was  proclaimed  that  has  not  been  received  with 
approval  by  the  people  at  large.  I feel  sure  that  the  administration  and 
our  cause  have  been  saved  from  a terrible  embarrassment  here  in  New 
Orleans. 

We  are  called  upon  here  from  all  quarters  to  furnish  everything — 
powder,  food,  equipments,  and  ordnance  stores  of  all  kinds — and  it  is 
utterly  impossible  to  make  any  estimate  which  will  suit  the  requirements 
of  the  bureaus.  We  must  have  money  here  in  large  quantities,  for  we 
know  not  what  urgent  requisition  may  come  upon  us  by  telegraph  at  a 
moment’s  notice.  Bragg  telegraphed  to-da}"  for  500,000  pounds  of  hard 
bread,  yet  the  estimate  of  my  commissary,  approved  by  me,  has  been 
returned  from  Richmond  for  details  of  what  we  woiild  require.  Such 
red  tape  will  kill  us.  We  had  to  borrow  money  to  keep  troops  from  suf- 
fering. This  point  being  recognized  as  a great  source  of  supply,  I hope 
you  will  see  the  importance  of  placing  large  amounts  of  money  here  for 
"all  the  bureaus — commissary,  ordnance,  quartermaster,  and  medical  pur- 
veyors. It  is  utterly  impossible  to  foresee  what  we  will  require.  Money 
Avill  have  to  be  borrowed  to  keep  our  troops  in  Tennessee  from  wanting 
bread.  This  certainly  could  not  have  been  forseen  by  the  assistant  com- 
missary of  this  department. 

I thank  you  very  warmly  for  the  confidence  expressed  in  the  last 
paragraph  of  your  letter,  and  trust  that  nothing  will  occur  to  abate  it. 
My  position  here  is  one  of  labor  and  difficulty,  without  much  chance  for 

Nos.  10  and  11,  March  15  and  18,  pp.  857,  860. 

55  R R — VOL  VI 


866  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  ICh.u>.  XVL 


glory  5 but  I shall  do  my  duty  as  I understand  it,  without  partiality, 
favor,  or  affection.” 

Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  March  23,  1862. 
Major  General  Lovell,  New  Orleans,  La.: 

I have  ordered  44,000  pounds  of  cannon  powder  sent  to  you  from 
Columbus,  to  enable  you  to  supply  gunboats.  Have  also  sent  orders  for 
heavy  guns,  as  requested  in  your  dispatch  of  yesterday. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 
Secretary  of  ^Yar. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  March  23,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones,  il/o&i/e; 

Send  to  General  Lovell  as  promptly  as  possible  some  10-inch  colum- 
biads  and  sea-coast  mortars. 

J.  P.  BEISMAMIN^, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Eichmond,  A^a.,  March  23,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones,  Mobile : 

The  President  desires  that  you  proclaim  martial  law  in  his  name  over 
Mobile  and  the  surrounding  country. 

J.  P.  BEXJAMINT, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Eichmond,  March  23,  1862. 

Major  General  Jones  : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received.  Eeserve  the  guns,  forces,  and 
ammunition  necessary,  as  suggested  by  you,  to  hold  the  place  against 
the  small  force  you  believe  the  enemy  to  have.  Communicate  further, 
if  necessarv.  You  will  be  further  advised. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIY, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Eichmond,  A^a.,  March  27,  1862. 

C.  J.  McEae,  Mobile,  Ala.: 

I understood  the  j)urpose  of  the  governor.  General  Jones  was  in- 
tended to  remain  in  command,  and  orders  have  been  given  accordingly. 

JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Grand  Division,  Army  of  the  Miss., 

Corinth,  Miss.,  March  28,  -1862. 

Alaj.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding  Department  Alabamia  and  West  Florida.: 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  19th  instant,  from  Mobile,  * reached  the 
major-general  commanding  after  some  delay,  owing  to  his  change  of 

*Not  found,  but  see  that  of  March  21,  p.  862. 


•OiiAi*.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  8G7 

position,  who  directs  me  to  say  that  the  dispositions  you  have  made 
under  the  orders  of  the  War  Department  appear  to  be  judicious,  and 
he  has  no  doubt  the  position  at  Pensacola  may  be  held  by  Colonel  Jones 
without  danger,  especially  as  we  may  expect  no  active  operations  from 
the  enemy  in  the  Gulf  during  the  approaching  summer  season. 

As  his  instructions  for  the  destruction  of  property  were  based  entirely 
on  the  orders  of  the  War  Department  to  ‘^abandon  Pensacola,”  he  is 
gratified  to  find  you  exercised  a proper  discretion  in  that  matter,  though 
rumors  have  reached  here  that  the  order  had  been  executed  in  part  on 
private  property. 

The  breaking  of  the  railroad  again  is  very  unfortunate.  Our  defenses 
on  the  Mississipi)i  are  very  imperfect,  and  require  all  the  guns  we  can 
command.  Will  you  please  hurry  forward  those  behind.  There  were 
in  all  at  least  twenty  heavy  shell  guns,  besides  8-inch  howitzers  and 
rifle  guns.  Half  were  ordered  via  Memphis  and  the  other  half  to  Kew 
Orleans.  But  seven  have  yet  reached  Memphis.  Please  urge  them 
forward,  sending  everything  complete  with  each  one. 

The  general  directs  that  you  will  change  the  destination  of  those  to 
Hew  Orleans,  too,  and  send  them  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  to  be  used  on  the 
river  near  Vicksburg. 

As  soon  as  you  can  ascertain  how  many  can  be  sent  in  each  direction 
please  advise  us. 

It  is  perfectly  useless  to  send  guns  to  Hew  Orleans.  If  we  lose  the 
river.  Hew  Orleans  must  fall;  no  defenses  can  save  it;  the  railroads 
would  be  cut  immediately,  and  starvation  would  do  its  work. 

lu  resuming  his  old  command,  in  addition  to  the  one  here,  the  general 
did  not  intend  to  interfere  with  your  command  of  the  department,  and 
requests  you  to  resume  it.  His  command  is  a larger,  and  only  includes 
the  smaller  one.  The  object  was  to  give  us  control  of  means. 

It  is  a subject  of  regret  that  the  Department  should  have  interfered  to 
prevent  your  coming  here.  The  most  important  command  in  this  army 
was  assigned  you,  and  the  one  on  which  the  general  considers  the  safety 
of  our  cause  depends. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  G.  GARHER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hevt  Orleans,  La.,  March  29,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin; 

I cannot  get  heavy  guns  from  Mobile.  The  enemy  is  in  large  force 
at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  Please,  order  commanding  officer  at  Mobile 
to  send  immediately. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  29,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

What  guns  do  you  mean;  guns  in  batteries  or  guns  on  their  way 
to  you? 

G.  W.  RAHDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


868  OPERATIONS  INW.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

New  Orleans,  La.,  March  31,  18G2. 
Hou.  George  W.  Eandolph: 

A part  of  the  lO-inch  columbiads  and  sea-coast  mortars  which  were 
at  Pensacola.  New  Orleans  has  only  one  of  the  former  and  none  of  the 
latter. 

M.  LOVELL. 


H eadquarters, 
Richmond^  March  31,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding  at  Pensacola: 

General:  In  answer  to  certain  inquiries  made  in  behalf  of  Col. 
Thomas  M.  Jones,  as  the  commanding  officer  at  Pensacola,  by  Oapt.  John 
B.  Sale,  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  you  are  desired  to  hold  Pensacola^ 
the  navy-yard,  &c.,  provided  you  have  the  ability  to  do  so,  and  to  save 
all  the  public  property  of  value.  Should  you  be  opposed  by  an  irresist- 
ible force,  you  are  expected  to  bring  off  your  command  in  good  order, 
with  their  arms,  &c.  It  is  therefore  suggested  that  you  at  once  make 
arrangements  for  sending  to  places  of  security  all  property  not  neces- 
sary for  your  purpose,  to  mobilize  your  troops,  and  be  prepared  for  any 
emergency. 

All  the  arms  that  are  available  have  been  sent  to  the  governor  of 
Elorida.  Nine  hundred  will  be  sent  to  you  by  him.  Possibly  he  may 
supply  you  with  more.  The  commanding  officer  at  Tallahassee  has  been 
written  to  to  send  you  a company  of  cavalry  and  a company  of  light  artil- 
lery, if  he  can  procure  them.  As  regards  the  field  officers  of  the  Twenty- 
seventh  Mississippi  Eegiment,  I learn  from  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
GeneraFs  Office  that  Thomas  M.  Jones  has  been  appointed  colonel,. 
James  L.  Autrey  lieutenant-colonel,  and  George  H.  Lipscomb  major. 
Very  respectfully, 

''  E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Abstract  from  field  return  of  the  Army  of  Mobile,  commanded  by  Maj,  Gen.  Samvel  Jones, 

for  March,  1862. 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

9.(\  "Rri  orn,(l  o 

78 

1,  548 

1,945 

2, 104 

9tli  Brigade  Alabama  Militia 

53 

599 

735 

■ 1,041 

1st  Confederate  Eegiment 

13 

196 

235 

270 

Gracie’s  regiment 

14 

282 

296 

296 

Ketchum’s  regiment 

9 

157 

166 

166 

McKinstry’s  regiment 

16 

579 

616 

638 

Smith’s  regiment 

21 

398 

419 

419' 

Boyle’s  company  Mobile  Dragoons 

3 

94 

107 

131 

Semple’s  company  light  artillery 

5 

104 

119 

121 

Waters’  company  light  artillery 

4 

113 

129 

141 

Total 

216 

4,  070 

4,  767 

5,  327' 

CiiAr.  XYI  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


869 


New  Orleans,  La.,  Ajyril  1,  1802. 

President  Davis, 

Richmond j Ya.: 

I purchased  eight  mouths  ago  1,880  rifles  and  30,000  cartridges,  and 
have  just  succeeded,  after  infinite  trouble  and  over  $00,000  of  outlay, 
in  having  them  landed  on  the  Florida  coast.  They  were  at  once  seized 
by  Governor  Milton,  and  I telegraphed  they  must  be  sent  to  me.  I 
have  received  his  reply,  in  which  he  coolly  informs  me  he  has  taken  one- 
half  and  your  Secretary  of  War  the  other.  This  unpardonable  and  un- 
paralleled outrage  is  nothing  less  than  robbery  and  just  as  bad.  I can- 
not use  Louisiana’s  money  to.  buy  arms  when  they  are  to  be  seized  by 
the  first  freebooter  that  meets  them.  I have  given  out  all  the  arms  I 
had,  expecting  that  these  would  be  in  the  hands  of  my  own  troops.  Now 
that  thirty-seven  sail  of  the  enemy  are  in  the  river,  in  God’s  name,  in 
the  name  of  my  State,  I ask  you  to  order  them  to  be  sent  to  me  im- 
mediately. 

TnO.  O.  MOORE. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  Axjril  2,  1862. 

Governor  Moore, 

New  Orleans^  La. : 

I was  not  aware  that  the  arms  in  the  hands  of  Governor  Milton  be- 
longed to  the  State  of  Louisiana.  One-half  of  them,  sent  to  Pensacola, 
have  been  ordered  to  be  placed  subject  to  your  order,  and  I have  re- 
quested Governor  Milton  to  make  the  same  disposition  of  the  remainder. 
He  took  them  supposing  that  they  were  arms  given  him  by  Mr.  Ben- 
jamin, when  in  fact  they  were  part  of  a different  cargo.  I did  not  know 
until  Mr.  Benjamin  informed  me  of  it  that  the  arms  held  by  Governor 
Milton  were  a part  of  the  cargo  of  the  Florida.  Gol.  T.  M.  Jones,  com- 
manding at  Pensacola,  will  communicate  to  you  the  arrival  of  the  arms 
at  that  place. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Mobile,  AjpriZ  2,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones, 

Pensacola : 

I have  resumed  command  of  this  department.  Nine  hundred  rifles 
on  the  way  to  you  for  war  troops.* 

#**#*%* 

SAM.  JONES. 


O’Bannonyille,  Ajyril  2,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones: 

Ten  10-inch,  seven  8-inch  columbiads,  nine  sea-coast  howitzers,  four 
rifle  guns,  and  two  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzers  have  been  shipped.  Lieu- 
tenant Aldrich  is  absent  at  East  Pass,  and  there  may  be  more;  when  he 
returns  Pll  let  you  know.  The  enemy  shelled  Captain  McPherson’s 
camp,  in  order,  I think,  to  enable  him  to  land  re-enforcements  behind 
the  island,  which  I think  was  done  yesterday,  as  160  cavalry  were  seen 
on  island  to-day.  I think  there  is  mischief  intended.  They  have  been 


*Some  matters  of  detail  omitted. 


870  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XYL 

re-enforced.  More  than  225  men  seen  landed  near  Pickens.  I tliink 
they  will  make  an  attack. 

The  negro  is  in  prison  5 he  has  implicated  a white  man  with  his  evh 
dence  and  corroborative  circumstances. 

THOS.  M.  JONES, 
Colonel^  Commanding. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  A])ril  3,  1862. 
General  George  W.  Eandolph: 

The  seizure  of  Governor  Moore’s  guns  by  the  War  Department  leaves 
me  in  a precarious  condition.  We  sent  off  all  our  men,  relying  upon 
those  guns  to  arm  others.  Please  order  them  here. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Kichmond,  Ya.,  April  4,  1862. 

General  Lovell, 

New  Orleans : 

I have  already  ordered  Colonel  T.  M.  Jones  at  Pensacola,  and  re- 
quested Governor  Milton,  of  Florida,  to  hold  the  arms  subject  to  Gov- 
ernor Moore’s  order,  and  have  notified  him  of  the  fact.  I have  also  en- 
deavored to  get  columbiads  and  sea-coast  mortars  for  you  from  Pensa- 
cola, but  find  that  all  have  been  sent  to  Mobile  that  could  be  spared. 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Pensacola,  April  4, 1862. 

General  Jones: 

I am  confident  that  the  enemy  now  know  my  true  condition,  two  men 
having  escaped  to  Fort  Pickens. 

THOS.  M.  JONES. 


Executive  Office, 
Montgomery^  Ala.^  April  5,  1862. 

General  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War,  G.  S.  A.,  Eichmond : 

Dear  Sir:  I consider  the  maintenance  of  the  possession  of  Pensa- 
cola a matter  of  such  prime  importance,  not  only  to  Alabama  and  Flor- 
ida, but  to  the  cause  at  large,  that  I must  claim  your  attention  to  a few 
thoughts  and  suggestions  upon  the  subject. 

Pensacola  is,  next  to  Norfolk,  the  most  important  point  on  our  entire 
seaboard  to  hold  at  this  time.  To  us  as  a possession  it  may  not  be  of 
any  great  importance,  but  to  the  Yankee  Government  its  importance, 
in  view  of  their  manifest  designs,  is  incalculable.  They  want  a spacious 
and  safe  harbor  far  South  for  their  vast  naval  armament.  Here  they 
have  it.  It  is  the  only  one  in  the  Gulf  to  which  their  large  ships  can 
find  access.  When  they  get  it,  there  is  the  spacious  bay  to  ride  in,  the 
navy-yard  to  repair  at,  the  fine  hospital,  and  other  appointments,  which 
cost  the  old  Government  millions  of  dollars,  the  extensive  fortifications, 
all  ready  to  their  hands. 

But,  again,  they  cannot  summer  at  New  Orleans,  nor  Mobile,  nor 
Savannah,  nor  Charleston.  The  yellow  fever  will  be  a terror  to  them 
and  repel  themj  but  at  Pensacola  they  can  make  safe  and  pleasant 


CiiAr.  XVI.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  871 

summer  quarters.  The  healthfulness  of  the  place  lias  been  tested  by 
time  and  experience  and  is  established,  and  the  Yankees  who  have 
already  spent  one  summer  at  Pickens  will  feel  every  confidence  in 
making  Pensacola  summer  quarters.  Ko  other  place  on  the  Southern 
coast  with  a roadstead  for  ships  can  compare  with  it  for  such  a purpose. 

Put  these  two  great  facts  together,  and  it  is  needless  to  elaborate  an 
argument.  They  speak  for  themselves.  I will  not  weary  you  nor  1113'- 
self  in  amplifying. 

This  great  and  important  point  can  be  securely  held  with  5,000  men, 
properly  armed  and  trained,  against  any  force  the  Yankee  Government 
can  detach  for  its  capture  ; perhaps  by  less,  but  certainly  by  5,000  men. 

But  we  are  now  ill  provided,  and  if  provision  be  not  made,  and  that 
soon,  our  comparatively  naked  condition  will  be  known  to  the  invaders, 
and  they  will  make  a stroke  at  us  and  take  us,  as  I fear,  almost  with- 
out a show  of  resistance. 

Let  me  state  to  you  plainly  what  is  needed  to  put  the  place  in  con- 
dition of  defense : 

1st.  We  want  a good  brigadier- general — some  man  who  will  inspire 
confidence  and  effect  speedy  organization.  The  gallant  and  worthy 
colonel  who  now  commands  the  post  himself  feels  this  want. 

2d.  We  want  small-arms  for  nearly  half  the  troops ; now  have  about 
3,200,  and  we  need  permanently  at  the  post  5,000  small-arms. 

3d.  We  want  now  one  or  two  artillery  companies  and  several  com- 
panies of  cavalry. 

Alabama  is  doing  all  she  can,  and  she  will  readily  furnish  the  men 
if  she  can  have  the  effective  co-operation  of  the  0.  S.  A. 

I have  this  suggestion  to  make  both  for  present  and  future  operations 
in  respect  to  Pensacola.  Being  a point  of  so  great  importance,  a healthy 
location,  and  accessible  for  stores  and  provisions,  let  it  be  made  a camp 
of  instruction  for  the  Confederate  service.  Send  new  regiments  or  com- 
panies, as  they  are  formed,  to  Pensacola  for  drill ; when  sufficiently 
trained,  retire  them  where  they  may  be  needed  and  bring  in  others, 
keeping  the  complement  at  4,000  or  5,000  men.  In  this  way  the  post 
can  be  maintained  and  the  new  levies  of  Alabama  and  adjoining  States 
furnished  with  a most  eligible  camp  of  instruction. 

I do  not  wish  to  seem  importunate,  but  feeling  persuaded,  as  I do, 
that  50,000  men  will  not  be  able  to  repair  the  loss  of  a post  which  5,000 
could  now  hold  safely,  I hope  I will  be  excused  for  any  seeming  impor- 
tunity. Prom  Pensacola,  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  the  whole  great 
producing  country  of  Middle  Alabama  can  be  so  menaced  as  to  put  a 
serious  check  to  ordinary  agricultural  labor  at  little  or  no  cost  to  the 
invader.  With  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  and  parts  of  North  Carolina, 
South  Carolina,  and  Virginia  lost  to  us,  what  are  we  to  do  for  food  if 
Middle  Alabama  is  seriously  disturbed  ^ 

I remain,  with  very  great  respect, 

JNO.  GILL  SHOKTEK. 

P.  S. — If  the  Secretary  will  furnish  arms,  I will  furnish  5,000  more 
troops  for  the  post  without  delay,  with  the  troops  already  there  included. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  April  10,  18G2. 
General  George  W.  Eandolph: 

Can  you  possibl^^  order  here  4,000  or  5,000  small-arms  ? I have  sent 
all  my  troops  to  Corinth,  but  have  several  unarmed  war  regiments. 

M.  LOVELL. 


872  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  A])ril  10,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.  : 

Are  the  cotton-lined  boats  ready,  and  where  are  they  ? 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  April  10,  1862. 

To  the  Governors  of  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  Alabama: 

General  Beauregard  must  have  re-enforcements  to  meet  the  vast 
accumulation  of  the  enemy  before  him.  The  necessity  is  imminent ; the 
case  of  vital  importance.  Send  forward  to  Corinth  all  the  armed  men 
you  can  furnish. 

JEFFEESON  DAYIS. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  April  11,  1862. 

Jefferson  Davis: 

Can  troops  be  armed  if  I send  them  ? I have  no  arms  here  except 
those  General  Lovell  thinks  we  should  keep — those  just  received  from 
Pensacola. 

THO.  O.  MOOEF. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  April  11,  1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore: 

No  arms  to  furnish.  You  will  not  fail  to  appreciate  the  necessity 
which  caused  the  application  to  you.  If  you  could  spare  armed  troops 
for  a few  weeks  they  might  then  be  returned  to  you. 

JEFFFESON  DAYIS. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  April  11,  1862. 
Hon.  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War^  Bichmondj  Ya.: 

Governor  Milton  will  not  forward  my  guns.  John  Leeds,  my  agent, 
has  been  waiting  at  Columbus,  Ga.,  one  week.  Order  them  sent.  I am 
greatly  annoyed. 

THO.  O.  MOOEF, 

Governor  of  Louisiana. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  April  11,  1862. 

General  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

We  have  just  had  a call  for  arms  from  Corinth,  which  we  cannot 
supply,  but  hope  soon  to  be  able  to  do  so  and  to  send  you  some.  Did 
you  receive  my  telegram  yesterday  asking  where  the  cotton-lined  boats 
are  ? 

G.  ^Y.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


■Chai*.  XVI.l 


873 


CORKESPOXDENCEj  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

jSTew  Orleans,  La.,  April  11,  1SG2. 

Oeueral  Eandolpii, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Five  cotton  boats  liave  gone  up ; three  more  will  go  to-night.  The 
other  six  are  to  go  below — four  being  ready. 

Al.  LOVELL. 


Kew  Orleans,  April  11,  1802. 

(Received  April  12.) 

Hon.  S.  R.  AIallory: 

I am  here  and  will  leave  soon.  The  Louisiana  will  be  ready  in  three 
<lays.  My  boats  are  not  able  to  meet  the  enemy  without  losing  them. 
Enemy  march  down  the  banks  and  erect  fortitications,  trying  to  cut  off 
our  boats.  Island  10  was  given  up  the  8th,  losing  all  the  guns.  Our 
boats  brought  off  500  of  the  army.  The  floating  batterj"  was  sunk  by  a 
shell  from  a mortar. 

GEO.  X.  nOLLIIs^S, 

Flag-Officer. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  April  11,  1802. 

Major-General  Lovell, 

Neiv  Orleans^  La.: 

The  Louisiana  was  ordered  up  the  river  to  meet  three  iron  clad  boats 
which  have  succeeded  in  passing  Island  Ro.  10,  and  her  presence  there 
is  deemed  very  imj)ortant  to  the  defense  of  New  Orleans.  The  guns 
were  intended  expressly  for  her,  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  is  unwill- 
ing to  give  them  up.* 

You  have  not  answered  my  two  telegrams  asking  where  the  cotton- 
lined  boats  were. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond.,  Fu.,  April  12,  1802. 

His  Excellency  J.  G.  Shorter, 

Governor  of  Alabama.,  Montgomery,  Ala. : 

Sir  : I beg  to  tender  you  my  thanks  for  the  valuable  suggestions 
contained  in  your  letter  of  the  5th  instant,  and  to  inform  you,  in  reply, 
that  the  Department  fuUy  appreciates  the  imxiortance  of  Pensacola,  and 
has  been  making  every  possible  effort  to  arm  troojis  for  its  defense. 
Very  respectfullv,  vour  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond,  Va.,  April  14,  1802. 

Alaj.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida : 
General  : Your  letter  to  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  5th  instant 
has  been  referred  to  me,  and  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  there 

* This  was  in  answer  to  dispatcli  printed  as  document  No.  13,  in  record  of  the  Court 
of  Inqniry.  See  X).  646. 


874  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Ciiap.  xvi. 

is  no  general  prohibition  of  the  exportation  of  produce  from  the  ports- 
of  the  Confederate  States.  Whenever  a military  commander  thinks 
that  it  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  he  may  stop  it,  and  even 
destroy  it  if  necessary,  such  authority  having  been  expressly  granted 
by  Congress;  or  where  he  thinks  that  the  exportation  is  a violation 
or  evasion  of  the  law  against  trading  with  the  enemy,  he  may  prohibit 
it ; but  he  should  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  good  policy  to  exchange  pro- 
duce for  arms  and  munitions  of  war  with  any  one  willing  to  make  such 
exchange. 

Persons  suspected  of  disloyalty,  and  yet  suffered  to  go  at  large  for 
the  want  of  evidence  against  them,  should  not  be  allowed  to  export 
cotton  or  other  produce,  of  which  the  enemy  stand  in  need,  unless  you 
are  satisfied  that  it  will  not  be  carried  directly  or  indirectly  to  the 
enemy’s  ports. 

After  exported  produce  gets  into  circulation  you  cannot,  of  course, 
prevent  its  going  to  the  ports  of  the  United  States ; but  if  you  have 
reason  to  think  that  it  is  exported  for  that  purpose,  you  would  be  justi- 
fied in  stopping  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 


EichjMOND,  Va.,  April  14,  1862. 

Governor  Moore, 

Hew  Orleans^  La.  : 

I have  telegraphed  to  Governor  Milton  to  deliver  the  arms  to  your 
agent  on  his  exhibiting  his  authority  from  you  and  identifying  the  arms 
as  the  property  of  Louisiana.  If,  however,  the  arms  were  originally 
taken  by  the  agents  of  the  governor  of  Florida  and  not  by  our  own,  we 
have  no  control  over  them.  Under  the  circumstances  of  the  landing  it 
was  impossible  to  distribute  the  cargo  at  the  time. 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

• 3Iohile,  Ala.,  April  15,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  G.  S.  Army: 

General  : Before  relinquishing  command  of  this  department,  as  I 
have  been  ordered  by  General  Lee  to  do,  I desire  to  place  on  file  in 
your  oflice  copies  of  the  principal  instructions  I received  and  gave  in 
regard  to  Pensacola.  The  copies  will  be  inclosed  with  this.* 

The  damaged  condition  of  the  railroads  and  other  causes  made  it 
'impracticable  to  move  the  shell  and  rifled  guns  and  other  property 
specified  as  rapidly  as  General  Bragg  supposed  it  could  be ; and  when 
I undertook  to  hold  Pensacola  beyond  the  time  appointed  for  its  evacu- 


*For  documents  referred  to  see  Bragg  to  Jones,  February  27  and  March  1,  pp.  835, 
837 ; Jones  to  Le  Barron,  March  4,  p.  838 ; Jones  to  Bragg,  March  5 and  6,  pp.  838,  840; 
.Tones  to  Brent,  March  8,  p.  846;  Jones  to  Jones,  March  0,  p.  848;  Jones  to  Beard,  March 
10,  p.  849;  Bragg  to  Jones,  March  11,  p.  852;  Jones  to  Cooper,  March  11,  p.  852;  Jones 
to  Jones  and  Myers,  March  12,  pp.  853,  855;  Jones  to  Bragg  and  Bragg  to  Jones,  March 
15,  pp.  856,  857  ; Jones  to  Jones,  March  16,  p.  858;  Beard  to  Stringfellovr,  March  16,  p. 
859;  Bragg  to  Jones,  March  18,  p.  861;  Jones  to  Bragg,  March  21,  p.  862;  Jones  to 
Benjamin,  March  22,  p.  862;  Benjamin  to  Jones,  March  23,  p.  866;  and  Lee  to  Jones,. 
March  31,  p.  868. 


Chap.  XYL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


875 


ation  it  was  not  alone  for  the  purpose  of  saving  much  valuable  public 
property,  but  I hoped  whilst  doing  so  to  gather  a sufficient  force  to 
repel  any  attack  I believed  the  enemy  capable  of  making  at  that  time, 
and  to  hold  the  place  until  the  men  I hoped  to  collect  could  be  armed, 
organized,  and  instructed,  and  put  in  condition  to  hold  it  against  any 
attack  the  enemy  might  be  induced  to  make  after  ascertaining  that 
nearly  all  the  troops  that  had  so  long  held  it  securely  had  been  with- 
drawn. About  1,000  armed  and  600  unarmed  men  were  retained. 
Of  these  only  about  330  had  any  experience  or  instruction  in  the  use  of 
heavy  artillery.  The  governor  of  Alabama  has  sent  to  Pensacola  about 

2.000  unarmed  and  unorganized  men.  Other  unarmed  men  might  have 
been  and  may  now  be  sent  there,  but  I have  not  thought  it  advis- 
able to  do  so  without  some  assurance  that  I could  procure  arms  for 
them.  One  hundred  very  inferior  old  Spanish  muskets,  brought  in  by 
a schooner  that  ran  the  blockade,  and  200  or  300  shot-guns  and  rifles 
furnished  by  Governor  Shorter,  are  the  only  arms  I have  yet  been  able 
to  procure.  Col.  T.  M.  Jones,  commanding  at  Pensacola,  has  now  about 
3,500  men,  including  one  cavalry  comi)any.  More  than  half  of  them  are 
unarmed,  and  he  has  no  field  artillery.  If  the  Government  can  furnish 
arms,  this  force  can,  I believe,  be  very  soon  increased  to  5,000  or  G,000 
men,  and  if  to  that  is  added  the  two  companies  (one  of  artillery  and  one 
of  cavalry)  which  General  Lee  informs  me,  by  letter  of  the  31st  October, 
the  commanding  officer  at  Tallahassee  had  been  ordered  to  send  to 
Pensacola,  if  they  could  be  procured.  Colonel  Jones  would,  I think,  be 
able  to  defend  his  post  successfully  against  a formidable  attack.  The 
effectiveness  of  his  force  would  be  increased  beyond  the  mere  addition 
of  numbers  by  the  encouragement  and  confidence  it  would  inspire  in 
the  officers  and  men.  Heretofore  they  have  been  greatly  discouraged 
and  depressed,  regarding  themselves  as  detained  at  their  post  only  to 
keep  up  the  appearance  of  holding  it,  but  in  reality  to  offer  but  a feeble 
resistance  if  attacked,  and  then  to  escape  or  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  whilst  their  more  fortunate  companions  were  sent  to  Tennessee 
to  meet  the  enemy.  But  unless  the  garrison  can  be  increased  to  near 

5.000  infantry,  and  one  or  two  companies  each  of  light  artillery  and 
cavalry  added,  the  place  is  constantly  in  imminent  danger  of  falling 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

It  is  for  the  Department  to  judge  whether  it  is  better  to  hold  it  by 
so  uncertain  and  insecure  a tenure,  or  to  move  to  a place  of  security  the 
large  armament  of  heavy  guns  remaining  there  and  then  abandon  the 
place.  Colonel  Jones  undertook  the  task  I assigned  him  in  the  best  pos- 
sible spirit,  and  has  had  many  difficulties  to  contend  with.  He  has  held 
his  post  more  than  a month  beyond  the  time  appointed  for  its  evac- 
uation, and  has  thus  saved  a large  amount  of  valuable  Government 
property.  He  has  performed  the  duty  assigned  him  so  far  in  a man- 
ner deserving  high  commendation. 

This  place  is  but  little,  if  at  all,  more  secure  than  Pensacola.  When 
the  Army  of  Mobile  was  withdrawn  garrisons  were  left  in  Forts  Mor- 
gan and  Gaines,  and  two  companies  with  the  battery  at  Cedar  Point; 
two  cavalry  companies,  one  patrolling  from  Fort  Morgan  to  the  Perdido, 
the  other,  near  Old  Portersville  on  Bayou  Labatre,  patrolling  the  coast  r 
one  light  artillery  company,  just  organized  and  ready  for  service,  and 
another  with  field  guns,  but  no  horses.  A battalion  of  the  First  Con- 
federate Begiment,  now  reduced  to  two  comx)anies,  was  sent  over  from 
Pensacola  to  man  the  batteries  near  this  city,  the  total  present  for  duty 
being  about  2,360.  Of  this  force,  one  regiment — the  Twenty-fourth 


376  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Alabama,  aggregate  present  680 — is  now  under  orders  from  Fort  Mor- 
gan to  Corinth. 

There  are  here  now  about  1,500  unarmed  and  unorganized  war  troops. 
I have  ordered  a portion  of  them  to  Fort  Morgan,  to  take  the  place  of 
the  Twenty-fourth  Alabama.  Besides  these  I have  about  1,000  ninety- 
day  volunteers  from  the  country,  armed  with  shot-guns,  and  about  the 
same  number  of  armed  militia  can  be  turned  out  in  this  city  on  an  emer- 
gency. I do  not  speak  accurately  as  to  numbers,  because  the  returns 
are  exceedingly  inaccurate,  and  we  have  no  blank  forms. 

While  the  garrisons  of  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines  may  be  able  to  repel 
any  attack  likely  to  be  made  on  them  soon,  there  is  little  or  nothing  to 
resist  a land  attack  on  the  city  if  made  in  force. 

You  will  see,  general,  from  the  foregoing  statement  that  not  only  Pen- 
sacola, but  this  city  and  bay  and  the  large  and  valuable  armaments  of 
Forts  Gaines  and  Morgan,  and  the  batteries  at  Cedar  Point  and  nearer 
the  city,  are  very  much  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy.  From  what  the 
governor  of  this  State  tells  me,  I believe  that  if  arms  can  be  procured 
the  force  here  can  easily  be  so  increased  as  to  defend  this  place  against 
any  attack  the  enemy  is  likely  to  make  soon. 

A few  weeks  more  and  the  climate  will  probably  deter  the  enemy  from 
undertaking  extensive  operations  on  the  Gulf  coast.  In  the  mean  time 
a few  thousand  arms  here  and  at  Pensacola  might  be  of  incalculable 
service  to  us.  I have  not  received  a gun  of  any  sort  from  the  Govern- 
ment since  I have  commanded  this  department. 

You  will  not,  I am  sure,  general,  understand  me  as  writing  this  in  any 
spirit  of  complaint.  This  is  not  at  all  my  intention.  The  Department 
knows  its  own  resources  and  the  best  way  of  applying  them  far  better 
than  I do.  I only  desire  before  turning  over  my  command  to  state  the 
<jondition  of  things  here  and  at  Pensacola. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JONES, 

3£ajor- General, 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  C.  S.  A., 

I£eto  Orleans^  La.,  April  15,  1862. 

General  Georoe  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I beg  leave  to  report  that  the  funds  for  the  river-defense  fleet 
which  were  sent  me  are  nearly  exhausted.  The  enormous  price  of  every 
kind  of  materials  has  made  the  preparation  very  expensive,  in  addition 
to  which  the  river  pilots  (Montgomery  and  Townsend),  who  are  at  the 
bead  of  the  fleet,  are  men  of  limited  ideas — no  system  and  no  adminis- 
trative capacity  whatever.  I very  much  fear,  too,  that  their  powers  of 
execution  will  prove  much  less  than  has  been  anticipated.  In  short, 
unless  some  competent  person,  of  education,  system,  and  brains,  is  put 
over  each  division  of  this  fleet,  it  will,  in  my  judgment,  prove  an  utter 
failure.  No  code  of  laws  or  penalties  has  been  established,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  decide  how  deserters  from  the  fleet  are  to  be  tried  and  pun- 
ished. There  is  little  or  no  discipline  or  subordination,  too  much  steam- 
boat,” and  too  little  of  the  man-of-war,”  to  be  very  eflective.  The  ex- 
penses of  fitting  up,  provisioning,  coaling,  and  paying  advances  so  far 
on  the  fourteen  ships  are  about  $800,000.  I have  received  $950,000,  but 
have  paid  nothing  as  yet  towards  the  $563,000,  at  which  sum  the  vessels 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  877 

seized  were  appraised.  The  original  appropriation  was  $1,000,000. 
Captain  Montgomery  informs  me  that  half  a million  more  has  been  voted ; 
if  so,  it  should  be  sent  on  at  once,  so  as  to  pay  off  the  liabilities  on  the 
vessels. 

I trust  that  the  results  to  be  derived  from  this  fleet  will  compensate 
for  the  outlay,  but  unless  some  good  head  is  placed  in  charge  of  it  I fear 
such  will  not  be  the  case.  The  expenses  of  outfit,  payment  for  ships, 
and  months’  W'ftges  will  consume  one  and  a half  millions.  It  is  due, 
however,  to  Montgomery  to  say  that  for  everything  he  has  been  com- 
pelled to  pay  nearly  300  per  cent,  over  current  piece  prices.  Eight  of 
these  vessels  are  up  the  river  and  four  below  j the  remaining  two  will 
go  below  in  a few  days. 

I telegraphed  General  Beauregard  some  time  since  about  fortifying 
at  Vicksburg,  although  we  have  no  guns  to  i)ut  up  there,  but  in  case  we 
fall  back  from  the  Corinth  and  Memphis  line  we  might  make  a fair 
stand  on  a line  running  from  Vicksburg  through  Jackson  and  Meridian. 
I have  no  officer  of  engineers  to  send  there,  but  think  the  subject  of 
importance. 

The  enemy  has  forty  vessels  just  below  Fort  Jackson,  and  has  been 
firing  occasionally  for  two  days  past.  I think  they  will  locate  their 
mortar  ships,  shell  the  forts  for  several  days  or  weeks,  and  then  try  to 
dash  by  with  their  steamers.  They  have  four  ships  of  the  class  of  the 
Hartford,  and  twelve  or  fifteen  gunboats,  besides  twenty-one  mortar 
schooners.  If  we  can  manage  to  obstruct  the  river  so  as  to  retain  them 
thirty  minutes  under  our  fire  I think  we  can  cripple  the  fleet. 

We  have  several  regiments  here  which  have  enlisted  for  the  war,  but 
are  entirely  destitute  of  small-arms,  I having  sent  all  I had  to  Corinth 
with  Buggies’  brigade. 

Heavy  requisitions,  entirely  unforeseen,  are’ constantly  made  on  this 
department  for  supplies  of  all  kinds,  and  when  they  come  are  generally 
very  urgent.  To  meet  such  calls  large  amounts  of  funds  should  be  kept 
here,  either  in  the  hands  of  the  different  disbursing  officers  or  placed  at 
my  disposition.  It  is  too  late  after  the  requisition  is  received  to  make 
estimates  5 neither  can  we  give  details  in  advance. 

I received  a telegram  from  the  President  that  the  Secretary  of  War 
had,  in  answer  to  my  dispatches  about  the  necessity  of  martial  law  in 
some  of  the  adjoining  parishes,  written  me  fully  on  the  subject.  I have 
not  received  his  letter.  The  good  citizens  in  many  of  the  neighboring 
parishes  are  sending  petitions  constantly  to  have  martial  law  extended 
over  them.  It  should  be  done,  in  order  to  make  it  effective  in  those 
parishes  where  it  exists.  Please  inform  me  on  this  point,  as  also  how 
are  the  expenses  of  provost-marshals  to  be  paid  hereabouts. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major- General,  Commanding^ 


ilEw  Orleans,  La.,  April  15, 1862. 

General  Bandolph: 

The  enemy  is  preparing  for  a formidable  attack  on  the  forts  below. 
He  shelled  them  a little  for  the  past  two  days  j no  harm  done.  Twenty- 
seven  vessels  in  sight  from  forts. 


Al.  LOVELL. 


878  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Cuap.  XVL 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  Aiiril  17,  1862. 

Oovernor  Milton, 

Tallahassee : 

I wish  1,500  arms  sent  to  Pensacola  or  1,500  armed  troops.  The  rest 
•of  the  arms  will  receive  such  destination  as  General  Lee  may  think 
proper  after  returning  to  the  governor  of  Georgia  what  were  taken  from 
him.  I will  submit  your  dispatch  to  General  Lee,  and^request  him  to 
telegraph  you. 

G.  W.  EAKDOLPH, 

Seeretary  of  War. 


Kew  Orleans,  La.,  April  17,  1862. 

President  Davis  : 

Forts  bombarded  an  hour  and  a half  yesterday.  General  Duncan 
telegraphs  none  of  our  guns  will  reach  them.  Commodore  Whittle  has 
orders  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  send  the  Louisiana  to  Ten- 
nessee. Duncan  and  Higgins  both  telegraph  she  is  absolutely  a neces- 
sity at  the  forts  for  the  safety  of  New  Orleans,  and  that  it  is  suicidal  to 
send  her  elsewhere.  With  the  enemy’s  plan  of  attack  our  safety  may 
depend  upon  her  timely  arrival  there.  I earnestly  beg  her  destination 
may  be  changed  and  protest  against  lier  being  sent  up  the  river.  Ex- 
citement among  the  people  great  on  the  subiect. 

THO.  O.  MOOEE, 

Governor  of  Louisiana. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  April  17,  1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore: 

A dispatch  was  sent  yesterday  to  General  Lovell  on  the  subject  of 
the  attack  on  the  forts  below.  His  answer  was  required  in  connection 
with  the  question  proposed  by  you.  The  wooden  vessels  are  below; 
the  iron  gunboats  are  above.  The  forts  should  destroy  the  former  if 
they  attempt  to  ascend.  The  Louisiana  may  be  indispensalde  to  check 
the  descent  of  the  iron  boats.  The  purpose  is  to  defend  the  city  and 
valley.  The  only  question  is  as  to  the  best  mode  of  effecting  the  ob- 
ject. Military  men  must  decide,  and  to-day  their  discretionary  power 
has  been  enlarged. 

JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Neiv  Orleans^  La.,  April  17,  1862. 

General  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : The  occupation  of  Tennessee  by  the  enemy,  the  low  water  in 
Eed  Eiver,  the  interruption  of  the  railroads  at  Decatur,  and  the  want 
of  communication  by  rail  with  Texas,  all  combined,  have  brought  about 
a scarcity  of  provisions  here.  Mr.  E.  Salomon  goes  hence  to  Eich- 
mond as  special  agent,  to  endeavor  to  remedy  this  evil,  if  possible.  I 
beg  that  you  will  cause  all  necessary  orders  to  be  given  to  facilitate  his 
mission,  as  you  will  perceive  at  once  it  is  one  of  vital  importance.  He 


879 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

takes  letters  from  Governor  Moore  and  several  of  our  most  i)romiuent 
citizens. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1. 

New  Orleans^  La.,  April  17,  18G2. 

General  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding  Department  of  Alabama: 

Dear  Sir  : We  are  threatened  here  with  a scarcitj^  of  flour  and  other 
provisions.  Mr.  Salomon  goes  from  here  as  a special  agent  to  Eich- 
mond  to  endeavor  to  procure  supplies.  Please  give  him  every  facility 
in  his  business  and  endeavor  to  push  forward  by  every  ])ossible  means 
any  provisions  that  he  may  succeed  in  obtaining.  It  is  a matter  of 
vital  imj)ortance,  and  there  is  no  time  to  be  lost.  I wish  you  would 
give  the  requisite  orders  in  your  department  to  enable  Mr.  Salomon  to 
succeed  in  his  mission. 

The  great  importance  of  this  matter  will  strike  you  at  once. 

Yours,  truly, 

M.  LOVELL, 
Major-General^  C.  S.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  AVest  Florida, 

3Iobile,  Ala.,  April  20,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.  C.  S.  A.,  Biclimo7id.,  Ya.: 

General:  The  occupation  by  the  enemy  of  points  on  the  Memphis 
and  Charleston  Kailroad  enhances  so  much  the  importance  of  holding 
this  place,  that  I deem  it  my  duty  to  bring  it  prominently  to  your 
notice. 

As  I am  at  present  informed,  the  only  railroad  and  telegraphic  com- 
munication between  the  Atlantic  States  and  those  bordering  on  the 
Mississippi,  between  the  Army  of  the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi  and  the 
seat  of  Government,  passes  through  this  city.  The  supply  of  flour  and 
grain  in  New  Orleans  is  so  reduced,  that  the  general  commanding  and 
the  governor  of  Louisiana  regard  that  city  as  in  more  danger  from  fam- 
ine than  from  the  guns  and  troops  of  the  enemy. 

Special  messengers  are  sent  from  Louisiana  to  procure  flour  from  the 
Atlantic  States,  whilst  those  States  are  in  great  want  of  the  molasses 
and  sugar  of  Louisiana. 

If  this  place  is  occupied  by  the  enemy  steam  and  telegraphic  com- 
munication between  the  Atlantic  and  Western  States  is  cut  otf,  and 
there  is  little  or  nothing  to  prevent  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  as  I have  stated  in  my  letter  to  you  of  the  15th  instant,  if  it  is 
attacked  in  force  by  land  and  water. 

The  governor  and  people  of  Alabama  are  fully  alive  to  the  imi)ortance 
of  holding  Mobile.  If  arms  can  be  procured,  the  men  can  be  found  to 
use  them  here;  if  additional  arms  cannot  be  procured,  it  becomes  a 
question  for  the  Government  to  decide  whether  the  interest  of  the 
service  does  not  demand  that  some  armed  troops  be  sent  here  from  some 
other  iioint. 

So  far  as  I am  informed,  the  enemy’s  land  force  in  the  Gulf  is  not  such 
as  to  indicate  any  intention  on  their  part  of  undertaking  extensive 


880  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Ciur.  XVI. 

operations  by  land  in  this  quarter,  but  I believe  it  to  be  large  enough ^ 
if  the  commander  is  active  and  energetic,  to  enable  them  to  seize  Mobile* 
So  important  do  I regard  this  place  that  I would  now  carry  out  my 
instructions  to  abandon  Pensacola,  if  by  so  doing  I could  so  increase 
the  force  here  as  to  afford  any  security  for  its  defense  against  a formi- 
dable attack.  If  the  troops  here  and  at  Pensacola  were  all  armed  and 
organized  this  place  might  be  rendered  comparatively  secure  for  a time 
by  combining  the  armies  of  Pensacola  and  Mobile,  but  under  existing 
circumstances  that  combination  would  not  add  more  than  about  1,500 
muskets  and  shot-guns  to  the  force  here.  I have  therefore  preferred  to 
continue  the  occupation  of  Pensacola,  trusting  that  our  affairs  in  Ten- 
nessee would  take  such  a turn  as  to  enable  the  Government  to  transfer 
a part  of  the  force  now  there  to  the  Gulf  coast. 

This  ])lace  has  labored  under  other  embarrassments  than  the  want  of 
men  and  arms 5 one  of  these  has  been  the  frequent  change  of  command- 
ers. Until  about  the  5th  of  February  General  Withers  was  in  comrnand. 
During  the  last  three  weeks  of  February  General  Bragg  was  here  in 
person.  On  the  28th  of  February  he  assigned  me  to  the  command  of  this 
department,  directing  me  to  carry  out  certain  instructions  at  Pensacola 
and  then  come  here.  In  the  mean  time  Colonel  (now  Brigadier-General) 
Villepigue  was  left  in  command.  On  the  4th  of  March  General  Bragg 
issued  an  order  resuming  his  former  command  of  this  department,  but 
subsequently  explained  that  he  did  not  intend  thereby  to  take  the  com- 
mand from  me,  but  only  to  attach  the  department  to  his  command  in 
Tennessee  and  Mississippi. 

I arrived  here  and  assumed  command  on  the  14th  March.  Ten  days 
later  General  Bragg  ordered  me  to  turn  over  my  command  and  report 
to  him  in  person  at  Corinth.  I did  so^  and  on  the  31st  March  was  or- 
dered to  return  here  and  resume  command  of  this  department.  Ten  days 
after  my  return  (on  the  11th  April)  I received  a telegram  from  General 
Lee,  ordering  me  to  turn  over  the  command  of  the  department  to  Briga- 
dier-General Forney,  who  had  been  ordered  to  report  to  me,  and  to 
report  myself  in  person  to  General  Beauregard. 

Forney  arrived,  but  with  his  wound  and  general  health  such  that  he 
could  not  enter  on  duty,  but  applied  for  and  obtained  leave  of  absence 
on  surgeon’s  certificate.  I so  telegraphed  General  Lee,  who  replied  that 
I could  not  leave  here  until  relieved  bj^  General  Forney.  In  the  mean 
time  General  Bragg  telegraphed  me  that  if  I could  not  go  immediately 
to  Corinth  and  report  to  General  Beauregard  I need  not  go  at  all.  So 
the  matter  now  stands. 

I am  under  orders  from  General  Lee  to  report  to  General  Beauregard 
when  Forney  is  able  to  relieve  me,  and  from  General  Bragg  not  to  do  so 
unless  I can  do  it  immediately.  This  state  of  uncertainty  is  embarrass- 
ing, and  prevents  me  from  carrying  out  some  plans  which  I thought 
would  add  to  the  security  of  this  place. 

I am  at  present  the  only  general  officer  of  the  Confederate  Army  on 
duty  in  the  department,  and  I,  as  you  see,  am  under  rather  uncertain 
orders.  I respectfully  suggest  that  there  should  be  at  least  two ; one 
here  and  one  in  Pensacola.  It  would  be  desirable  that  another  should 
command  the  department  if  one  can  be  spared  for  that  service. 

I shall  be  glad  if  you  will  lay  the  substance  of  this  letter  before  the 
Secretary,  and  communicate  to  me  such  instructions  as  may  be  thought 
proper. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JONES, 

Major-  General. 


CifAr.  XVI.] 


COlUtESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


881 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

, Mobile^  April  21,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  Lee,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond j Va.: 

General  : I am  under  somewhat  conflicting  orders  at  present. 

By  your  telegram  of  the  9th  instant,  received  on  the  lltli,  I am 
ordered  to  turn  over  this  department  to  Brigadier-General  Forney  and 
report  in  person  as  soon  as  practicable  to  General  Beauregard.  General 
Forney  arrived  and  reported  to  me,  but  with  his  wound  and  general 
health  such  that  he  could  not  enter  on  duty,  but  on  surgeon’s  certifl- 
cate  applied  for  and  obtained  a leave  of  absence — sick  leave.  I so  tele- 
graphed you,  and  you  replied  on  the  17th  that  I could  not  leave  here 
until  relieved  by  Forney.  An  hour  or  so  before  I received  this  last 
telegram  of  yours  I received  one  from  General  Bragg,  this  department 
being  attached  to  his  command,  saying  if  I could  not  go  immediately 
to  Corinth  not  to  go  at  all ; from  which  I inferred  that  if  I could  not  go 
on  to  Corinth  immediately,  it  was  intended  to  assign  some  other  ofiicer 
to  the  command  to  which  it  had  been  intended  to  assign  me,  and  I pre- 
sume that  has  been  done,  as  I have  since  received  various  telegrams 
from  Generals  Bragg  and  Beauregard,  and  no  allusion  is  made  to  my 
leaving  here.  One  just  now  •eceived  from  General  Bragg  directs  me 
to  do  certain  things  in  this  department  which  he  would  not  direct  me 
to  do  if  he  contemplated  my  going  to  Corinth. 

But  as  matters  now  stand  I am  under  ord^ers  from  you  to  go  to 
Corinth  and  report  to  General  Beauregard  when  General  Forney  can 
relieve  me,  and  from  General  Bragg  not  to  do  so,  and  both  orders  were 
received  within  a few  hours  of  each  other. 

Under  the  circumstances  I shall  await  further  orders  from  you,  and  I 
shall  be  glad  if  you  will  give  them  as  soon  as  you  can  conveniently  do 
so.  It  is  not  probable  that  General  Forney  will  be  well  enough  to  enter 
on  duty  before  I can  hear  from  you,  particularly  if  you  reply  to  this  by 
telegraph,  and  I shall  be  glad  if  you  will  do  so;  and  if  before  answer- 
ing you  will  have  the  kindness  to  read  a letter  of  yesterday’s  date  which 
I addressed  to  General  Cooper  I shall  be  obliged.  It  contains  some 
suggestions  which  I desire  you  to  see.  It  is  rather  long  and  I have  not 
time  now  to  recapitulate  it. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JO^JES, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond^  F«.,  April  22,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding^  cj&c..  Mobile,  Ala.: 

General  : It  is  represented  by  General  Lovell  that  he  needs  heavy 
guns  for  the  defenses  of  the  city  of  Kew  Orleans.  He  states  that  but 
three  of  those  removed  from  Pensacola  were  sent  him,  while  fourteen 
10-inch  columbiads  were  kept  at  Mobile.  I desire  to  know  if  you  cannot 
spare  him  some  of  those  in  your  command,  and,  if  so,  request  that  you 
will  cause  them  to  be  forwarded  to  Hew  Orleans  '^^ithout  delay.  It  is 
all  the  more  important  that  he  should  have  them,  because,  when  in  posi- 
tion, he  will  be  able  to  send  the  iron- clad  steamers  up  the  river,  where 
they  would  render  most  efficient  service.  You  will  therefore  please  send 
56  R R — VOL  VI 


882  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

such  as  are  not  positively  necessary  for  the  defense  of  your  depart- 
ment. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

li.  hj.  LHlhj, 

OeneraL 


New  Orleans,  April  22,  1862. 

General  Jones: 

Bombardment  still  goes  on  day  and  night ; casualties  few,  but  forts 
much  cut  up.  Can  you  send  two  10-inch  columbiads  in  haste,  or  spare 
any  powder? 

M.  LOVELL. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond^  7h.,  April  22,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Commanding  Department  No,  1,  New  Orleans^  La. : 

General  : Tour  letter  of  the  12th  instant  to  the  Hon.  Secretary  of 
War  has  been  referred  to  General  Lee.  who  directs  me  to  say  that  he 
has  ordered  that  such  heavy  guns  as  are  nere  available  be  sent  you.  The 
Chief  of  Ordnance  Bureau  informs  him  that  he  can  send  four  or  five ; 
in  addition,  General  Samuel  Jones  has  been  written  to  and  instructed  to 
send  you  some  of  the  guns  taken  from  Pensacola,  if  they  can  possibly 
be  spared  from  the  defense  of  Mobile.  As  regards  the  small-arms  you 
desire,  he  regrets  there  are  none  on  hand  for  issue.  The  demand  is 
great  from  aU  sides  and  the  supply  inadequate.  There  are  some  afloat, 
however,  and  it  is  hoped  they  will  soon  arrive,  when,  as  far  as  practica- 
ble, your  wants  in  this  respect  will  be  supplied. 

The  nomination  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith  has  been  confirmed,  of 
which  fact  you  are  perhaps  already  aware. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


New  Orleans,  La.,  April  22,  1862. 

General  Eandolph: 

In  case  the  city  should  be  occupied,  should  the  cotton  and  tobacco 
belonging  to  foreigners  be  destroyed  ? I require  funds  for  river- defense 
fleet  immediately  or  cannot  keep  it  up. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  April  23,  1862. 

Major  General  Lovell, 

New  Orleans: 

Ton  will  not  destroy  foreign  property  unless  it  is  necessary  to  insure 
the  destruction  of  our  cotton  and  tobacco.  Your  telegram  about  funds 
is  not  intelligible  and  had  better  be  repeated,  but  in  case  of  necessity, 
before  receiving  further  instructions,  you  may  borrow  such  funds  as 
are  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  city. 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Chat.  XVI.] 


883 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Eiohmond,  Ya.,  April  23,  1862. 

General  Lovell, 

New  Orleans j La.: 

Confine  tlie  functions  of  your  provost-marshals  to  subjects  proper  to 
military  police.  Eevoke  orders  to  banks  to  issue  notes  in  conformity 
with  views  of  provost-marshals,  and  leave  all  State  institutions  as  far  as 
possible  undisturbed  by  military  power. 

JEFFEESOX  DAVIS. 


• Hew  Orleans,  La.,  April  23,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

Bombardment  continues  with  unabated  vi^orj  now  five  days  and 
nights.  We  stiU  hold  out,  with  4 casualties,  but  Fort  Jackson  much 
cut  up.  Want  more  powder,  if  it  can  be  had. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Hew  Orleans,  April  24,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones: 

The  enemy  has  passed  our  forts.  It  is  too  late  to  send  any  guns  here ; 
they  had  better  go  to  Vicksburg. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  April  24,  1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

Neio  Orleans^  La.: 

I sent  dispatch  to  General  Lovell  on  receipt  of  yours  in  relation  to  the 
banks.  From  his  reply  find  that  orders  were  revoked. 

Your  dispatch  in  relation  to  enemy^s  ships  this  day  received.  I am 
hopeful  that,  whilst  the  forts  divide  the  fleet,  the  Louisiana  will  not  lose 
the  opportunity.  In  painful  anxiety  wait  further  intelligence. 

JEFFEESOH  DAVIS. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  April  24,  1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

New  Orleans^  La. : 

We  will  take  the  coin  of  the  banks  and  be  responsible  for  it.  The 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  will  take  action  immediately. 

JEFFEESOH  DAVIS. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  April  25,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

New  Orleans^  La.: 

It  has  been  determined  to  burn  all  the  cotton  and  tobacco,  w*hether 
foreign  or  our  own,  to  prevent  it  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  You  will  therefore  destroy  it  all,  if  necessary,  to  prevent  them 
from  getting  it. 

G.  W.  EAHDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


884  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Headquarters, 
Richmond^  Va.^  April  27,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding^  Mobile,  Ala. : 

General:  In  reply  to  that  portion  of  your  letter  to  the  Department 
of  the  15th  instant  which  relates  to  the  public  property  and  defenses 
at  Pensacola  I would  state  that  it  is  deemed  expedient  to  remove  at 
once  all  Government  property,  including  guns,  munitions  of  war,  &c.,  not 
]iecessary  for  present  service,  to  some  place  of  security,  and  to  make 
every  preparation  for  concentrating  the  whole  available  force  of  your 
command  at  Mobile,  should  occasion  require  it. 

Such  of  the  heavy  guns  as  are  not  needed  in  your  department  could 
be  sent  to  Montgomery  or  other  safe  point  and  a portion  of  them 
assigned  to  defense  of  the  interior  of  Florida.  General  Joseph  Finegan, 
commanding  the  Department  of  Florida,  can  inform  you  what  may  be 
required  for  the  defense  of  the  Saint  John’s,  Chattahoochie,  and  other 
rivers. 

Everything  of  value  that  it  is  possible  to  remove  should  be  sent  away, 
and  what  cannot  be  secured  should  be  destroyed  when  you  withdraw 
from  the  position,  to  prevent  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 
As  much  as  in  your  power  deceive  the  enemy  as  to  your  real  intent, 
keeping  a bold  front  and  doing  the  work  of  the  removal  with  all  the 
secrecy  possible. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

• * P.  E.  DEE, 

General,  Commanding* 


Camp  Moore,  La.,  [April]  27,  1862. 

General  Samuel  Jones: 

I evacuated  Pew  Orleans,  the  fleet  having  anchored  opposite  the  city. 
Send  all  heavv  guns  you  can  to  Yicksburg  with  great  dispatch. 

M.  LOVELL. 


EicmiOND,  Ya.,  April  28,  1862. 

iMayor  Monroe, 

of  New  Orleans,  La.  : 

I deeply  sympathize  with  your  situation,  and  recognize  with  pride  the 
])atriotism  of  the  citizens  of  Pew  Orleans. 

Your  answer  to  Commander  Farragut  leaves  to  you  all  the  chances 
and  rights  of  war.  General  Duncan  may  prevent  re-enforcements  to 
the  enemy,  and  General  Beauregard  has  been  informed  of  your  condi- 
tion, and  will  aid  you  as  he  may. 

My  prayers  are  with  you.  There  is  no  personal  sacrifice  I would  not 
willingly  make  for  your  defense.  Maintain  firmly  the  position  you  took 
in  your  reply,  and  let  us  hope  for  a successful  issue. 

JEFFERSOP  DAYIS. 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  April  30,  1862. 

General  Yan  Dorn  : 

Just  returned  from  Pew  Orleans.  The  men  at  forts  refused  to  hold 
out  longer,  and  Duncan  had  to  surrender.  The  enemy  will  therefore 
occupy  the  city  under  his  guns.  All  seems  quiet  and  orderly,  and  I 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  885 

think  there  will  be  no  trouble  for  citizens  and  himilies.  The  only  fear 
is  a scarcity  of  provisions. 

I shall  occupy  Vicksburg,  and  support  Beauregard  witli  all  the  men 
I can  organize  and  arm. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Camp  Moore,  La.,  May  1,  1SG2. 

General  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  ^Yar: 

Have  received  no  instructions  about  destruction  of  cotton.  Shall  I 
destroy  all  that  can  be  reached  by  the  enemy,  leaving  each  ])lanter  a 
portion  for  supplies j if  so,  what  percentage  shall  be  left?  Shall  I Vmrn 
the  barracks  and  arsenal  at  Baton  Eouge? 

M.  LOVELL. 


Camp  Moore,  La.,  May  2,  18G2. 

General  Eandolph: 

Butler  occupied  Hew  Orleans  to-day.  Cannot  enroll  men  there.  What 
is  to  be  done  about  destroying  cotton  ? 

M.  LOVELL. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  May  2, 


General  Lovell  : 

The  following  dispatch  was  sent  to  you  on  the  25th  ultimo: 


18G2. 


It  has  been  determined  to  burn  all  the  cotton  and  tobacco,  whether  foreign  or  our 
own,  to  prevent  it  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  You  Avill  therefore 
destroy  it  all,  if  necessary,  to  prevent  them  Ifom  getting  it. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 

A.  T.  BLEDSOE, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  May  3,  1862. 

Major-General  Lovell, 

Gamp  Moore,  La.,  via  Mobile,  Ala.  : 

This  is  the  third  telegram  which  has  been  sent  to  you  about  burning 
cotton — the  last  two  copies  from  the  first.  It  is  this : 

It  has  been  determined  to  burn  all  the  cotton  and  tobacco,  whether  foreign  or  our 
own,  to  prevent  it  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  You  will  therefore 
destroy  it  all,  if  necessary,  to  prevent  them  from  getting  it. 

Acknowledge  receipt  of  this  at  once. 

G.  W.  EAHDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Camp  Moore,  La.,  May  4,  1862. 

General  Eandolph  : 

Dispatch  about  cotton  received.  Immediate  steps  taken  to  carry  out 
the  instructions  of  yesterday.  Want  copy  of  law  to  organize  guerrilla 
parties,  with  authority  to  act.  This  is  the  only  available  force  in  the 
swamps  of  South  Louisiana. 


M.  LOVELL. 


886  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

Eichmond,  Va.,  May  5,  1862. 

Governor  Moore, 

Camp  Moore,  La,: 

Notice  that  you  were  going  to  Monroe  caused  my  failure  to  reply  to 
your  former  dispatch.  With  regret  I afterwards  learned  that  the  enemy 
had  occupied  New  Orleans.  Concur  with  you  as  to  the  changes  neces- 
sary because  of  that  event.  I had  previously  concluded  to  form  a depart- 
ment west  of  the  Mississippi.  It  is  now  a necessity,  but  we  must  further 
delay  action,  because  the  troops  and  higher  officers  are  concentrated  for 
a battle  in  Tennessee. 

My  present  opinion  is  that  it  will  be  better  to  have  one  of  your  camps 
on  each  side  of  the  river. 

JEFFEESON  DAYIS. 

(Eepeated  May  7.) 


Montgomery,  May  5,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Have  furnished  General  Forney  with  all  the  arms  I have.  If  he  can 
get  500  of  those  at  Charleston,  brought  by  Nashville  and  Cecilia,  he 
believes  he  can  defend  Mobile  successfully.  Its  fall  involves  the  arsenal 
at  Mount  Yernon,  perhaps  this  place,  and  cuts  offi  communication  with 
Corinth.  Shall  send  immediately  an  agent  to  Charleston  to  bring  them, 
and  most  earnestly  urge  they  be  supplied.  Alabama,  in  addition  to 
turning  over  21,000  stand  taken  at  Mount  Yernon,  has  armed  over 
18,000  troops  now  in  other  States.  She  asks  but  for  500. 

JNO.  GILL  SHOETEE, 

Governor  of  Alabama. 

[IndorsemeBt.] 

I have  only  heard  of  3,000  arms  having  been  brought  to  Charleston 
by  the  Cecilia ; 2,000  were  ordered  to  General  Pemberton  for  Georgia 
troops  and  1,000  to  Chattanooga  for  the  Alabama  troops. 

So  far  as  I know  there  are  no  arms  in  Charleston. 

E.  E.  LEE. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  May  5,  1862. 

General  John  H.  Forney, 

Mobile : 

Governor  Shorter  suggests  that  in  case  of  an  attack  upon  Mobile  the 
prisoners  at  Montgomery  should  be  removed  to  Columbus  or  Macon,  Ga. 
As  you  may  be  too  much  occupied  in  case  of  attack  to  attend  to  their 
removal,  I have  requested  the  governor  to  advise  with  and  assist  you  in 
the  matter.  You  had  better  communicate  with  liim. 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  May  6,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones, 

Commanding  at  Pensacola : 

In  case  you  have  to  evacuate  Pensacola,  destroy  cotton,  tobacco,  and 
military  and  naval  stores,  but  avoid  the  destruction  of  buildings  and 


Chap.  XVI.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  887 

other  private  property  as  much  as  possible.  Only  such  things  as  could 
be  used  by  the  enemy  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war  are  required  by  the 
act  of  Congress  to  be  destroyed. 

G.  W.  EAITDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  May  6,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Gam])  Moore,  La,: 

1 see  no  reason  for  the  destruction  of  the  barracks  and  arsenal  at 
Baton  Eouge.  You  will  therefore  preserve  them,  unless,  in  your  opin- 
ion, there  is  some  urgent  reason  for  their  destruction. 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 


New  Orleans,  May  8,  1862. 

[The  Secretary  of  War:] 

In  the  perilous  and  entirely  isolated  position  in  which  we  find  our- 
selves in  this  once  glorious  city  of  New  Orleans,  and  under  the  pressure 
of  the  calamities  which  have  befallen  us,  bearing,  as  it  were,  by  com- 
mon consent,  the  burden  and  responsibility  of  a trust  so  complex  and 
arduous  as  that  which  it  imposed  upon  me,  I feel  authorized,  in  the 
absence  and  during  the  fiight  of  all  our  State  authorities,  to  address 
myself  to  Major-General  Lovell,  commanding  at  Camp  Moore,  and  to 
Major-General  Beauregard,  commanding  at  Corinth,  and,  through  the 
latter,  to  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States,  for  the  purpose  of 
obtaining  some  information  concerning  the  ulterior  designs  of  the  Gov- 
ernment with  reference  to  this  doomed  city,  that  the  good  citizens,  in 
whose  breast  still  lingers  not  only  hope,  but  faith  in  the  success  of  the 
great  struggle  in  which  we  are  engaged,  may  have  some  direction  to 
guide  them  in  the  course  which  coming  events  may  command  them  to 
adopt  and  in  the  efforts  which  they  may  be  disposed  to  make  in  vindi- 
cation of  their  independence. 

The  city  has  been  deserted  by  all  such  as  had  moneys  or  other 
resources  of  the  Government  under  their  control,  and  is  left  without 
official  direction  and  without  means  for  supplying  the  necessities  which 
that  desertion  has  left  unprovided  for. 

Yast  amounts  of  property,  such  as  coal,  guns,  small-arms,  and  ammu- 
nitions of  every  shape  and  form,  have  been  abandoned  without  any  steps 
having  been  taken  to  protect  them  from  the  grasp  of  the  invader  and 
secure  their  possession  to  the  Confederate  Government.  They  still  lie 
in  the  i)laces  where  they  had  been  stored  up,  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy, 
without  a word  of  instruction  from  any  quarter  as  to  what  should  have 
been  done  with  them,  and  without  a single  cent  being  left  anywhere  to 
provide  security  for  the  same. 

The  entire  crew  of  the  McEae,  108  in  number,  and  the  scattered 
remnants  of  the  soldiers  that  retreated  from  Gamins  Lovell  and  Ohal- 
mette,  and  from  the  forts  below  and  around  New  Orleans,  are  dispersed 
throughout  the  city,  prowling  about  in  the  streets  asking  for  their  pay, 
and  having  no  bread  to  put  in  their  mouths  or  to  give  to  their  families, 
and  exposed  to  the  temptations  which  the  enemy  fails  not  to  hold  out 
to  them,  to  entice  them  into  tbe  Federal  ranks. 

We  are  threatened  with  measures  on  the  part  of  the  Federal  com- 


888  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

mander  which  look  to  a servile  insurrection  as  the  means  of  crushing- 
the  indomitable  energy  supposed  still  to  exist  in  many  hearts,  and  if 
the  threat  be  carried  out  we  will  have  to  encounter  a much  harder 
question  than  th  at  of  a bombardment : the  sack  of  our  houses  and  the 
slaughter  of  our  women  and  children  by  the  hand  of  our  own  slaves 
will  be  the  next  issue  we  may  have  to  face.  We  do  know  what  this 
supreme  contingency  will  exact  from  us,  and  we  will,  I hope,  be  pre- 
pared for  the  dire  dilemma  which  may  arise  out  of  it. 

But  are  we  not  to  be  remembered  by  those  who  have  assumed  charge 
of  our  destinies  ? Shall  we  be  left  without  assistance,  nay,  without  a 
word  of  comfort  and  encouragement,  to  the  tender  mercy  of  our  infuri- 
ated negroes,  and  will  not  the  hand  of  the  Government  manifest  itself 
in  some  form  or  shape,  if  it  were  but  to  protest  that  they  have  not  yet 
given  us  up  to  the  enemy  ? 

I repeat,  again  that  we  are  left  entirely  to  ourselves,  with  a State 
government  in  shameless  flight,  and  with  the  supreme  Government  in 
an  apparent  state  of  torpescence  and  forgetfulness  ! 

The  messenger  who  takes  charge  of  this  communication  is  recom- 
mended to  me  as  an  intelligent,  skillful,  and  reliable  medium  of  inter- 
course. His  name  is  James  D.  Brylan.  He  may  be  freely  trusted, 
I send  him  at  the  earnest  instance  of  our  friends  here,  that  my  message 
may  be  carried  safely,  and  that  he  may  be  the  means  of  bringing  back 
to  us,  either  from  General  Beauregard  or  the  Government  at  Eichmoud^ 
such  intelligence  and  instructions  as  will  relieve  our  minds  fi?om  doubt 
and  perplexity  as  to  what  best  should  be  done. 

PIEEEE  SOULE. 

[Indorsement.] 

May  22,  1862. 

Bead  and  returned  to  Secretary  of  War  for  assurance  to  the  citi«ens 
of  New  Orleans  that  the  Confederate  States  Government  has  not  been 
unmindful  of  their  condition,  and  had  its  power  but  been  equal  to  its 
will,  would  have  long  since  rescued  the  city  from  the  brutal  invader. 
On  both  the  east  and  west  side  of  the  river  efforts  are  being  made  to 
organize  forces,  &c. 

JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  May  8,  1862. 

Governor  Moore, 

Gam;p  Moore,  La. : 

Dispatch  received.  Concur  in  your  wish  for  prompt  organization 
west  of  river,  and  gladly  accept  your  offer  to  proceed  at  once  in  enroll- 
ment. Let  the  flrst  camp  be  at  Opelousas,  if  you  so  choose ; how  would 
Camp  Moore  do  for  the  other  ? I have  no  authority  to  appoint,  but  only 
to  detail,  officers  to  command  the  encampments.  General  Beauregard 
has  been  called  on  to  name  officers  for  encampments  in  the  West.  A 
general  to  command  department  will  be  sent  as  soon  as  practicable. 

JEFFEESOE  DAVIS. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  May  12,  1862. 

Governor  Moore, 

Camp  Moore,  La. : 

Dispatches  of  lOth  received.  Let  a third  camp  be  located  at  Monroe. 
Martial  law,  if  declared  by  me,  can  be  administered  only  by  Confederate 


Chap.  XVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

ofiicers  or  agents.  It  is  not  intended  to  interfere  with  your  powers  as 
executive  of  the  State. 

I will  wait  for  further  communication  from  you. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Richmond,  May  12,  1802. 

General  John  H.  Forney, 

Mobile^  Ala.  : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received.  In  the  contingency  referred  to^ 
burn  all  the  cotton  of  foreign  subjects  exce])t  in  cases  where  exemption 
has  been  granted  by  our  Government.  Where  the  consul  applies  for 
exemption  on  cotton  the  property  of  foreign  government,  immediately 
advise  this  office  by  telegraph  for  action  here. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Camp  Moore,  May  12,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Corinth : 

Dear  General:  I received  your  dispatch  asking  for  my  regiments 
here,  which  I declined  sending.  In  my  judgment  the  most  energetic 
steps  should  be  taken  to  confine  the  enemy  to  New  Orleans,  where  he 
must  suffer  more  from  sickness  than  in  the  country  adjoining.  Besides,  it 
would  have  a very  bad  moral  effect  upon  the  State  to  abandon  it  entirely, 
and  might  operate  to  prevent  the  burning  of  the  cotton,  which  act  will 
show  the  world  that  we  are  in  earnest,  and  put  an  effectual  stop])er  on 
the  promises  of  the  Federals  ‘‘to  send  out  the  cotton  in  thirty  days.”  If 
it  is  destroyed,  it  certainly  cannot  be  delivered  in  Europe,  even  though 
they  should  hold  every  seaport  in  the  Confederacy.  The  troops  in  New 
Orleans  are  already  suffering  much  from  sickness,  and  they  will,  beyond 
a question,  endeavor  to  occupy  Baton  Rouge,  the  lake  shore,  or  this 
railroad.  To  prevent  this,  I propose  to  have  a considerable  number 
of  partisan  rangers,  with  5,000  or  6,000  men  well  armed  and  provided,  in 
some  central  p,osition,  who  can  iirevent  their  troops  from  leaving  New 
Orleans  except  in  very  large  force. 

I was  raising  and  arming  five  regiments  here  under  the  last  call  of  the 
President,  and  by  the  aid  of  Governor  Moore  was  getting  along  very 
well, ‘when  I learned  that  800  guns,  for  which  I had  an  order  from  the 
governor,  were  seized  and  carried  to  Corinth,  thus  depriving  me  of  the 
means  of  arming  a fine  regiment.  I must  protest  against  this  method 
of  procedure.  Everything  intended  for  the  defense  of  New  Orleans  for 
the  past  six  months  has  been  stopped  and  seized  in  every  direction  until 
it  was  left  literally  defenseless. 

If  the  enemy  occupies  Baton  Rouge  I shall  attempt  to  dispossess  him, 
but  cannot  do  it  without  guns. 

I beg  you  will  do  me  the  favor  to  say  to  persons  who  ask  where  Gen- 
eral Lovell  and  his  army  were  when  New  Orleans  fell,  that  all  the  troops^ 
that  I had  organized  and  prepared  were  sent  to  Corinth  in  March,  and 
took  a prominent  part  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  leaving  me  with  the 
heterogeneous  militia  of  the  city,  armed  mostly  with  shot-guns,  against 
9 and  ll  inch  Dahlgrens.  Not  that  20,000  well-armed  infantry  would 


890  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


have  made  any  difference  against  ships  of  war,  but  the  people,  not  un- 
derstanding this,  cast  censure  upon  me. 

The  city  fell  from  three  causes : 

1st.  The  carrying  away  of  the  river  obstructions  at  the  forts  by  the 
storm  and  flood  a few  nights  before  the  attack. 

2d.  The  want  of  a sufficiency  of  heavy  guns,  which  I tried  in  vain  to 
i:)rocure  from  Mobile  and  Pensacola. 

3d.  From  inefficiency  and  want  of  proper  co-operation  on  tlie  part  of 
those  who  were  building  and  those  who  were  to  use  the  naval  defenses 
when  ready. 

I have  asked  for  an  official  investigation.  My  conscience  is  clear. 

Yours,  truly, 

M.  LOYELL, 

Major- General, 


Richmond,  Ya.,  May  13,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  M.  Jones, 

Pensacola,  Fla,: 

In  case  you  evacuate  the  navy -yard,  destroy  such  machinery  as  can- 
not be  removed,  but  do  not  destroy  the  dwelling-houses. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Brooksville,  Miss.,  June  20,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C,  S,  Army,  Richmond,  Ya,: 

General  : I send  with  this  a letter  in  reply  to  one  addressed  to  me 
by  the  Secretary  of  War,  calling  on  me  to  report  the  facts  regarding  the 
burning  of  two  unfinished  gunboats  by  my  order  in  Pensacola  Bay,  on 
the  11th  of  March  last.  When  I wrote  the  letter  I was  preparing  to 
leave  Mobile  and  go  to  Corinth  in  obedience  to  an  order  from  General 
Lee,  and  in  the  press  of  business  on  me  just  then  in  turning  over  the 
command  of  the  department  and  other  matters  I omitted  to  forward  the 
letter  to  its  address.  It  was  sent  in  my  valise  to  the  rear  a short  time 
after  I reached  Corinth,  and  I now  avail  myself  of  the  first  opportunity 
to  forward  it  with  this  explanation  of  the  delay,  which  I have  to  ask  you 
to  make  known  to  the  Secretary. 

Events  which  have  transpired  since  my  letter  was  written  show,  I 
think,  that  if  the  destruction  of  the  unfinished  gunboats  was  uncalled 
for  on  the  11th  of  March,  it  would  have  been  called  for  a little  later,  and 
that  by  destroying  them  when  I did  I at  least  saved  the  Government 
the  additional  expense  which  would  have  been  incurred  by  longer  work 
on  the  boats,  which  could  not  have  been  completed  before  Pensacola  was 
in  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

I have  been  detained  here  a week  by  an  attack  of  sickness,  but  expect 
to  rejoin  my  division  in  a few  days.  ♦ 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JONES, 

Major-General, 


Chap.  XVI.  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

[Inclosure  No.  l.J 


891 


Hdqrs.  Department  Alabama  and  West  Florida, 

Mobile^  April  25,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War^  Eichmondj  Ya. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the 
17th  instant,  inclosing  copies  of  two  letters,  one  from  Commander  Far- 
rand,  C.  S.  Navy,  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  one  from  the  latter 
to  the  President. 

Commodore  Farrand  reports  correctly  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy 
that  two  unfinished  gunboats  were  burned  in  Pensacola  Bay  on  the  11th 
ultimo  by  my  order,  and  adds  that  wlien  he  was  at  Pensacola  he  could 
not  discover  the  necessity  for  the  destruction  of  the  gunboats.  The 
Secretary  of  the  Navy  communicates  this  report  to  the  President,  and 
adds  that,  so  far  as  he  is  advised,  ^Hhe  destruction  of  these  vessels  was 
uncalled  for,”  and  asks  that  the  officer  under  whose  authority  they  were 
burned  may  be  called  upon  to  report  why  it  was  done. 

You  request  me  to  make  a report  of  the  facts  of  the  case.  They  are 
these: 

On  the  1st  of  March  I received  from  Major-General  Bragg,  command- 
ing this  department,  a letter  dated  27th  February  last,  in  which  he  says: 

You  will  make  dispositions  at  the  earliest  moment,  working  day  and 
night,  to  abandon  Pensacola.”  And  after  giving  certain  directiohs  he 
adds: 

I desire  you  particularly  to  leave  nothing  the  enemy  can  use ; hum  all  from  Fort 
McRee  to  the  junction  with  the  Mobile  road.  Save  the  guns,  and,  if  necessary,  destroy 
your  gunboats  and  all  other  boats ; they  might  be  used  against  us,  &c. 

On  the  2d  or  3d  of  March  I received  another  letter  from  Major-General 
Bragg.  It  has  no  date,  but  could  not  have  been  written  later  than  the 
1st  of  March,  as  it  was  written  in  this  city  and  he  left  here  on  that  day. 
He  says: 

Press  forward  your  troops  and  heavy  guns;  we  must  have  them  to  hold  the  Missis- 
sippi. Should  you  find  yourself  unable  to  accomplish  your  work  in  ten  days,  destroy 
your  smooth-bore  guns  and  send  me  your  troops.  I would  not  thus  press  you,  but  our 
fate  may  depend  on  two  weeks  in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi. 

On  the  evening  of  the  10th  of  March  I considered  that  the  time 
appointed  by  Major-General  Bragg  for  the  evacuation  of  Pensacola  had 
arrived.  My  force  had  by  that  time  been  so  reduced  by  sending  off 
troops  to  Corinth  that  I could  not  have  held  my  post  if  attacked  in 
force. 

I had  reason,  too,  to  believe  that  the  enemy  was  informed  of  the 
reduction  of  my  force  and  the  preparations  to  abandon  the  place.  The 
report  that  it  was  to  be  abandoned  was  known  in  Pensacola  before  the 
first  instructions  on  the  subject  reached  me  and  caused  a great  panic. 
The  inhabitants  were  flying  from  the  town,  and  some  persons  had  suc- 
ceeded in  escaping  to  Fort  Pickens,  and  no  doubt  informed  the  enemy  of 
the  condition  of  things;  and  though  I determined,  for  reasons  not  now 
necessary  to  state,  to  hold  the  place  as  long  as  possible,  I thought  it 
incumbent  upon  me  to  carry  out  the  work  of  destruction  ordered  by 
General  Bragg  as  far  as  it  could  be  done  without  attracting  the  atten- 
tion of  the  enemy  to  what  I was  doing.  I therefore  directed  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Beard  to  proceed  up  the  bay  and  the  next  morning  to  commence 


892  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVI.  . 

tlie  work  of  destruction.  In  my  instructions  to  liim  I said  in  regard  to 
those  unfinished  gunboats : 

You  will  communicate  with  the  officer  or  agent  having  charge  of  the  gunboats  and 
deliver  a letter  which  I will  send  you.  If  they  can  he  towed  up  the  Escambia,  you 
will,  after  having  completed  thoroughly  the  destruction  of  the  property  I have  men- 
tioned, give  such  assistance  as  you  can  in  towing  them  out  of  danger  up  the  Escam- 
bia. If  that  cannot  be  done,  you  will  destroy  the  gunboats  also. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Beard  reported  to  me  that  it  was  found  imprac- 
ticable to  tow  the  gunboats  up  the  Escambia  or  put  them  out  of  reach 
of  the  enemy,  and  he  therefore  burnt  them. 

I was  reluctant  to  give  any  orders  for  the  destruction  of  these  un- 
finished gunboats,  and  would  have  much  preferred  leaving  them  to  the 
naval  officers.  But  I was  informed  there  was  no  naval  officer  firesent 
in  charge  of  them.  Commander  Farrand,  who  had  charge  of  them,  was, 
by  his  own  statement,  in  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  and  did  not  return  io  Pen- 
sacola until  a week  after  they  were  destroyed.  I was  informed  that 
there  were  no  engines  or  machinery  ready  for  the  boats ; that  they  had 
been  commenced  early  the  previous  autumn,  and  it  was  supposed  would 
be  ready  to  receive  the  machinery,  if  it  could  be  procured,  some  time 
in  May;  that  they  were  at  that  time  in  the  hands  of  contractors  and 
ship-carpenters,  and  that  the  mechanics  and  laborers  employed  about 
them  could  not  be  relied  on  to  destroy  them  to  prevent  their  falling  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Under  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case, 
therefore,  I thought  it  any  duty  to  ])revent  the  enemy  from  profiting  by 
the  results  of  so  many  months  of  labor  bestowed  on  those  unfinished 
gunboats,  and  accordingly  ordered  their  destruction. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  in  his  letter  of  the  12th  of  April  to  the 
President,  says  : So  far  as  I am  advised,  the  destruction  of  those  ves- 
sels was  uncalled  for.”  I entertained  at  the  time  no  doubt  that  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  Navy  knew  that  I was  ordered  to  abandon  Pensacola,  acd 
that  the  unfinished  gunboats  must  either  be  destroyed  or  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy;  for  I supposed  that  Major-General  Bragg  had 
ordered  the  abandonment  of  Pensacola  under  instructions  from  the  War 
Department,  or’that  he  had  communicated  to  the  Department  his  in- 
structions to  me,  and  that  the  evacuation  of  so  important  a place  as 
Pensacola  would  necessarily  be  known' to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 
It  not  only  contained  much  valuable  naval  property,  but  was  the  place 
of  the  Secretary’s  private  residence,  where  much  of  his  property  was 
located.  A number  of  his  slaves  were  hired  by  my  quartermaster,  and 
a day  or  two  alter  I received  the  order  to  prepare  for  the  evacuation,  and 
while  I was  calling  upon  the  governor  of  Alabama  for  slaves  to  aid  in 
removing  public  property,  the  Secretary’s  agent  called  upon  me  for  his 
slaves,  to  be  removed,  as  I was  informed,  with  his  larniture,  to  a place 
of  security. 

From  all  of  these  circumstances  I was  convinced  that  the  Secretary 
was  advised  of  the  order  for  the  evacuation  of  the  place,  and  the  con- 
sequent necessity  of  destroying  the  unfinished  gunboats,  to  prevent 
them  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  I regret  that  I did 
not  know  at  the  time  that  the  Secretary  was  not  advised  of  the  orders  in 
the  case,  that  I might  have  brought  the  matter  to  his  notice. 

I am,  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JONES, 

Major- GenemL 


Chap.  XVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  893 


[Inclosuro  No.  2.] 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  April  17,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding  Dept.  Alabama  and  West  Florida,,  Mobile,,  Ala.  : 

Sir  : Tbe  inclosed  copies  of  a report  from  Commander  E.  Farrand, 
C.  S.  Navy,  and  a letter  from  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  the  President, 
in  reference  to  the  destruction  of  two  untinished  gunboats  at  the  head 
of  Pensacola  Bay  by.  your  order,  have  been  referred  to  me  by  the  Pres- 
ident, and  you  are  requested  to  make  a report  of  the  facts  of  the  case. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War, 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 


Navy  Departaient,  0.  S., 

Richmond,  April  12,  3862. 

The  President: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  your  information  the  report  of 
Commander  Farrand.  He  was  charged  with  the  duty  of  constructing 
naval  vessels  on  the  inland  waters  of  Florida,  and  he  details  the  de- 
struction, under  the  orders  of  the  military  commandant  at  Pensacola, 
of  two  fine  gunboats  on  the  bay  of  Escambia. 

So  far  as  I am  advised  the  destruction  of  these  vessels  was  uncalled 
for,  and  I have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  officer  under  whose  author- 
ity 'they  were  burned  may  be  called  upon  to  report  why  it  was  done. 

The  Government  loses  the  entire  value  of  the  vessels  j but  apart  from 
this,  they  were  built  with  express  reference  to  service  in  the  waters  near 
Pensacola  and  Mobile,  and  would  have  been  of  important  service. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  MALLOEY, 
Secretary  of  Navy, 

[Inclosuro  No.  4.] 

Navy  Department,  C.  S., 

Richmond,  April  11,  1862. 

Hon.  S.  E.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy  : 

Sir:  Upon  my  return  from  Jacksonville  to  Pensacola,  on  the  17th 
ultimo,  I found  that  the  two  gunboats  that  were  being  constructed  at 
the  head  of  Pensacola  Bay,  under  my  superintendence,  had  been  burned 
by  mint  ary  authority  on  the  llth  of  March.  It  was  done  by  an  armed 
force  of  100  men,  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  K.  Beard,  of 
tlie  First  Eegiment  Florida  Volunteers,  and,  as  Colonel  Beard  informed 
me,  by  order  of  Brig.  [Maj.]  Gen.  Samuel  Jones,  commanding  the  Con- 
federate forces  at  Pensacola.  * 

The  progress  and  condition  of  the  gunboats  at  the  time  they  were 
destroyed  were  as  follows: 

The  one  that  was  being  built  by  F.  G.  Howard  was  yet  on  the  stocks, 
but  might  have  been,  if  necessary,  put  into  the  water  at  the  moment, 
and  would,  in  her  regular  course  of  progress,  have  been  ready  to  launch 
ill  six  or  eight  days,  and,  with  the  exception  of  machinery,  would  have 
been  ready  for  her  armament  in  twenty  or  twenty-five  days,  and  would 
have  carried  two  10-inch  guns  of  9,000  pounds. 


894  OPERATIONS  IN  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  AND  LA.  [Chap.  XVL 

The  one  building  by  Ollinger  & Brace  had  been  in  the  water  about 
ten  days,  and,  with  the  exception  of  machinery,  would  have  been  ready 
for  her  gnns  in  ten  days ; she  would  have  carried  one  10-inch  and  one 
rifled  32-pounder. 

These  gunboats  [were]  well,  strongly,  and  thoroughly  built,  and  for 
sails  or  steam,  and  would,  in  my  opiuion,  have  rendered  important 
service  in  case  of  an  attack  by  the  enemy  upon  Pensacola.  These  ves 
sels  were  being  constructed  about  35  miles  from  Fort  Pickens,  and  in 
case  of  an  attack  upon  Pensacola  were  in  a condition  to  have  been, 
and  might  have  been,  removed  np  the  Escambia  Eiver,  out  of  reach  of 
the  enemy’s  gunboats. 

When  I was  at  Pensacola  I saw  no  unusual  number  of  enemy’s  ships 
off  the  port,  nor  could  I discover  the  necessity  for  the  destruction  of  the 
gunboats. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EBEl!T  FAERATO, 

Commander^  G.  S.  Navy, 


Mobile,  February  18,  1862.* 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

Yours  of  the  8th  just  received.  Fifth  Georgia,  Ninth  Mississippi, 
Twentieth  and  Twenty- third  Alabama  Regiments  on  way  to  Knoxville. 
Should  we  not  give  up  the  seaboard  now  and  concentrate  all  our  means 
on  the  vital  point  % 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


Found  too  late  for  insertion  in  regular  sequence. 


INDEX 


Brigades,  Divisions,  Corps,  and  Armies  are  ^^Mentioned  ” under  name  of  commanding  officer  / State  and 
other  organizations  under  their  official  designation. 


Page. 

Abandoned  Lands,  Refugees,  etc.  (See  Ref  ugees,  etc.) 

Adam,  Private.  Mentioned.. 41 

Adams,  C.  Wesley.  Mentioned 132 

Adams,  D.  W.  Mentioned 495,810 

Adjutant- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 672,  699 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 704,710 

Brown,  Harvey  672,673 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 673, 681 

Dix,  John  A 218 

Phelps,  John  W 679, 688, 693, 696, 698 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 188-190, 192, 193, 195, 198, 

203,205,210,216,218,219,222,  224,  226,  235,  240,  242,  243,  248,  250,  253 

War  Department,  U.  S 677 

Wool,  John  E 218 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  26,  248. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Anderson,  Ed.  C 368 

Bragg,  Braxton 755, 

757, 758, 761, 764, 766-768, 771, 782, 784, 787, 789, 790, 793, 807, 820 

Court  of  Inquiry.  Fall  of  New  Orleans 571, 596, 628,  629, 643 

Davis,  Jefferson 630 

Deas,  George 341 

Forney,  John  H 663, 664,  889 

Gatlin,  R.  C 310 

Jones,  Samuel  852,853,874,879,890 

Lee,  Robert  E 327, 367, 390 

Lovell,  Mansfield .570, 777, 778, 883 

Pemberton,  John  C 407,416,419-421,430 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 267,269,309-311 

Twiggs,  David  E 738 

War  Department,  C.  S ; 271, 278, 768 

Withers,  Jones  M 747 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861:  No.  90,  297;  No.  130,  267;  No.  151,  738;  No. 

173,  paragraph  VIII,  643;  paragraph  IX,  751;  No.  176,  288;  No.  186, 

293;  No.  200,  762;  No.  206,  309;  No.  264,  780.  Series  1862;  No.  59, 

407 ; No.  63,  413  ; No.  79,  428  ; No.  80,  430 ; No.  81,  432.  Series  1863:  No. 

41,  No.  43,  No.  46,  555. 

Agar,  Richard.  Mentioned 548 

Aiken,  Mr.  Mentioned 382 


(895) 


896 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Alabama. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  (See  Alabama  and  West  Florida,  Department  of.  Con- 
federate.) 

Military  departments  embracing 751 

Operations  in.  Mobile,  Ala.) 

Alabama,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 872 

Mobile  Executive  Committee  of  Safety 804 

War  Department,  C.  S 739, 803, 870, 873, 88C 

Alabama  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery— 5affa//o/7S ; 1st,  2d,  819;  Batteries:  Homer’s, 460;  Robertson’s,* 

819;  Semple’s,  868;  Waters’,  868. 

Cuxalrj— Companies : Cottrill’s  Scouts,  499;  Mobile  Dragoons,  868. 

InfantTy— Battalions : 1st,  772 ; 2d,  819 ; 4tli,  838, 848, 853.  Regiments : 1st, 

460,  492, 768, 784, 819, 838 ; 2d,  819 ; 7th,  460, 777, 779 ; 17th,  768, 819 ; 18th, 
772,795,806,819,836;  19th,  772,819;  20th,  772,  819, 894;  21st,  756,819; 

22d,  764,772,819,836;  23d,  764,772,819,894;  24th,  756,819,875,876; 

25th,  819;  29th,  662;  32d,  36th,  38th,  43d,  868. 

Alabama  and  West  Florida,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  (xenerars  Office,  C.  S.  A 768 

Bragg,  Braxton 744, 755, 757, 758, 761, 762, 764, 766-768, 

771, 777, 778, 784, 787, 789, 793, 797, 806, 809,  820, 822, 824, 826, 829, 834 

Davis,  Jefferson 866 

Johnston,  J.  D 800,801 

Jones,  Samuel 838,869,874,879,881 

Mobile,  Confederate  Agent  at 810 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 799 

Powell,  W.  L 856 

Walker,  L.P 764,765 

War  Department,  C.  S 761,762,764,773,788,794-796,803,823,828 

Withers,  Jones  M 779 

Bragg,  Braxton,  assigned  to  command  in 751,752,836,838,867 

Established  and  limits  defined 751,752,780 

Jones,  Samuel,  assigned  to  command  in 836,867 

Orders,  General,  series,  1861  (C.  S.  troops,  Pensacola):  No.  108,  460;  No. 

110,  751;  No.  120,  753;  (Department),  No.  1,  752;  No.  18,785.  Series, 

1862 : No.  23,  815 ; No.  38,  836. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861 : No.  14,  772.  Series  1862 : No.  62,  836. 

Strength  of  Confederate  troops  in,  February  1,  1862 819 

Alabama,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined - 738, 752, 785 

Denominated  Army  of  Mobile,  January  27, 1862 815 

Strength  of  Confederate  troops  in,  December  2,  1861 772 

Withers,  Jones  M.,  assigned  to  command  in 738,752 

Aldrich,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 869 

Algerine,  Steamer.  Mentioned 536 

Allen,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 730 

Allen,  Gaston.  Mentioned 16^ 

Allen,  Harvey  A. 

Mentioned 470, 473, 475, 497 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about  Pensacola,  Fla., 
November  22-23,  1861 479 


Claimed  for  Florida. 


INDEX. 


897 


Page. 

Amelia  Island,  Florida. 

Evacuation  of,  by  Confederate  troops,  March  3,  1862. 

Communications  from  JohnC.  Pemberton - 94 

Deports  of 

Hopkins,  Edward 94 

Trapier,  James  H 93 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  troops,  March  4,  1862. 

Communications  from  Thomas  W.  Sherman £»7 

Deport  of  Horatio  G.  Wright 96 

Ammen,  Daniel.  Mentioned 50, 57, 83, 388 

Anderson,  Edward  C. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 368 

Mentioned 318, 379 

Anderson,  James  B.  Mentioned 534, 547, 548 

Anderson,  Joseph  R. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 308, 309, 311 

Mentioned 306,309,326 

Anderson,  J.  Patton. 

Correspondence  with  Florida,  Governor  of 299 

Mentioned 288, 299, 300, 429, 459-461, 463, 751, 820, 824, 841 

Anderson,  Richard  H. 

Assignments  to  command.  (See  Note,  p.  1.) 

Mentioned 1, 127, 441, 444, 

458-460, 489, 491, 492, 497, 498, 750,  751,  754,  759,  762,  792,  802,  820, 842 

Deports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla.  Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November 

22-23,  1861 494 

Santa  Dosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9, 1861 460 

Andracita,  British  Schooner. 

Contest  over,  on  coast  of  Alabama,  January  20, 1862.  Deports  of 

Bragg,  Braxton 498 

Powell,  W.  L 498 

Mentioned 498,499 

Andrew,  D.  Mentioned 678 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Massachusetts,  Governor  of.) 

Andrew,  John  A.  Mentioned 168-170, 173, 174 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Massachusetts,  Governor  of. ) 

Anglo  Norman,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 

Anglo  Saxon,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 

Angomau,  Mr.  Mentioned 817 

Antonio,  Charles.  Correspondence  with  John  B.  Grayson 295 

Apalachicola,  Fla.,  Citizens  of.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S . 286 

Appleby,  F.  B.  Mentioned 21 

Appleton,  Edward  L.  Mentioned 500,501 

Ariel,  Steamer.  Mentioned 179, 190 

Arizona,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 

Arkansas.  Affairs  in  generally.  Communications  from  War  Department,  C.  S.  788 

Armstrong,  James.  Mentioned 59-61,197 

Army  Headquarters. 

Correspondence  with' 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 672, 699 

Barnard,  John  G 227, 684, 685, 691 

Brown,  Harvey 665-669 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 673,681,685,694,699 


57  R R— VOL  VI 


898 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Army  Headquarters— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 168, 

169, 171, 177, 207, 210, 211, 214, 224-226, 235, 236, 238, 240, 247 

War  Department,  U.  S 677,687 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : No.  99,  66 ; No.  100,  457.  Series  1862,  No.  3, 

217  ; No.  20,  695. 

Arnold,  Lewis  G. 

Assignments  to  command 258, 694 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 704, 710 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 712 

Farragut,  Darid  G 711,712 

McKean,  William  W 712 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 715 

Mentioned 258, 439-443, 446, 455, 470-472, 497, 694, 709, 717 

Keports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla. 

Abandoned  by  Confederates  and  occupied  by  Union  forces,  May 

9-12,  1862 658;  659 

Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November  22-23, 1861. ..  472 

Santa  Kosa  Island,  Fla. 

Action  on,  October  9,  1861 444, 446 

Reconnaissance  on,  March  27-31,  1862  499 

Arrow,  Steamer.  Mentioned 596 

Atlantic,  Steamer  (C.  S).  Mentioned 809 

Atlantic,  Steamer  (U.  S.  Transport).  Mentioned..  179, 180, 186, 187, 208, 220,248, 257 

Augusta,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with  Georgia,  Governor  of 381 

Austin,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 

Autrey,  James  L.  Mentioned 798, 868 

Avendain  Brothers.  Mentioned 864 

Azalea,  Schooner.  Mentioned 255 

Baby,  Alexander  J.  Mentioned 485 

Bache,  Hartman.  Mentioned 229 

Bache,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 704 

Bacon,  Francis.  Mentioned 


166 

Badeau,  Adam.  Mentioned 146, 160 

Badger,  Frederick  M.  Mentioned 91 

Bailey,  Henry.  Mentioned 79 

Bailey,  J.  E.  Mentioned 38 

Bailey,  Robert.  Mentioned 481 

Bailey,  Theodorus.  Mentioned 511, 516 

Baird,  Absalom.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Baker,  Judge.  Mentioned 334 

Baker,  Judge.  Mentioned 560 

Baker,  S.  D.  Mentioned..... 132 

Baldwin,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 508 

Baltic,  Steamer.  Mentioned 180,186,187 

Bankhead,  J.  P.  Mentioned 124,125 

Banks,  E.  A.  Mentioned 574 

Barmode,  Captain.  Mentioned 197 

Barnard,  Ephraim.  Mentioned 9 

Barnard,  J.  G. 

Correspondence  with  Army  Headquarters 227. 684, 685, 691 

Mentioned 235 


INDEX. 


899 


Page. 

Barnes,  Dixon. 

Mentioned 24, 26, 6G,  C7, 69-71 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 72 

Barnes,  J.  S.  Mentioned 83,219 

Barnes,  J.  T.  M.  Mentioned  734 

Barnwell  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  February  10,  1862.  Reports  of 

Dimock,  Gordon  Z 88 


Stevens,  Isaac  I 


88 


Barnwell,  John  G.  Mentioned 16, 17, 76, 368 

Barnwell,  O.  Mentioned 36, 37 

Barnwell,  Robert.  Mentioned 


91 

Barrancas,  Fort,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  January  1,  1862.  Reports  of 

Bragg,  Braxton 497 

Brown,  Harvey 495 

Barringer, . Mentioned 625,  627 

Barrow,  Robert  J.  Mentioned 734 

Bartlett,  Frank  L.  Mentioned 837 

Barton,  William  B.  Mentioned 55 

Batchelor,  S.  S.  Mentioned 494,495 

Bates,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned i 116 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Arsenal  and  barracks  at.  Communications  from 

Lovell,  Mansfield 885 

887 


22 

22 

548 

78 

331 


War  Department,  C.  S 

Baya,  H.  T. 

Mentioned 

Report  relative  to  subsistence  stores  for  Forts  Beauregard  and  Walker,  S.  C 

Baylor,  Eugene  W.  Mentioned 

Baynard,  Rev.  Mr.  Mentioned 

Baynard,  Joseph.  Mentioned 

Baynard,  W.  G.  Mentioned 79, 81 

Bean  & Sons.  Mentioned 625 

Beanmiller, . Mentioned 625 

Beard,  Oliver  T. 

Correspondence  with  Egbert  L.  Viele 261 

Mentioned 112, 141, 147, 150-153, 159, 245 

Reports  of  • 

Saint  Augustine  Creek,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  near  the  mouth  of,  March 

28,  1862 

Wright  River,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  to,  February  6,  1862 
Beard,  W.  K. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  Jones 

Mentioned 

Beasly,  Stephen  T.  Mentioned 

Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Expedition  to,  December  6-7,  1861. 

Occurrences  at,  November  7-8,  1861. 

Robertson,  Henry  C 

Tuomey,  John 

Beauregard,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Beauregard,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  November  7,  1861 

Casualties,  Confederate  forces 

Communications  from  Roswell  S.  Ripley 

Reports  of 

Drayton,  Thomas  F 

Dunovant,  R.  G.  M 


112 

85 


843,849,859 

848, 849, 856-858, 874, 891-893 
123 


(See  Fort  Boyal  Ferry,  S.  C.) 
Reports  of 


29 

29 

29 

12 

13 

6 

23 


900 


INDEX. 


Page- 

Beauregard,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  Nov.  7, 1861 — Continued. 
Reports  of 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 27 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 3, 5 

Beauregard,  G.  T. 

Assignments  to  command.  (See  Note,  p.  1.) 

Correspondence  with 

Bragg,  Braxton 836 

Lovell,  Mansfield 647,648,651,889 

Mentioned 1, 18, 363, 432, 433, 507, 

511, 513, 561, 563, 565, 567, 572, 600, 624, 637, 645, 647, 649, 652, 653, 685, 
723, 828, 830, 834, 835, 837, 847, 854, 872, 877, 880, 881, 884, 885,  887, 888 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 600-602 

Beauregard,  R.  T.  Mentioned 363 

Becker,  Julius.  Mentioned 477 

Bedel,  John.  Mentioned .' 98-100 

Bedon,  Josiah. 

Mentioned 13, 14, 16, 17 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Walker,  S.  C.,  November  7,  1861 20 

Beeler,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 475,477 

Beggs,  James.  Mentioned 575,609 

Belger,  James  A.  Mentioned 184 

BeU,  Major.  Mentioned 517, 568, 570, 616 

Bell,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 704,723 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Benjamin  F,  Butler.) 


Bell,  T.  I.  Mentioned 24,27 

Bell,  Louis. 


Correspondence  with  Horatio  G.  Wright 

Mentioned 

Belle  Algerine,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 

Belvidere,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Ben  De  Ford,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Benezet,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Benham,  H.  W. 

Assignments  to  command 

Correspondence  with 

DuPont,  S.  F 

Fellows,  Enoch  Q 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 

Hunter,  David 

Viele,  Egbert  L 

Wright,  Horatio  G 

Mentioned 

Reports  of  bombardment  and  capture  of  Fort 


129,255 

256 

527,529,536,538,612 

3, 124, 129, 130, 179, 186, 244 

96, 123, 149, 180, 193, 194, 244, 388 
356 

258 


262,265 

265,266 

139,259 

139,140 

259-261,264,265 

127 

124, 130, 134, 156, 158-160, 258, 260 
Pulaski,  Ga.,  April  10-11, 


1862  135,140 

Benham,  S.  N.  Mentioned 138 

Benjamin,  Judah  P.  Mentioned 85, 288, 291, 


296, 298, 300, 304, 305, 310, 347, 376, 379, 400, 404, 406, 416, 563, 589,  619, 
654,  655,  662, 747, 750, 760, 764, 767, 768, 781, 804, 811, 812-814, 869, 874 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S.,  also  State  Depart- 
ment, C.  S.) 


Bennett  & Surges.  Mentioned 560,575,576,584,599 

Benochi,  Mr.  Mentioned 808 


INDEX. 


901 


Page. 

Bernard,  Simon.  Mentioned 601 

Berry,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 7, 9 

Bermuda,  Steamer.  Mentioned 283 

Berwick  Bay,  La.  Defense  of.  Communication  from  John  L.  Lewis 736 

Betts,  C.  B.  Mentioned 24,27 

Bibb,  U.  S.  S.  (Coast  Surrey.)  Mentioned 699,701,702 

Bienville,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 512, 557, 604, 605 

Bienville,  U.  S.  Transport.  Mentioned 192 

Bldwell,  David  D.  Mentioned 172 

Biloxi  and  Pass  Christian,  Miss.  Affairs  at,  April  3-4,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 707 

Strong,  George  C 707 

Orders,  congratulatory.  (Butler.) 709 

Report  of  Mansfield  Lovell 502 

Biloxi,  Miss.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 707 

Strong,  George  C 707 

Bird,  D.  B.  Mentioned Ill 

Bird,  W.  C.  Mentioned 858 

Bisbee,  H.,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  Horatio  G.  Wright 130 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Femandina,  Fla.,  April  10,  1862 132 

Bischoff,  N.  Mentioned 15 

Bishop,  A.  B.  Mentioned 117 

Bishop,  W.  P.  Mentioned 117 

Black  Prince,  Ship.  Mentioned 464 

Black,  John  L.  Mentioned 329,336,360 

Black,  Thomas. 

Mentioned’ 388-390 

Statement  of 388 

Black,  William.  Mentioned 451 

Blake,  F.  B.  Mentioned 437 

Blake,  Walter.  Mentioned 324,  353 

Blow,  H.  L.  Mentioned 552 

Bluffton,  S.  C.  Operations  near,  March  20-24,  1862.* 

Communication  from  John  C.  Pemberton 108-111 

Reports  of 

Drayton,  Thomas  F 103, 104 

.Tackson,  John  H 101 

Tracy,  Carlos 106 

Willcoxon,  John  B 104-106 

Blunt,  Matthew  M. 

Mentioned 470, 471, 473-475, 497 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about  Pensacola,  Fla.,  Novem- 
ber 22-23,  1861 487 

Boardman,  F.  A.  Mentioned 723 

Bogart,  Mr.  Mentioned 816 

Boggs,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 701 

Boggs,  William  R.  Mentioned 459, 492, 742, 7.52, 757, 806, 816 

Bomar,  John  E.  Mentioned 118 

Bond,  R.  C.  Mentioned 532,552 

Bond,  Thomas  R.  Mentioned 299 


’ Includes  affairs  at  Buckingham  and  Hunting  Island,  S.  C. 


902 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Bookter,  E.  F.  Mentioned 74 

Borden,  Alonzo.  Mentioned 97 

Bostick,  Edward.  Mentioned 37, 38 

Boston,  Steamer.  Mentioned 54,123,221,238,239,244,262 

Boutelle,  C.  A.  Mentioned 4, 12, 96, 388, 699, 701, 702 

Bowen,  Robert  J.  Mentioned 603 

Bowen,  W.  L.  L. 

Correspondence  with  Jolin  B.  Grayson 294 

Mentioned 294 

Bowman,  James  W.  Mentioned .* 132 

Box,  Mr.  Mentioned 375 

Boyle,  W.  A.  Mentioned 17,20,21 

Bradbury,  Dr.  Mentioned 534,549 

Braddock’s  Point,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  November  10-11,  1861.  Eeport  of 

Quincy  A.  Gillmore 31 

Bradford,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 825, 847, 850 

Bradford,  Richard.  Mentioned 299, 448, 463 

Bradley,  Theodore.  Mentioned 497 

Bragg,  Braxton. 

Assignments  to  command 751, 752, 836, 838, 867 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPe  Office,  C.  S.  A 755, 

757,  758,  761,  764,  766-768,  771,  782,  784,  787,  789,  790,  793,  807,  820 

Beauregard,  G.  T 836 

Brown,  Harvey 670, 671 

Jones,  Samuel 822,824,835,837-840,852,854,856,857,861,862,866 

Lovell,  Mansfield 643 

War  Department,  C.  S 376, 377, 744, 758, 761, 762, 

773,  777,  778,  788,  794,  797,  802,  803,  806,  809, 823, 824, 826-829, 834, 894 

Withers,  Jones  M 779 

810 

Mentioned 127,288,291, 

295,  297,  298,  301,  325,  354,  355,  377, 437, 443, 496, 560, 563, 645, 647, 665, 
669,  704,  725,  750-752, 761,  762,  764,  780,  787,  791, 792, 796, 799, 800, 819, 
822,  823,  825,  836,  838, 844,  848,  852,  853,  863,  865,  874, 880, 881, 891,  892 
Orders,  congratulatory. 

Action  on  Santa  Kosa  Island,  Fla.,  October  9,  1861 . 460 

Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about  Pensacola,  Fla.,  November 
22-23,  1861 494' 


Eeports  of 

Andracita,  British  Schooner.  Contest  over,  on  the  coast  of  Alabama, 


January  20,  1862 498 

Barrancas,  Fort,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  January  1,  1862 497 

McEee,  Fort,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  January  1,  1862 497 

Pensacola,  Fla. 

Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November  22-23, 1861 . . 488, 489 

Descent  on  navy-yard  at,  September  14,  1861 438 

Santa  Eosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9,  1861 458, 459 

Staff.  Announcements  of 752, 816 

Branch,  John  L. 

Mentioned 39,351 

Eeport  of  evacuation  of  Eockville,  S.  C.,  by  Confederates,  December  17, 1861 . 40 

Brannan,  J.  M. 

Assignments  to  command 218, 258 

Mentioned 218, 258 


INDEX. 


903 


* Pago. 

Breaux,  G,  A.  Mentioned 837 

Brenholts,  Thomas  S. 

Correspondence  with  Isaac!.  Stevens 197 

Mentioned 49, 58, 199, 206 

Eeport  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 59 

Brent,  Thomas  W. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  Jones 846 

Mentioned 463 

Brickell,  D.  W. 

Mentioned 575, 630, 631 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 575-578 

Bridges,  William  M. 

Mentioned 534, 548, 587 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 587 

Brien,  J. 

Mentioned 592 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 592 

Brock,  Samuel.  Report  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 538 

Brooklyn,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 

Brooks,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 146,160 

Brosenham,  Mr.  Mentioned 659 

B*-own,  Harvey. 

Assignments  to  command 694 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 672,673 

Army  Headquarters 665-669 

Bragg,  Braxton 670,671 

McKean,  William  W 669 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 667 

Mentioned 447, 451, 453, 454, 456, 457, 666, 672, 673, 675, 690, 694, 771 

Reports  of 

Barrancas,  Fort,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  January  1,  1862 495 

McRee,  Fort,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  January  1,  1862 495 

Pensacola,  Fla. 

Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  Nov.  22-23,  1861..  469, 471, 472 

Descent  on  navy-yard  at,  September  14,  1861 437 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  at,  October  9,  1861 438, 439, 442, 443, 446 

Brown,  J.  N.  Mentioned 70 

Brown,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 283,  302,305-307, 

310, 320, 340,  346, 351, 381,  385, 398,  400,  418,  419, 421,  424,  428, 431,  878 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Georgia,  Governor  of 

Brown,  Simeon  H.  Mentioned 59 

Brown,  William  A.  Mentioned 91 

Browne,  A.  G.,  jr.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Massachusetts,  Governor  of.) 

Bruce,  R.  J.  Mentioned 548 

Bruggermann,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 16 

Bryant,  James.  Mentioned 21 

Brylan,  James  D.  Mentioned 888 

Buchanan,  Franklin.  Mentioned 327 

Buchanan,  Thomas  McK.  Mentioned 465,  466 

Buchel,  A.  Mentioned 833 

Buckingham,  S.  C.  Affair  at,  March,  1862.  {iieeBlvffton,  S.  C.  Operations  near, 

March  20-24,  1862.) 

Buckingham,  William  A.  Mentioned 168,  169 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Connecticut,  Governor  of.) 


904 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Buckman,  Thomas  E.  Mentioned 296,315 

Budd,  T.  G.  Eeport  of  evacuation  of  Eockville,  S.  C.,by  Confederates, 

December  17,  1861 40 

Budd,  Thomas  A.  Mentioned Ill 

Budd,  William.  Mentioned 50,  83,  124 

Buell,  Don  Carlos.  Mentioned 505,  833 

Buisson,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 553,  554,  595 

Buist,  George.  Mentioned 6 

Bujac  65:  Bennett.  Mentioned 576,  577,  584 

Bullion,  Ship.  Mentioned 675 

Bull  River,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  up,  February  23-26,  1862.  Report  of  Isaac 

I.  Stevens 91 

Bull,  Simon  K.  Mentioned 412 

Burdell,  James.  Mentioned 476 

Burger,  W.  L.  M.  Mentioned • 160 

Burgoyne,  Sir  John.  Mentioned 161 

Burke,  John  H.  Mentioned 854 

Burke,  Somerville.  Mentioned 534,549,766,767 

Burket,  Daniel  F.  Mentioned 197 

Burns,  Mr.  Mentioned 277 

Burnside,  A.  E.  Mentioned 224,  228,  263,  371,  388,  678,  692,  809 

Burtheh,  Victor.  Mentioned 858 

Butler  (Vessel).  Mentioned 715 

Butler,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 553 

Butler,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 467,  689,  693 

Butler,  Benjamin  F. 

Assignments  to  command 667,  695,  704 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-Generahs  Office,  U.  S.  A 673,  681 

Army  Headquarters 673,  681,  685,  694,  699 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 712 

Biloxi,  Miss.,  Mayor  of 707 

Farragut,  David  G 706,713 

Fulton,  Captain 702 

Jones,  E.  F 716 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Mayor  of,  et  al 723 

Phelps,  J.  W 675,  723 

Shepley,  George  F 714,  716 

State  Department,  U.  S 723 

Strong,  George  C 707 

War  Department,  U.  S 673,  677,  686,  708,  710 

Instructions  of  George  B.  McClellan  to.  New  Orleans,  La — 694 

Itinerary  of  voyage  of  steamer  Mississippi  to  Ship  Island,  Miss 699 

Mentioned 173,  174,  176,  601,667,  669,  673, 

677, 678,  681,  682,  684,  687,  688,  696,  699-701,  704,  707,  708,  711, 824,  832 

Proclamation  to  people  of  New  Orleans 717 

Reports  of 

New  Orleans,  La.  Operations  against,  April  18-May  1,  1862 503,506 

Ship  Island,  Miss. 

Arrival  at,  of  expedition  to 465 

Departure  of  expedition  to 463 

Staff.  Announcements  of 667, 704 

Suggestions  of.  New  Orleans,  La 687 

Butler  Expedition.  (See  Neiv  Orleans,  La.) 


INDEX. 


905 


Page. 

180,190 

709 

23,30 

GOG, 817, 833, 843 

372 

IG 

116 


Cahawba,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Cahill,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 

Caldwell,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Calhoun,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Calhoun,  W.  R.  Mentioned 

Cameron,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 

Cameron,  Nicholas.  Mentioned 

Cameron,  Simon.  Mentioned 169, 180, 187, 673, 677, 678 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S.) 

Cameron,  Westley.  Mentioned 116 

Campbell,  Anson  B.  Mentioned 59,61 

Campbell,  G.  W.  Mentioned... G44 

Campbell,  H.  W.  Mentioned 72 

Campbell,  John.  Mentioned 443,471,497 

Campbell,  Samuel.  Mentioned 116 

Campbell,  Thomas.  Mentioned 166 

Canady,  D.  S. 

Mentioned 14,16,17 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Walker,  S.  C.,  November  7,  1861 21 

Capers,  W.  C. 

Mentioned 574, 593 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 593 

Capron,  James  P.  Mentioned 476 

Carlsen,  F.  Mentioned 15 

Carolina,  Steamer.  Mentioned 400 

Carondelet,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 502,512,557,615 

Carr,  Captain.  Mentioned \ 736, 737 

Carter,  W.  J.  Mentioned 70 

Cartwright,  S.  A.  Mentioned 781 

Cary . Mentioned 625 

Cary  [Curry],  Samuel.  Mentioned.. 79,114 

Caulkins,  Captain.  Mentioned 570 

Cayuga,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 

Cecelia  (Vessel).  Mentioned 886 

Cedar  Keysj  Fla.  Naval  descent  upon,  January  16,  1862.  Reports  of  J.  H. 

Trapier 75,76 

Chalfin,  Samuel  F. 

Mentioned 470,473,475,497 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about  Pensacola,  Fla.,  Novem- 
ber 22-23,  1861 483 

Chalmers,  James  R.  Mentioned 459-461, 725, 779, 798, 824 

Chambers,  William  E.  Mentioned Ill 

Chapman,  W.  A.  Mentioned 116 

Charles  Morgan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 597,651,809 

Charleston,  S.  C. 

Martial  law 313,318 

Operations  against  (proposed).  Communications  from 

Barnard,  J.  G 227 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 212 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 211 

Woodbury,  D.  P 235 

Ripley,  Roswell  S.  Directed  to  assume  charge  of  defenses  of 323 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

Ingraham,  D.  N.,  assigned  to  duty  in 322 


906 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. — Continued. 

Sinking  of  stone  fleets  at  entrance  of,  December  20,  18G1,  and  January  20, 


1862.  Eeports  of 

Lee,  Eobert  E 42 

Wagner,  Thomas  M 43 

Chase,  Ansel.  Mentioned 132 

Chase,  Anthony.  Mentioned 659 

Chase,  S.  P.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Treasury  Department,  U.  S. 

Chase,  William  H.  Mentioned 601,685 

Chesnut,  James,  jr.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina,  Executive 
Council  of.) 

Cheves,  L.  Mentioned 13,17 

Chichester,  Captain.  Mentioned 389 

Chilcutt,  William  H.  Mentioned 476 

Childs,  F.  L,  Mentioned 270, 387, 390 

Chisolm,  Robert.  Mentioned 24,29 

Chisolm’s  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  December  17,  1861.  Eeport  of  Isaac  I. 

Stevens 42 

Choate,  Francis  C.  Mentioned 486 

Christ,  B.  C. 

Correspondence  with  Isaac  I.  Stevens 206,207 

Mentioned 48, 50, 205 

Eeport  of  engagement  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 57 

Church,  Lucius  A.  Mentioned 300 

Claghorn,  Joseph  S.  Correspondence  withE.  M.  Cuyler 277 

Clancy,  John.  Mentioned 484 

Clark,  George.  Mentioned y. 837 

Clark,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 269,  335 

Clark,  James.  Mentioned 449 

Clark,  John.  Mentioned 725 

Clarke,  H.  C.  Mentioned 704 

Clarke,  John.  Mentioned 625,627,628 

Clayton,  H.  D.  Mentioned 492 

Clinch,  Duncan  L.  Mentioned 272,273 

Clinch,  Henry  A. 

Mentioned 574,586 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La...  586,587 

Clifton,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 508,509 

Cliugman,  T.  L.  Mentioned 324 

Closson,  Henry  W. 

Mentioned 471, 473-476, 497, 499 

Eeport  of  reconnaissance  on  Santa  Eosa  Island,  March  27-31,  1862 500 

Clouet,  Captain.  Mentioned 531,675 

Coatzacoalcos,  Steamer.  Mentioned 180 

Cockroft,  Mr.  Mentioned 29 

Cogswell,  William  S. 

Mentioned 49, 51, 63-65 

Eeports  of  engagement  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862  61,62 

Colburn,  A.  V.  Mentioned 685 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Arnty  Headquarters.) 

Colcock,  C.  J. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  F.  Drayton 330, 331 

Mentioned 329 

Coleman,  Michael.  Mentioned 449 


INDEX. 


9.07 


rage. 

CoU,  H.  L.  Mentioned 630 

Colorado,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 437, 444,  GG6,  CG9 

Colquitt,  P.  H. 

Assignments  to  command 433 

Mentioned 433, 4:55 

Colson,  J amea.  Mentioned 21 

Columbus,  Ky.  Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Lovell  Mansfield 1 825 

War  Department,  C.  S 823,824,827 

Conant,  G.  H.  Mentioned 701,713 

Confederate  Congress.  Acts  making  appropriation,  etc.,  for  floating  defenses 

Western  Rivers 812, 813 

Confederate  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Beauregard,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment,  November  7,  18G1 12 

Jackson,  Fort,  La.  Bombardment  of,  April  18-25,  18G2 550 

Port  Royal  Ferry,  Coosaw  River,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 75 

Pulaski,  Fort,  Ga.  Bombardment  of,  April  10-11,  1862 166 

Saint  Philip,  Fort,  La.  Bombardment  of,  April  18-25,  1862 550 

Walker,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  November  7,  1861 12 


Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries : Semmes,  620. 

CsbYSblrj— Regiments : 15th,  835. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 1st,*  806, 819, 835, 868, 875. 
Marines— 492, 494, 495, 772, 819. 

Regulars,  detachment  of — 551, 552. 

Organization  of.  Returns  of 


Army  of  Mobile,  February  1,  1862 819 

Army  of  Pensacola,  February  1,  1862.. 819 

Statement  of  number  of,  from  South  Carolina,  up  to  Feb.  20,  1862 404, 405 

Strength  of.  Returns  of. 

Alabama  and  West  Florida,  Department  of. 

Mobile,  Army  of. 

December  2,  1861 772 

February  1,  1862 819 

March  31,  1862..... 868 

Pensacola,  Army  of. 

September  1,  1861  725 

October  1,  1861 750 

November  1, 1861 762 

January  1,  1862 792 

February  1,  1862 819 

Department  No.  1.  January  31,  1862  819 

Middle  and  Eastern  Florida,  Department  of. 

December,  1861 364 

January,  1862 371 

South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  Department  of. 

September,  1861  (South  Carolina) 285 

September,  1861  (District  of  Savannah) 286 

October,  1861  (Department  of  Georgia) 304,  305 

November  19,  1861  (South  Carolina) 326 

December,  1861  (First  District  South  Carolina) 360 


Connecticut,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S . 168, 169, 172 


Originally  36tli  Georgia  Infantry. 


908 


INDEX. 


Connecticut  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  {Independent)  : 1st,  237. 

CaTalry — 688. 

Infantry— /?e5r//we/7fs ; 5th,  679 ; 6th,  141, 172, 180, 185, 237 ; 7th,  30, 32, 138, 
146, 151,  152, 154, 172, 180, 185, 237  ; 9th,  463-465,  469,  506, 677, 682, 687, 694, 
696,705-709;  12th,  506,508,509,681-683,687,694,696,705,706,708;  13th, 


687,694,706, 707, 709,716. 

Connelly,  James.  Mentioned 449 

Connerty,  J ohn.  Mentioned 476 

Connor,  Coxswain.  Mentioned 60,61 

Conoley,  John  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Jones,  Samuel 844 

Jones,  Thomas  M 665 

Mentioned 662, 848, 849, 858 


Conrad,  C.  M. 

Mentioned 622, 623 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 622-625 

Conroy,  Thomas.  Mentioned— - 477 

Constitution,  Steamer.  Mentioned 218, 

463-468, 676, 677, 679, 681-683, 688, 689, 691, 698, 709 

Cook,  J.  B.  Mentioned 562 

Cooke  & Bro.  Mentioned 575,634 


Cooke,  P.  W.  C. 


Mentioned 622, 633 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La...  633-635 

Cooper,  E.  Reports  of  bombardment  of,  and  casualties  at.  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga., 

April  10-11, 1862 165, 166 

Cooper,  George  E.  Mentioned 175,178,264 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 273, 276, 361, 558, 

567,  571,  589,  629,  631,  639,  652,  759,  763,  794, 817, 822, 857, 873, 874, 881 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraVs  Office,  C.  S.  A. ) 

Cooper,  Theodore.  Mentioned 475 

Corcoran,  James.  Mentioned 449 

Cornay,  F.  O.  Mentioned 548 

Cornelius,  J ames  E.  Mentioned 59 

Cornelius,  William  H.  Mentioned 97 

Corypheus,  Yacht.  Mentioned 596 

Cosgrove.  Mentioned 625 

Cosmopolitan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 124,130,221,253,257 

Cottrell,  Abraham.  Mentioned 51,52 

Cottrill,  Captain.  Mentioned 499 

Court  of  Inquiry.  Pall  of  New  Orleans,  La.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 571, 596, 628, 629, 643 

Mitchell,  J.  K 618 

Sinclair,  Arthur 618 

Tift,  A.  F 631 

Tift,  Nelson 631 

(For  proceedings,  etc.,  see  New  Orleans,  La.) 

Coy,  Abr.  D.  Mentioned 116 

Craven,  John  J.  Mentioned 166 

Crawford,  J.  T.  Mentioned 123 

Crawley,  William  J.  Mentioned 117,118 

Creighton,  John.  Mentioned 447,457 

Crews,  I.  E.  Mentioned 29 


INDEX. 


909 


Page. 

Crews,  T.  Mentioned 29 

Crispin,  Silas.  Mentioned 170 

Crittenden,  George  B.  Mentioned 817 

Croft,  Ed.  Mentioned 70 

Cronin,  Janies.  Mentioned - 476 

Crusader,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 123 

Cry tzer,  Robert.  Mentioned - — - - 116 

Cummin  ga,  Henry.  Mentioned 385 

Cummings,  R.  C.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  Orleans,  La.,  Committee 
of  Safety.) 

Cunningham^  Colonel.  Mentioned 315 

Cunningham,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 758 

Cushing,  J.  W.  Mentioned 704 

Cuthbert,  W.  H.  Mentioned 26 

Cuyler,  R.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Claghorn,  Joseph  S 277 

Harden,  William  D 362 

Mentioned - 367, 368, 375, 419 

Dahlgren,  C.  G.  Mentioned 730,742,748 

Dale,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned 123,263,267 

Dancy,  F.  L.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Florida,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.  of.) 

Daniel  Webster,  Steamer.  Mentioned - 190 

Dannenfelser,  Mr.  Mentioned 122 

Davis,  Captain.  Mentioned 574 

Davis,  Captain.  Mentioned 612 

Davis,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 83,84,151 

Davis,  Jefferson. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 630 

Alabama,  Governor  of 872 

Florida,  Governor  of 290, 300, 325, 341, 426, 429 

Georgia,  Governor  of 872 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  Jos6 278 

Lee,  Robert  E 400 

Louisiana,  Governor  of ....... . 657, 740, 746, 830, 856, 869, 872, 878, 883, 886, 888 

Lovell,  Mansfield 645,760,883 

McRae,  C.  J 866 

McRae,  John  J 781 

Mississippi,  Governor  of 780, 792, 872 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 629, 655, 832, 844, 893 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Committee  of  Safety 831, 846 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Mayor  of. 884 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 318, 334, 366, 372, 435, 872 

War  Department,  C.  S 554,655,657,888 

Mentioned 268, 269, 271-273, 288, 292, 298, 299, 304, 308, 310, 320, 334, 355, 

358, 363, 404, 412, 429, 433, 555, 558, 562, 571, 572, 577, 578, 589, 622-624, 
628, 629, 653, 655, 663, 727, 736, 740, 741, 747, 757, 759, 760, 763, 766, 768, 
770, 771, 773, 781, 786-789, 794-798, 802, 803, 806, 807, 811-813, 815, 816, 
823,  824,  828, 829, 842, 846, 853, 854, 857, 865, 866, 877, 887, 889, 891-893 
Messages  to  Conffederate  Congress  transmitting 

Correspondence  between  Governor  of  Louisiana  and  Mansfield  Lovell. . 654 

Proceedings  of  Court  of  Inquiry.  Capture  of  New  Orleans,  La 554 

Davis,  Joseph.  Mentioned 774, 792, 807, 815 


910 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Davis,  Kinsler.  Mentioned 116 

Davis,  R.  S.  Mentioned 704 

Davis,  William  G.  M. 

Correspondence  with  Horatio  G.  Wright 127 

Mentioned 131, 132, 290, 342, 390, 404, 408, 411, 418, 427 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Fernandina,  Fla.,  April  10,  1862 133 

Dawson,  E.  I.  Mentioned 22 

Dawson,  Matthew  M.  Mentioned 59 

Deas,  George.  Correspondence  with  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.^s  Office,  C.  S.  A 341 

Deason,  J.  B.  Mentioned 502 

De  Bleeckere,  Aim^.  Mentioned 485 

Defiance,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 522, 529, 541, 542, 603, 607, 612, 613 

Dekle,  G.  C.  Mentioned 95 

Delafield,  Richard.  Mentioned jt 601 

Delaney,  James  C.  Mentioned 854 

Delleney,  J.  W.  Mentioned 73 

De  Meyers,  Antoine.  Mentioned 485 

Doming,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 508, 509, 722 

Denham,  William.  Mentioned 299 

Dennison,  W.  Mentioned 163 

Department,  No.  1. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Bragg,  Braxton 790,  807 

Davis,  Jefferson 746, 832, 846, 878, 883, 886, 888 

Lee,  Robert  E 881, 882 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 740-742, 747, 752, 765, 773, 791, 830, 878 

Lovell,  Mansfield 753,754,760,761,764, 

765,  769,  774,  777,  778, 781,  783,  786,  787, 790,  791,804,  807, 809,  813,  816, 
825,  828,  832,  841,  847,  850,  852,  864,  867,  868,  871,  876-879,  882,  883,  889 

Mississippi,  Ordnance  Officer  of 783 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 728,782,844 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Committee  of  Safety 831 

Sonl^,  Pierre 887 

Twiggs,  David  E 729, 738, 743, 747, 750 

War  Department,  C.  S . .742, 744, 745, 747, 749, 751, 752, 754, 758, 764, 765, 767, 783, 
785, 791,  808, 815,  817,  822,  823, 824,  829, 863,  866,  867,  870, '873,  882, 883 

Lovell,  Mansfield,  assigned  to  command 643 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  10,  857 ; No.  11,  860. 

Strength  of  Confederate  troops  in,  January  31,  1862 819 

Twiggs,  David  E.,  relieved  from  command 643 

De  Saussure,  William  D. 

Mentioned 9 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Walker,  S.  C.,  November  7, 1861 17 

De  Saussure,  Wilmot  G.  Mentioned 326, 336, 351 

De  Soto,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 467,468 

De  Treville,  Richard. 

Correspondence  with  Nathan  G.  Evans 383 

Mentioned 359, 383 

Devereux,  J.  G.  Mentioned 574,587,734 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  David  E.  Twiggs.) 

Devereux,  W.  H.  [J.  G.] 

Mentioned 594 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 594, 595 

Dial,  William  H.  Mentioned 301 


INDEX. 


911 


Page. 

Dil worth,  W.  S. 

Assignments  to  command 413 

Correspondence  with 

Pemberton,  John  C 424 

Smith,  E.  S 503 

War  Department,  C.  S 289,290,315 

Mentioned 256, 294, 300,  301, 328, 332, 413, 418, 423, 425, 502 

Reports  of 


Smyrna,  Fla.  Affair  at,  March  23,  1862 Ill 

Dimock,  Gordon  Z. 

Mentioned 88 

Report  of  skirmish  on  Barnwell  Island,  S.  C.,  February  10,  1862 88 

Dix,  John  A. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant-General’s  Ofl&ce,  U.  S.  A 218 

Mentioned 686 

Dixon,  J.  K.  Mentioned 526, 532, 551, 552, 592 

Dobie,  James  H.  Mentioned 441, 444-446, 449, 451, 452 

Dodge,  John  A.  Mentioned 497 

Dole,  W.  R.  Mentioned 138, 258 

Donelson,  Daniel  S. 

Assignments  to  command - 349, 433 

Correspondence  with 

Jones,  James 71 

Lee,  Robert  E 346 

Pemberton,  John  C 109-111 

Mentioned 66, 67, 75, 340, 341, 349, 414, 419, 432, 433 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 68 

Doolittle,  A.  O.  Mentioned 258 

Doublon,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 636 

Dougherty,  William.  Mentioned 449 

Douglass,  Mr.  Mentioned 769 

Douglass,  Marcellus.  Mentioned 123 

Dow,  Neal.  Mentioned 699,701 

Dowd,  William  F.  Mentioned 403, 411, 767 

Doyle,  George  W.  Mentioned 482 

Doyle,  Richard  N.  Mentioned 91 

Drayton,  J.  E.  Mentioned 8,13 

Drayton,  Percival.  Mentioned 210,238,244 

Drayton,  Thomas  F. 

Assignments  to  command 345 

Correspondence  with 

Colcock,  C.  J 330,331 

Lee,  Robert  E 329, 331, 373, 374 

Pemberton,  John  C 110, 419, 428 

War  Department  C.  S 306 

Mentioned 3, 17, 29, 

106, 272, 309-312, 314, 323, 324, 331, 345, 375, 414, 555, 556, 581, 600, 606 

Reports  of 

Beauregard,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  November  7, 

1861 6 

Bluffton,  S.  C.  Operations  near,  March  20-24,  1862,  including  affairs 

at  Buckingham  and  Hunting  Island,  S.  C 103, 104 

Walker,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  November  7,  1861.  6 


912 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Drew,  Jeremiah  D.  Mentioned 130, 193 

Drew,  Thomas.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Massachusetts,  Governor  of.) 

Driscoll,  John  J.  Mentioned 482 

Drum,  William  A.  Mentioned 702 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M.  Mentioned 508, 509, 688, 722 

Duer,  Edward  A.  Mentioned 497 

Duffy,  Patrick,  Mentioned 448 

Dufour,  Cyprian.  Mentioned 858 

Dunbar,  Charles  P.  Mentioned 97 

Duncan,  James  M.  Mentioned 154 

Duncan,  Johnson  K. 

Address  to  soldiers  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  La 544 

Correspondence  with  David  E.  Twiggs 730 

Mentioned 510-512, 514, 517, 518, 520, 537, 544, 545, 559, 563, 564, 

565, 567, 569-571, 574, 579, 587, 588, 591, 594, 603, 604, 607, 613, 641, 647, 
650,  728,  730, 734, 735, 747, 750, 760, 766, 770, 787, 790, 795, 796, 878, 884 

Reports  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 521, 535, 539, 540, 542 

Duncan,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned 449 

Duncan,  W.  P.  Mentioned 513 

Dunham,  Captain.  Mentioned 298 

Dunn,  ]\Ir.  Mentioned 807 

Dunovant,  R.  G.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Robert  E 343, 344 

Pemberton,  John  C 110 

Mentioned 7, 11, 12, 27, 28, 30, 67, 268, 312, 341 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Beauregard,  S.  C.,  November  7,  1861 23 

Dupierre,  Captain.  Mentioned 568 

DuPont,  Samuel  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  H.  W 262, 265 

Hunter,  David 266 

Rodgers,  C.  R.  P 65 

Mentioned 3, 6, 45-47, 66, 128, 135-137, 151, 168, 

181,  184,  188,  190,202,  206-211,  219,  226,  238,239,243,248,250,253,388 

Duryea,  Colonel.  Mentioned 372,873 

Duryea,  Richard  C 

Mentioned 441, 445, 450, 454, 455, 470, 471, 473-475, 497 

Reports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla.  Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November 

22-23,  1861 - 476 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9,  1861 452 

Eason,  T.  D.  Mentioned 361 

Ea'sterbrook,  J.  E.  Mentioned 704 

Eastman,  Franklin.  Mentioned 449 

E.  B.  Hale,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 48, 60, 152 

Echols  [Eccles],  James.  Mentioned 299 

Echols,  William  H.  Mentioned 278,401 

Economist,  Steamer.  Mentioned 863 

Eddings,  Evans.  Mentioned 79 

Eddings,  J.  E.  Mentioned 13 

Edenfield,  J.  A.  Mentioned 28 

Edisto,  Steamer.  Mentioned 10,22 


INDEX. 


913 


Page. 

Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

Alfair  on,  Marcli  29,  1862. 

Communications  from  Nathan  G.  Evans 115 

Reports  of 

Evans,  Nathan  G 113 

Palmer,  F.  G 117 

Salvo,  James 119 

Stevens,  P.  F 115,117,119 

Expedition  to,  January  22-25,  1862. 

Communications  from  Nathan  G.  Evans 78,  81 

Reports  of 

Evans,  Nathan  G 77 

Stevens,  P.  F 78 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces. 

February  11,  1862.  Report  of  Henry  Moore 89 

April  .5,  1862.  Report  of  Enoch  Q.  Fellows 123 

Sketch  of 279 

Edith,  Steamer.  Mentioned 7, 11 

Edwards,  O.  E.  Mentioned 343 

Ela,  Richard.  Mentioned 102 

Elba  Island,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  to,  March  7-11,  1862.  Report  of  John  H. 

Jackson 97 

Elder,  Matthew.  Mentioned 206 

Elford,  C.  J. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 361 

Mentioned 348,  359 

Ellen,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 50,60,83,124 

Elliott,  George.  Mentioned 68 

Elliott,  Ralph.  Mentioned 79,114 

Elliott,  Stephen,  Rev.  Mentioned 26 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr. 

Mentioned 11,23-27,29,36 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Beauregard,  S.  C.,  November  7, 1861 27 

Elliott,  Thomas  R.  S.  Mentioned 11,27,29 

Elliott,  William.  Mentioned 13, 29 

Elliott,  William  St.  George. 

Mentioned 48, 50, 53, 59, 206 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1, 1862  56 

Ellis,  Towson.  Mentioned 492, 752 

Ellis,  William  C.  Mentioned 552 

Ellison,  Francis  B.  Mentioned 469,471 

Elmore,  Captain.  Mentioned 626 

Elmore,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 822 

Ely,  A.  B.  Mentioned 137,138 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  H.  W.  Benham.) 


Ely,  Ralph.  Mentioned 53,91,92,196 

Emery,  Sabine.  Correspondence  with  Thomas  W.  Sherman 196 

Emma,  Steamer.  Mentioned 11,22,29 

Emmons,  George  F.  Mentioned 76 

Empire  City,  Steamer.  Mentioned 179, 189, 221, 244 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Lockett,  S.  H 726, 727, 750 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 753 

War  Department,  C.  S 278,743,745 

58  R R — VOL  VI 


914 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  witli — Continued. 


Warren,  H.  B 728 

Withers,  Jones  M 740 

Ericsson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 180 

Evans,  H.  D.  Mentioned 67,75 

Evans,  James.  Mentioned 114 

Evans,  Nathan  G. 

Assignments  to  command 347 

Correspondence  with 

De  Treville,  Richard 383 

Lee,  Robert  E 78, 354, 359, 382, 386, 394 

Pemberton,  John  C 415,434 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 384 

Stevens,  P.  F 81,115 

Instructions  to  P.  F.  Stevens.  Expedition  to  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  January 

22-25,  1862 81 

Mentioned 115, 334, 347-349, 

353,  357,  358,  360-362, 364, 369, 370, 382, 384, 387, 389, 391-393, 395, 415 
Reports  of,  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

Affair  on,  March  29,  1862  113 

Expedition  to,  January  22-25,  1862  77 

Everett,  Charles.  Mentioned 504,709 

E.  W.  Farley,  Ship.  Mentioned 508, 509. 705, 708, 714 

Ewing,  Steamer.  Mentioned 461,462 

Fago,  William.  Mentioned 736 

Fairbanks,  Acting  Master.  Mentioned 612 

Fairbanks,  Captain.  Mentioned 675 

Fairfax,  A.  B.  Mentioned 348 

Falbin,  I.  E.  Mentioned 28 

Farish,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 736 

Farley,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 299, 454 

Farr,  Major.  Mentioned 324,330 

Farragut,  David  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 711,712 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 706, 713 

Mentioned 504, 533, 543, 544, 570, 601, 610, 708, 711, 713, 715, 624, 884 

Farrand,  Eben. 

Correspondence  with  Navy  Department,  C.  S 893 

Mentioned 891-893 

Farren,  Andy.  Mentioned 116 

Feeney,  John.  Mentioned 484 

Fellows,  Enoch  Q. 

Correspondence  with  H.  W.  Benham 265.266 

Report  of  occupation  of  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  hy  Union  forces,  April  5, 

1862  123 

Fenton,  William  M. 

Mentioned - 48, 50, 58 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1, 1862 53 

Ferguson,  Mr.  Mentioned 194 

Ferguson,  J.  B.  Mentioned 363 

Fernandina,  Fla.  Skirmish  near,  April  10,  1862.  Reports  of 

Bisbee,  H.,  jr 132 

Davis,  William  G.  M 133 


INDEX. 


915 


Page. 

Fernandina,  Fla.  Commanding  OfiBcer.  Correspondence  with  Robert  E.  Lee.  368 
Finegan,  Joseph. 

Assignments  to  command 430, 432 

Mentioned - 303, 429, 430, 432, 884 

Fingal,  Steamer.  Mentioned 318-323 

299 

116 

449 

475 


Finley,  Samuel  G.  Mentioned 

Fisher,  Noah.  Mentioned 

Fitzgibbons,  Edward  B.  Mentioned 
Fitzsimmins,  Thomas.  Mentioned . . 


Flag,  Steamer.  Mentioned 194 

Flewellen,  Edward  A.  Mentioned 825 

Florida,  Steamer.  Mentioned 416, 417, 502, 503, 790, 800, 809, 833, 863, 864, 869 

Florida. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Dil worth,  W.  S 289,315^ 

Florida,  Governor  of 287, 

290,  295,  297,  299,  300,  304,  308,  319,  325,  341,  354,378,402,404,412,426 

Floyd,  R.F 355,378,412 

Georgia,  Governor  of 310 

Grayson,  John  B 276 

Taylor,  H.  R.,  et  al 286 

Trapier,  J.  H 307 

War  Department,  C.  S 292, 295, 296, 304, 328, 334, 398 

Yulee,  D.  L 292 

(See  also  Alabama  and  West  Florida,  Department  of— Confederate— and  South 
Atlantic  Coast.) 

Martial  law 427 

Meeting  and  resolutions  of  citizens  of  Eastern  Florida 251, 252 

Military  departments  embracing 217,248,309 

Operations  in 

Eastern  and  Middle.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 238 

Davis,  Jefferson 429 

Dilworth,  W.  S 503 

Florida,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 303 

Lee,  Robert  E 364,  367, 368, 370, 380, 393, 398-400, 403, 406, 429 

Mickle,  B 356 

Pemberton,  John  C 417 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 248-250 

Trapier,  J.  H 409-411,414,417 

Wright,  Horatio  G 220,221,224,238,239,241,243,253,255-257 

(See  also 

Amelia  Island,  Fla.  Evacuated  by  Confederate  and  occupied  by  Union 
forces,  March  3-4,  1862. 

Cedar  Keys.  Naval  descent  on,  January  16,  1862. 

Fernandina,  Fla.  Skirmish  near,  April  10,  1862. 

Jacksonville,  Fla.  Evacuated  by  Union  troops  April  9, 1862,  and  occu- 
pied by  Union  troops  March  12,  1862. 

Lyman  Dudley,  Sloop.  Seizure  of,  October,  1861. 

Smyrna,  Fla.  Affair  at,  March  23,  1862. 

William  Batty,  Sloop.  Seizure  of , October,  1861.) 

Western.  Communications  from 

Adjutant- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 672,673 

Army  Headquarters 668,672 


916 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Florida — Continued. 

Operations  in 

Western.  Communications  from 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 704,710-712,715 

Bragg,  Braxton 670 

Brown,  Harvey 666, 667, 669-671, 673 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 712 

Farragut,  D.  G 712 

McKean,  William  W 669 

Moore,  Charles  B 666 

(See  also 

Barrancas,  Fort,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  January  1,  1862. 

McBee,  Fort,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  January  1,  1862. 

Pensacola. 

Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November  22-23,  1861. 
Evacuated  by  Confederate  and  occupied  by  Union  forces,  May  9- 
12,  1862. 

Navy-yard  at.  Descent  on,  September  14,  1861. 

United  States  dry-doch  at.  Destruction  of,  September  2,  1861. 

Saint  Andrew’s  Bay.  Affair  at,  April  7,  1862. 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla. 

Action  on,  October  9,  1861. 

Reconnaissance  on,  March  27-31,  1862.) 

Proclamation  to  people  of  East  Florida 251 

Eequisitions  on,  for  troops 371 

Union  sentiment  in 250-252, 300, 426, 666 

Florida,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of.  Correspondence  with  Florida, 

Governor  of 303 

Florida,  Department  of.  (Union.) 

Arnold,  Lewis  G.,  assumes  command 694 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  6,  694. 

Strength  of  Union  troops  in.  Eeturns  of 

October,  1861  672 

December,  1861  675 

Florida,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Anderson,  J.  Patton 299 

Davis,  Jefferson 290, 300, 325, 341, 426, 429 

Florida,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 303 

Floyd,  Eichard  F 355, 378, 412 

Georgia,  Governor  of 304 

Lee,  Eobert  E 393, 399, 429 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 287 

Trapier,  J.  H 307 

War  Department,  C.  S. .295, 297, 299, 304, 308, 319, 328, 334, 354, 378, 402, 404, 412, 878 
Florida  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery- ^affa//o/7s;  Holland’s,*  288,  289,  296,  301-303,  315,  316.  Bat- 
teries: Leon,  409;  Grayson,  364,  371,  409;  Marion,  94,  364,  371,  409; 
Milton,  409,412,413;  Robertson’s,!  819. 

Cavalry — Companies  : Aucilla,  410 ; Magnolia,  410 ; Marianna,  410,  502, 

503;  Marion,  94,  111,  364, 371, 409;  Milton,  410, 413 ; Pickett’s,*  364, 371; 

Saint  John  Rangers,  364,371;  Tallahassee  Guards,  409;  Turner’s,  364, 

371, 410.  Regiments : 1st,  126,  133,  290,  371,  390,  400, 404, 406, 408, 410, 411, 

417, 418, 427. 

♦State  Militia.  t Claimed  for  Alabama. 


INDEX. 


917 


Page. 

Florida  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Infantry— ^atfa//o/7S : 1st  Special,  126,364,371,409.  Regiments:  Ist,  126, 

127, 288, 299, 460, 495, 751, 819, 848, 853, 856-859, 893 ; 2d,  126, 127 ; 3d,  111, 

126, 131, 256, 257, 300,  316,  317,  364,  409,  418 ; 4th,  76,  94, 95, 126, 256, 257, 286, 
288,291,300-302,364,371,409,418  ; 5th,  288,371,409,413;  6th,  413. 

Floyd,  John  B.  Mentioned 340 

Floyd,  Richard  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Florida,  Governor  of 355, 378, 412 

Mickle,  B 356 

Mentioned 302, 326, 354, 355, 378, 393, 411, 412, 426 

Foard,  A.  J.  Mentioned 493, 752 

Folger  8c  Co.  Mentioned 625 

Follen,  G.  A.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  In- 
spector General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 

Fontaine,  Ewd.  Mentioned 783 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mississippi,  Ordnance  Offiiee  of.) 

Foot,  John  C.  Mentioned 88 

Footman,  William  M.  Mentioned 133 

Ford,  Mr.  Mentioned 729 

Forney,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 663, 664, 889 

War  Department,  C.  S 663, 886 

Mentioned 880,881,886 

Forsyth,  John.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mobile,  Ala.,  Mayor  of.) 

Foster,  Dr.  Mentioned 534 

Foster,  James  P.  Mentioned 808 

Foster,  John  G.  Mentioned 232 

Fowler,  D.  H.  Mentioned 625 

Fowler,  H.  W.  Mentioned 552 

Fox,  Gustavus  A.  Mentioned 684 

Fraser,  James  L. 

Mentioned 48, 55 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,1862 54 

Fraser,  Philip.  Mentioned 251 

Fraser  8c  Co.,  John.  Mentioned 319, 352 

Fremont,  John  C.  Mentioned 788 

French,  Jonas  H.  Mentioned 704 

Freret,  William.  Mentioned 858 

Fripp,  Private.  Mentioned 29 

Fripp,  M.  W.  Mentioned 29 

Fripp,  W.  O.  P.  Mentioned 26 

Frost,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 554 

Frost,  Mr.  Mentioned 816 

Fry,  Edward. 

Mentioned 574,  594 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 594 

Fulda,  Mr.  Mentioned 534 

Fuller,  C.  A.  Mentioned 515,  567,  574, 587, 593,  605, 641 

Fuller,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 52, 60, 160 

Fulton,  Steamer.  Mentioned 661, 666, 681, 709, 853 

Fulton,  Captain.  Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 702 

Furguson,  Private.  Mentioned 454 


918 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Furman,  C.  M.  Correspondence  with  Eohert  E.  Lee 369 

Gaines,  J.  W.  Mentioned 548 

Galbreth,  Robert.  Mentioned 475 

Galveston,  Steamer.  (See  C.  S.  Gunboat  Governor  Moore.) 

Gamble,  Carey  B.  Mentioned 461, 825 

Gandy,  F.  C.  Mentioned 526 

Gannon,  John.  Mentioned 452 

Gardiner,  George  F.  Mentioned 98,151 

Gardner,  W.  M.  Mentioned 555,556,  .531,  600,  606 

Garland, . Mentioned 625 

Garlinger,  W.  E.  Mentioned 116 

Garlington,  A.  C.  Mentioned 115, 116, 118, 119 

Garner,  George  G.  Mentioned 492,752 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Braxton,  Bragg.) 

Gates,  J.  T.  Mentioned 660 

Gatlin,  R.  C.  Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generars  Office, 

C.  S.  A 310 

Gautherin  8c  Co.,  E.  Mentioned 813 

Geilfuss,  A.  Mentioned 15 

General  Clinch,  Steamer.  Mentioned 22, 23 

General  Lovell,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned * 612 

General  Meigs,  Steamer.  Mentioned 659 

General  Quitman,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 522,529,597,603,604,612,  613 

George  Green,  Ship.  Mentioned 464,675 

George  Washington,  Ship.  Mentioned 715,716 

George’s  Creek,  Steamer.  Mentioned 244 

Georgia. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Georgia,  Governor  of 274, 284, 315, 318,  320,  377 

Harden,  W.D 362 

Jackson,  H.  R 362 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 272, 273, 283, 305, 306, 313 

Lee,  Robert  E 351, 365, 376, 401,  424 

Pemberton,  John  C - 410 

War  Department,  C.  S 274,283-285,318,319,  321 

W arthen,  Thomas  J 305 

Military  departments  embracing 248, 297, 309 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Anderson,  Ed.  C 368 . 

Augusta,  Ga.,  Mayor  of 381 

Bragg,  Braxton 377 

Georgia,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 381 

Georgia,  Governor  of 396 

Griffin,  W.B 381 

Lee,  Robert  E 364,367,379,  384,  385,390,  391 

Mercer,  H.  W 386 

Rains,  George  W 396 

War  Department,  C.  S 376,  377 

(See  also 

Elba  Island.  Beconnaissance  to,  March  7-11,  1862. 

Pulaski,  Fort,  Ga.  Bombardment,  etc.,  April  10-11,  1862. 

Saint  Augustine  Creek,  Ga.  Beconnaissance  near  mouth  of,  March  28, 

1862. 

Savannah  Biver,  Ga.  Beconnaissance  up,  March  7-11,  1862. 


INDEX. 


919 


Page. 

Georgia — Continued. 

Operations  in. 

(See  also 

Tyhee  Island,  Ga.  Occupied  hy  Union  troops,  November  1861. 

Venus  Point,  Ga.  Action  at,  February  15,  1862. 

Whitemarsh  and  Wilmington  Islands,  Ga.  Affairs  on,  March  30-31, 

1862. 

Wilmington  Narrows,  Ga.  Beconnaissance  to,  January  26-28,  1862.) 

Requisitions  on,  for  troops 371 

Georgia,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of.  Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Robert  E 381,385 

Pemberton,  John  C 410, 431 

War  Department,  C.  S 415 

Georgia,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 297 

Lawton,  Alexander  R.,  assigned  to  command 297 

Merged  into  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida 309 

Strength  of  Confederate  troops  in,  October,  1861.  Return  of 304, 305 

Georgia,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Augusta,  Ga.,  Mayor  of 381 

Davis,  Jefferson 872 

Florida,  Governor  of 304 

Griffin,  W.  B 381 

Lee,  Robert  E 377, 379, 391, 396, 397 

Pemberton,  John  C 421, 433 

War  Department,  C.  S 274,284,285,310,315,318-321,421,425 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  : Bartow,  283,284  ; Read’s,  7-10, 16. 

Ijiidintvj— Battalions : 3d,  284,  315 ; 4th,  7-9,  386.  Regiments  : 1st  {Regu- 
lars), 272,277;  2d,  272  ; 3d,  320,371;  5th,  460,798,819,894;  13th,  123, 
347,380,387,399;  18th,  19th,  315;  26th,  386. 

Miscellaneous — Phillips  Legion,  103-108, 315, 340, 347. 

Gerry,  J.  O.  A.  Mentioned 316 

Gholson,  S.  C.  Mentioned 461 

Gibbon,  L.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Ordnance  Department,  C.  8.  A.) 

Gibbs,  Captain.  Mentioned 


Gibbs,  Theodore  K.  Mentioned. 


855 

501 

Gilbert,  James  M.  Mentioned 476 

Gill,  Robert.  Mentioned 448 

Gill,  William  G. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  E.  Lee 332, 384 

Mentioned 312, 352, 368, 401 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  H.  W 139,259 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 149, 150, 193, 212 

Mentioned 134-139, 141, 142, 178, 193, 195, 196, 211, 212, 216, 259, 262, 263 

Reports  of 

Braddock’s  Point,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  November  10-11,  1861 31 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  to,  November  8,  1861 30 

Pulaslii,  Fort,  Ga.  Operations  against,  Jan.  28-Ai)ril  11,  1862..  144, 147, 148 
Whitemarsh  and  Wilmington  Islands,  Ga.  Affairs  on,  March  30-31, 

1862  120 

Gipsey,  Schooner.  Mentioned 714 


920 


INDEX. 


Gist,  S.  R. 

Assignments  to  command 
Mentioned 


Page. 

430 

335, 336, 363, 382, 387, 404, 427, 430 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen- 
eral of.) 


Givens,  J.  C.  Mentioned 

Gladden,  A.  H.  • 

Assignments  to  command 

Mentioned 

Gladiator,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Glisson,  Oliver  S.  Mentioned 

Godfrey,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Godlie,  John  E.  Mentioned 

Goldsborough,  J.  R.  Mentioned 

Gollipher,  Silas.  Mentioned 

Gronzales,  Ambrosio  Jose. 

Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 

Mentioned 

Goodhue,  John  M.  Mentioned 

Gooding,  O.  P.  Mentioned 

Goodwin,  Ichabod.  Mentioned 

Gordon,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Gordon,  W.  A.  Mentioned 

Gorgas,  J osiah.  Mentioned 


38 

: 754,816 

489, 491, 751, 754, 762, 792, 798, 816, 820, 821 

418,419,863 

700,701 

219 

299,454 

239,691 

116 

278 

278,324 

683 

699 

168-170 

299 

785 

297, 560, 637, 802, 833, 842, 863, 882 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Ordnance  Department,  C.S.  A.) 


Gott,  Richard.  Mentioned 276 

Gould,  John  H.  Mentioned 91 

Governor  Moore,  C.  S.  Gunboat  [Steamer  Galveston].  Mentioned 522, 

529, 597, 599, 603, 604, 612, 613, 651 

Graef,  Frederick  E.  Mentioned 146,160 

Graham,  Alexander.  Mentioned 200 

Graham,  R.  F.  Mentioned 426, 433 

Grand  Caillou  Bayou,  La.  Capture  of  blockade-runner  in.  (See  Quitman, 

Fort,  La.) 

Grant,  Alexander.  Mentioned 522-524,536,562,590,597,604,612 

Grant,  N.  B.  Mentioned 396-398 

Grant,  U.  S.  Mentioned 66 

Graves,  Mark.  Mentioned 50,53 

Gray,  Captain.  Mentioned 450 

Grayson,  John  B. 

Assignments  to  command 267,288 

Correspondence  with 

Antonio,  Charles 295 

Bowen,  W.  L.  L 294 

War  Department,  C.  S 276 

Mentioned 267, 287-289, 291, 294, 298, 301-303, 315,  316, 325, 341, 342, 355 

Great  Republic,  Ship.  Mentioned 708,714,716,717 

Green,  Quartermaster-Sergeant.  Mentioned 41 

Green,  Marion.  Mentioned 38 

Green,  W.  G.  Mentioned 38 

Greenfield,  T.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  Orleans,  La.,  Committee  of 
Safety.) 

Greenwood,  A.  B.  Mentioned 808 

Gregg,  Mr.  Mentioned 727 


INDEX. 


921 


Page. 

Gregg,  Maxcy. 

Assignments  to  command 349 

Corre8i)ondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 108, 109,  111,  421-423, 434, 435 

Mentioned 268, 275, 349, 372, 414, 433 

Gregorie,  J.  W.  Mentioned 18 

Gregory,  Mr.  Mentioned 324 

Gregory,  Samuel  B.  Mentioned 83, 99 

Grier,  David.  Mentioned 449, 485 

Griffin,  W.  B. 

Correspondence  with  Georgia,  Governor  of 381 

Mentioned 385 

Grimes,  Micah  M.  Mentioned 476 

Grinnel,  Mr.  Mentioned 816 

Guerard,  J.  J.  Mentioned 17, 20, 21 

Guirot,  Mr.  Mentioned 822 

Gulf,  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

Butler,  Benjamin  F.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command 695,  704 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 695 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  1, 704 ; No.  8,  705 ; No.  9,  708 ; No.  10,  709 ; 

No.  14,  714 ; No.  15,  717;  No.  19,  No.  20,  720;  No.  21,  721 ; No.  22,  No.  23, 

722  ; No.  24,  No.  25,  724. 

Union  troops  in. 

Organization  of,  March  31,  1862 706 

Strength  of,  March  31,  1862 707 

Guss,  H.  R.  Correspondence  with  Horatio  G.  Wright 238 

Gwathmey,  W. 

Mentioned 515, 605, 615 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 615 

Habersham,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 398 

Haggerty,  Peter.  Mentioned 704, 723 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Benjamin  F.  Butler.) 

Hagner,  Peter  V.  Mentioned , 173 

Hagood,  Johnson.  Mentioned 268,389 

Hale,  Mr.  Mentioned 184 

Hale,  Joseph  L.  Mentioned 299 

Hale,  R.  Mentioned 299 

Haley,  Mr.  Mentioned 779 

Hall,  Alfred  G.  Mentioned 508, 698 

Hall,  James  F.  Mentioned 138,146,159 

Halleck,  H.  W. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 704 

Mentioned 833 

Halliday,  S.  F.  Mentioned 251 

Hallonquist,  James  H.  Mentioned 461, 463, 757, 837 

Halpine,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 137,138,258 

Hamilton,  Gavin.  Mentioned 200 

Hamilton,  J.  A.  Mentioned 29 

Hamilton,  John.  Mentioned 142,152,153 

Hamilton,  P.  Mentioned 803 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of  Safety.) 

Hamilton,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 59, 61 

Hammett,  R.  Mentioned 571 

Hammond,  Captain.  Mentioned 612 

Hammond  & Co.  Mentioned 625 

Hanahan,  Dr.  Mentioned 113,114 


922 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Hanckel,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 26,29 

Hanham,  Moore.  Mentioned 443, 447, 448 

Hanney,  James.  Mentioned 477 

Harden,  William  D. 

Correspondence  with  R.  M.  Cuyler 362 

Mentioned ,* 332,368 

Harleston,  F.  H.  Mentioned 33 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Boswell  S.  Ripley.) 

Harllee,  R.  Z.  Mentioned 352 

Harllee,  William  W.  Mentioned 321 

Harms,  H.  Mentioned 13-16 

Harper,  H.  H.  Mentioned 70 

Harper,  Nicholas.  Mentioned 486 

Harriet  Lane,  U.  S.  Revenue  Cutter.  Mentioned 235,  .505, 532, 658, 713 

Harris,  Henry.  Mentioned 476 

Harrison,  Burton  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Jefferson  Davis.) 

Harrison,  John  R.  Mentioned 382 


Harrison,  J.  P.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  Orleans , La.,  Committee  of 
Safety.) 


Harrod,  B.M.  Mentioned 554 

Hart,  Oscar.  Mentioned 127 

Hartford,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529,604,772 

Hartridge,  A.  L.  Mentioned 401 

Hasell,  Dr.  Mentioned 36 

Hawkes,  Henry  F.  Mentioned 138 

Hawkins,  Judge.  Mentioned 301 

Hay,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 138, 258 

Hayden^  Surgeon.  Mentioned 574 

Hayne,  Isaac  W.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina,  Executive 
Council  of.) 

Hays,  A.  J.  Mentioned 662 

Hazeltine,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 447,448 

Heape,  J.  E.  Mentioned 15, 17, 20 

Heard,  S.  S.  Mentioned 574 

Heath,  Mr.  Mentioned 132 

Heaton,  Edward.  Mentioned 497 

Heaton,  P.  Mentioned - 21 

Hebert,  Paul  O. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 830 

Mentioned 582, 602, 813, 817, 821, 825, 830 

Heidenreich,  C.  Mentioned  . 16 

Helen,  Steamer.  Mentioned 661 

Heller,  J.  B.  Mentioned 118 

Henberer,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 447,475 

Henderson,  Ransom.  Mentioned 116 

Henderson,  William.  Mentioned 577,623,830,831 

Henry,  Andrew,  U.  S*  S.  Mentioned Ill 

Herbert,  William.  Mentioned 58 

Hessee,  Julius.  Mentioned 756,767,768,800 

Heth,  H.  Mentioned 376 

Heyward,  William  C. 

Mentioned 6, 8,  9, 13-15, 269 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Walker,  S.  C. , November  7,  1861 16 

Hickey,  John  D.  Mentioned 475 


INDEX, 


923 


Page. 

Hicks,  Joseph.  Mentioned 

Higgins,  Edward. 

Correspondence  with  David  D.  Porter 643, 544 

Mentioned - - 510, 512, 513, 521, 

522, 527, 533, 534, 542, 544, 545, 562, 574,  588,  595,  596,  749,  766,  809,  878 

Reports  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans 547, 549 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 588-592 

Hildt,  John  McL. 

Mentioned 440, 441, 444,  445, 448, 454, 456, 470, 473, 475, 497 

Reports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla.  Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November 

22-23,1861 485 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9,  1861 448 

Hill,  D.  H.  Mentioned 842 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 

Defenses  of,  November  7, 1861.  Report  of  Francis  D.  Lee 18 

Reconnaissance  to,  November  8,  1861.  Report  of  Quincy  A.  Gillmore 30 

Subsistence  stores  for,  November  7,  1861.  Reports  of 

Baya,  H.  T 22 

Owens,  C.  D 21 

Hinckel,  Anton  C.  Mentioned 122,146,160 

Hindman,  T.  C.  Mentioned 555, 556, 581, 600, 606, 629 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Court  of  Inquiry.  Fall  of  New  Orleans.) 

Hobart  & Foster.  Mentioned 560,790 

Hobart,  Edward. 

Mentioned 592 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 592 

Hoelzle,  Henry  L.  Mentioned 443, 445, 447, 448 

Holbrook,  Henry.  Mentioned 52 

Holbrook,  William  C.  Mentioned 676 

Holland,  D.  P.  Mentioned 94, 95, 288, 289, 291, 296, 301-303, 315 

Holliman,  C.  F.  Mentioned 


299 

Hollins,  George  N. 

Correspondence  with  Navy  Department,  C.  S 873 

Mentioned 562, 563, 574, 610, 614, 617, 618, 648, 650, 728, 745, 

747,  749,  752,  754,  769,  773,  782,  783,  786,  795,  798,  800, 801, 809, 825, 846 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 610, 611 

Holmes,  Captain.  Mentioned 854 

Holt,  G.  W.  Mentioned 757,800 

Honduras,  Steamer 702 

Hooker,  Anson  P.  Mentioned 690 

Hooper,  Isaac.  Mentioned 522,524,604,612,854 

Hopkins,  Charles  P.  Mentioned 289, 291, 315 

Hopkins,  Edward. 

Mentioned 93, 286, 287, 291, 298, 301, 302, 354 


Report  of  the  evacuation  of  Amelia  Island,  Fla.,  by  the  Confederate  forces. 


March  3,  1862  94 

Hough,  R.  M.  Mentioned 138, 258 

Houston,  W.  H.  Mentioned 556 

Howard,  F.  G.  Mentioned 893 

Howell,  E.  T.  Mentioned 21 

Howell,  William  B.  Mentioned 845 

Hubbell,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 100 

Hudson,  T.  Mentioned 20 


924 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Hudson,  William.  Mentioned 21 

Huger,  Arthur  M.  Mentioned 13-17,423 

Huger,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 824 

Huger,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 13, 17, 29 

Huger,  Thomas  B. 

Mentioned 527, 528, 537, 538, 548, 612,  809 

Report  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 537, 538 

Huguenin,  J.  Mentioned 68 

Hunt,  Carleton.  Mentioned 552 

Hunter,  David. 

Assignments  to  command 248, 257 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  H.  W 139, 140 

DuPont,  S.  F 266 

Olmstead,  Charles  H 134 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 257 

War  Department,  U.  S 254, 263 

Mentioned 156, 157, 160, 248, 257, 259, 260, 265 

Report  of  bombardment  and  capture  of  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  April  10-11, 1862.  133 

Staif.  Announcements  of 258, 264 

Hunter,  R.  M.  T.  Mentioned 639 

Hunting  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  at,  March,  1862.  (See  Bluffton,  S.  C.) 

Huntress,  Steamer.  Mentioned 29,30 

Hurst,  William.  Mentioned 59 

Hurt,  James  H.  Mentioned 854 

Hyllested,  W.  Mentioned 736 

I’ Anson,  W.  H.  Mentioned 276 

Ida,  Steamer.  Mentioned 90,153 

Idaho,  Ship.  Mentioned 464,696-698,714 

Illinois,  Steamer.  Mentioned 180 

Indiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 21st,  504, 506, 694, 705, 706, 708. 

Ingraham,  D.  N. 

Assignments  to  command 322 

Mentioned 322,624 

Iroquois,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 507,529 

Irwin,  Mr.  Mentioned 117,119 

Irwin,  John.  Mentioned. 49,134,136,137,146,160 

Isaac,  Smith,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 83 

Isbell,  H.  L.  Mentioned 382 

Itasca,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 713 

Ives,  Joseph  C.  Mentioned 82, 103, 312, 344, 361, 369, 401, 406, 414 

Ivey,  Edward.  Mentioned 515 

Jackel,  Charles.  Mentioned 1 477 

Jackson  & Co.  Mentioned 621,625-627,630 

Jackson,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 522, 528, 536, 604, 612, 613 

Jackson,  Fort,  La. 

Bombardment  and  capture  of.  (See  Neiv  Orleans,  La.) 

Sketch  of 546 

Jackson,  H.  R.  Correspondence  with  Robert  E.  Lee 362,365 

Jackson,  John  H. 

Mentioned 245 

Reports  of 

Bluffton,  S.  C.  Operations  near,  March  20-24,  1862 101 

Savannah  River,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  up  the,  March  7-11,  1862 97 


INDEX. 


925 

Page. 


Jackson,  John  K. 

Assignments  to  command 81G 

Mentioned 377, 459-463, 725, 798, 802, 810, 816, 821 

Jackson,  Richard  H. 

Mentioned 440, 441, 445, 455, 471, 473, 475, 497, 500, 501, 658 

Reports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla.  Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November 

22-23,  1861 477 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9,  1861 456 

Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Evacuation  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  9,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Benham,  H.  W 127 

Wright,  Horatio  G 125-130 

Proclamation  of  Horatio  G.  Wright 129 

Reports  of 

Dilworth,  W.  S 131 

War  Department,  U.  S 131 

Wright,  Horatio  G 124 

Occupied  by  U.  S.  forces,  March  12,  1862.  Report  of  Horatio  G.  Wright...  100 

James,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 301,412,413 

James,  Gr.  S.  Mentioned 348,359 

James,  S.  L. 

Mentioned 514, 516, 517, 568, 570, 575, 615, 616, 635 

Reports  of  operations  in  defense  of  Ne*v  Orleans,  La 519, 520 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 568,569 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  Orleans,  La.,  Committee  of  Safety.) 

Jamison,  D.  F.  Mentioned .372 

Jaquess,  John  A.  Mentioned 492,495 

Jarvis,  John.  Mentioned 299 

Jennings,  M.  W.  Mentioned 42 

J.  L.  Day,  Steamer.  Mentioned 833 

John  A.  Moore,  Steamer.  Mentioned 22,324 

Johnson,  Dr.  Mentioned 30 

Johnson,  John  A.  Mentioned 27 

Johnson,  Wilber  F.  Mentioned... 463,855 

Johnston,  Albert  Sidney. 

Correspondence  with 

Lovell,  Mansfield 761 

War  Department,  C.  S 761,762 

Mentioned 94, 320, 321, 327, 390, 398, 400, 403, 404, 406, 408, 411, 

413, 417, 418,  427,  560,  626,  641,  646,  661,  704,  749, 763, 764, 769,  773, 781, 
783,  784,  787-789,791,799,804,817,  823,  825,  827,  828,833,  834,  836,  847 
Johnston,  James  D. 

Correspondence  with 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 800 

Withers,  Jones  M 801 

Mentioned 800 

Johnston,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 815 

Jones,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 499 

Jones,  Ap  C.  Mentioned 387 

Jones,  Cadwalader. 

Mentioned 7, 10, 11, 66,  67, 73, 74 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 73 


926 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Jones,  Charles.  Mentioned 38 

Jones,  David.  Mentioned 482 

Jones,  Edward  F. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 716 

Mentioned 174, 465, 504, 509, 716 

Jones,  James. 

Correspondence  with 

Donelson,  Daniel  S 71 

Lee,  Robert  E 341 

Mentioned 37, 42, 66-ti9, 72, 75, 109, 344 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  Januai:y  1,  1862 69 

Jones,  S.  Mentioned 548 

Jones,  Samuel. 

Assignments  to  command 816,  836, 867, 869 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 852, 853, 874, 879,  890 

Beard,  W.  K 843, 849, 859 

Bragg,  Braxton 822, 824, 835, 837-840, 852, 854, 856, 857, 861, 862, 866 

Brent,  Thomas  W 846 

Conoley,  J.  F 844 

Jones,  Thomas  M 848, 853, 858, 869, 870 

Le  Barron,  C.  L 838 

Lee,  Robert  E 868, 881, 884 

Lovell,  Mansfield 647,879,882-884 

Myers,  F.  J 855 

Powell,  W.  L 856 

War  Department,  C.  S 862, 866, 873, 891,  893 

Mentioned 417,  563, 653, 654, 

660, 663, 665, 802, 810, 816, 819, 820, 834, 836, 864, 866, 868,  874, 882, 893 
J ones,  Thomas  M. 

Assignments  to  command - 849 

Correspondence  with 

Conoley,  J.  F 665 

Jones,  Samuel 848, 853, 858, 869, 870 

War  Department,  C.  S 886,890 

Mentioned 424, 492, 

493, 663, 664, 752, 794, 839-841, 849, 852, 856, 857, 862, 867, 869, 870, 875 
Reports  of  abandonment  of  Pensacola,  Fla.,  by  Confederates  and  occupa- 
tion of,  by  Union  forces.  May  7-12,  1862 660, 663 

Jones,  W.  B.  Mentioned 552 

Joy,  Steamer.  Mentioned 559 

Joyce,  E.  W.  Mentioned 29 

Judah,  J.  Mentioned 21 

Judah,  Schooner.  Mentioned 437,666 

Juge,  Paul.  Mentioned 568 

J.  W.  Wilder,  British  Schooner  (Andracita).  Mentioned 498,499 

Kane,  Perry  C.  Mentioned 123 

Katahdin,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 

Kate,  Steamer.  Mentioned 378 

Kaufman,  W.  B.  Mentioned 481 

Keegan,  John.  Mentioned 452 

Keenan,  E.  J.  Mentioned 264 

Keene,  O.  L.  Mentioned 251 

Keitt,  L.  M.  Mentioned 387 


INDEX. 


927 


Page. 

Keller,  Lewis.  Mentioned 477 

Kelley,  A.  D. 

Mentioned 632, 639, 643-645 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 643-645 

Kellogg,  Charles  H.  Mentioned  206 

Kelly,  John  L.  Mentioned 130 

Kelly,  Timothy.  Mentioned 449 

Kemble,  George  S.  Mentioned 52 

Kemper,  K.  Mentioned 363 

Kempif,  Louis.  Mentioned 50 

Kennebec,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 533 

Kennedy,  Beverly  C.  Mentioned 548 

Kennedy,  John  L.  Mentioned - 382 

Kennon,  Beverly. 

Mentioned 522-524, 562, 590, 597, 599, 611, 612, 636 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 599,600 

Kensel,  George  A.  Mentioned 704 

Kent,  John  E.  Mentioned 132 

Kermer,  Arthur  R.  Mentioned 485 

Key  West,  Fla,,  Department  of.  (Union.) 

Brannan,  J.  M.,  assigned  to  command 218 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 217 

Merged  into  Department  of  the  South 248, 258 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : No.  82,  665. 

Kilpatrick,  W.  H.  Mentioned 662 

Kineo,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 

King,  Hugh  M.  Mentioned 463 

BUng,  John.  Mentioned 727 

Kingfisher,  Bark.  Mentioned 464 

Kinsman,  J.  B.  Mentioned 704 

Kinzie,  Arthur  M.  Mentioned 138,258 

Kirk,  John.  Mentioned 197 

Kirk,  Manning  J.  Mentioned 331 

Kirk,  Robert.  Mentioned 621,625,627 

Kirk,  Rollin.  Mentioned 197 

Koch,  Charles,  & Co.  Mentioned 817, 818 

Kraell,  Christian.  Mentioned 447,448 

Kurtz,  John  D.  Mentioned 444 

Kutcher,  Theodore.  Mentioned 486 

Lady  Davis,  Steamer.  Mentioned 29 

Lamar,  Major.  Mentioned 597 

Lamb,  William  W.  Mentioned 854 

Lambert,  Richard. 

Correspondence  with  Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 814 

Mentioned 651, 833 

Lamon,  J.  H.  Mentioned 552 

Landis,  Tug-boat.  Mentioned ' 541,611,612 

Langdon,  Loomis  L. 

Mentioned 441, 445, 453, 471, 473-475, 479, 497 

Reports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla.  Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November 

22-23,  1862 484 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9,  1861  454 

Lanier,  Corporal.  Mentioned 299 


928 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Lanier,  W.  L. 

Mentioned 565, 638, 770 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 638 

La  Place,  Captain.  Mentioned 612 

Larice,  W.  L.  Mentioned 574 

Larned,  Benjamin  P.  Mentioned 668 

Lartigue,  Armand.  Mentioned 513 

Lastree,  Mr.  Mentioned 1 79,80 

Lavelle,  Michael.  Mentioned 449 

Lavery,  Felix.  Mentioned 476 

Law,  Corporal.  Mentioned 167 

Law,  William  F.  Mentioned 301 

Lawton,  Mr.  Mentioned — 375 

Lawton,  Alexander  R. 

Assignments  to  command 297 

(See  also  Note,  p.  1.) 

Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Robert  E 313, 351, 401, 424 

Pemberton,  John  C 418, 420 

War  Department,  C.  S 272-274, 283, 285, 299, 305, 306, 309, 311, 319 

Warthen,  Thomas  J 305 

Mentioned 8, 103, 166, 274, 284, 

286, 297, 304, 306, 309, 310, 312, 326, 335, 346, 362, 365, 399, 419-421, 433 

Reports  of 

Pulaski,  Fort,  Ga.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  April  10-11,  1862.  ..  166 

Whitemarsh  and  Wilmington  Islands,  Ga.  Affairs  on.  Mar.  30-31,  1862.  122 

Lawton,  B.  T.  Mentioned 38 

Lawton,  Edward  P.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Alexandei'  B.  Lawton.) 
Leadbetter,  D.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A.) 

Leake,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 74 

Leake,  W.  D.  Mentioned 67, 70, 71 

Leasure,  Daniel. 

Mentioned 50,53,57 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 59 

Leathers,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 854 

Le  Barron,  C.  L. 

Correspendence  with  Samuel  Jones 838 

Mentioned 874 

Leckey,  David  A.  Mentioned 60,61 

Lee,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 335 

Lee,  Francis  D. 

Mentioned 13, 16 

Report  of  defenses  of  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  November  7,  1861 18 

Lee,  Hutson.  Mentioned 270,315,346 

Lee,  Robert  E. 

Assignments  to  command 309,312 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 327,367,390 

Davis,  Jefferson 400 

Donelson,  Daniel  S 346 

Drayton,  Thomas  F 329, 331, 373, 374 

Dunovant,  R.  G.  M 343,344 

Evans,  Nathan  G 78, 354, 359, 382, 386,  394 

Fernandina,  Fla.  Commanding  Officer 368 

Florida,  Governor  of 393, 399, 429 


INDEX.  929 

Pago. 

Lee,  Robert  E. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Furman,  C.  M 309 

Georgia,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 381,  385 

Georgia,  Governor  of 377, 379, 391,  396,  397 

Gill,  W.  G 332, 384 

Jackson,  H.  R 302,  305 

Jones,  James 341 

Jones,  Samuel 868, 881, 884 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 313, 351, 401, 424 

Lovell,  Mansfield 052, 882 

Magrath,  A.  G ‘ 349 

Manigault,  A.  M 321, 337, 352, 359 

Martin,  William  E 33,34,36 

Mercer,  St.  W 380 

Olmstead,  C.  H 389 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S 367,375,399 

Pemberton,  John  C 344, 375, 395, 406, 423, 424, 429, 432, 433 

Rains,  George  W 396,397 

Ripley,  Roswell  S - 323,329, 

335,  336,  339,  349,  352,  358,  360,369,370,  382,  384,  385,  387,  389-391,  394 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 345, 364 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 326, 356, 363, 365 

Trapier,  J.  H 364, 370, 380, 393, 398, 403, 406, 411, 414 

War  Department,  C.  S 312, 

314,  319,  320, 327,  335,  340,  346-349,  352,  371,  376-380,  390,  398,  400,  88f) 

Mentioned 33, 34, 93, 309- 

313,  318,  321,  331,  334,  348,  352,  353,  360,  366,  376,  389,  402,  404,  409,  410, 
423-425,  427,  431,  433,  637,  646,  660,  768,  824,  874,  875,  878,  880,  882,  890 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Sinking  stone  fleet  at  the  entrance  to,  De- 
cember 20,  1861  42 

Tybee  Island,  Ga.  Occupied  by  Union  forces,  November  24,  1861  32 

Wilmington  Narrows,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  to  and  naval  engagement, 

January  26  28,  1862 85 

Requested  by  the  President  to  visit  Richmond,  Va 400 

Staff.  Announcements  of 312 

Lee,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 808,813,817 

Leeds  & Co.  Mentioned 560, 573, 575, 577, 584, 620-622, 625, 627, 628, 630, 634 

Leeds,  John.  Mentioned 872 

Leeds,  Thomas.  Mentioned 573,621 

Legare,  Berwick.  Mentioned 79,80 

Leonard,  William  IL  BE.  Mentioned 854 

Lesley,  jr.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Depai'tiiient,  U.  S.) 

Letcher,  John.  Mentioned 334 

Lewis,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 675, 676, 705, 707, 714, 779 

Lewis,  Major.  Mentioned 834 

Lewis,  C.  D.  Mentioned 534 

Lewis,  John  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 741 

Todd,  R.  B 850 

Tracy,  E.  L 837 

59  R R — YOL  VI 


930 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Lewis,  John  L. — Continued. 

Correspondence  \rith 

Twiggs,  David  E 736 

Walker,  Thomas  F 837 

Mentioned 568, 637 

Liebenau,  J.  H.  Mentioned 98, 142 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Egbert  L.  Viele.) 

Lilley,  William.  Mentioned 51,52 

Lincoln,  Abraham. 

Correspondence  with 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 181 

War  Department,  U.  S 171 

Mentioned 4, 131, 138, 176, 177, 254, 508, 673 

Lipscomb,  George  H.  Mentioned 794, 868 

Lipscomb,  W.  L.  Mentioned 461 

Livingston,  Fort,  La.  Eecaptnre  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  27, 1862.  (See  Sum- 
mary of  Principal  Events,  p.  437.) 

Lockard,  Thomas.  Mentioned 116 

Locke,  Erie.  Mentioned 697 

Lockett,  S.  H. 

Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 726,727,750 

Mentioned 728, 729, 739 

Locust  Point,  Steamer.  Mentioned 702 

Long,  A.  L.  Mentioned 401,406,414,417,432 

Longford,  J.  P.  Mentioned 42 

Longford,  J.  Y.  Mentioned 42 

Longford,  L.  M.  Mentioned 42 

Longstreet,  James.  Mentioned 842 

Louisiana,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned. . . . 504, 505, 509, 513, 514, 517, 520, 522, 526-533, 
536, 537, 539, 541, 548, 549, 551, 552,559, 563-566, 569, 572, 589, 590,592,595, 
603, 604, 607, 611-614, 617, 618, 621, 626, 640-642, 646, 650, 654,873, 878, 883 

Louisiana. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 856 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 723 

(See  also  Department  No.  1.) 

Martial  law  in  parishes  of  Orleans,  Jefferson,  Saint  Bernard,  and  Plaque- 

mine 718,856,857,860,865,888 

Military  departments  embracing 695 

Militia.  Organization  of. 

Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 746 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 740, 741 

Lovell,  Mansfield 825,841,847 

Todd,  K.  B 850 

Tracy,  E.  L 837 

Walker,  Thomas  F 837 

Eesolution  of  officers  of 740 

Operations  in. 

(See 

Baton  Bouge^La. 

Berwick  Bay,  La. 

Department  No.  1 {Confederate).  Affairs  in,  generally. 

Livingston,  Fort,  La.  Recapture  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  27,  1862 
Neiv  Orleans,  La. 


INDEX. 


931 

Page. 


Louisiana— Contiuned. 

Operations  in. 

(See 

Pike,  Fort,  La.  Pecapture  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  27,  1862. 

Quitman,  Fort,  La.  Evacuation  of,  etc.,  April  27-May  8,  1862. 

Wood,  Fort,  La.)  Recapture  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  27,  1862. 

Requisitions  on,  for  troops. 821 

Louisiana,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 657, 740, 746, 830, 856, 869, 872, 878, 883, 886, 888 

Lewis,  John  L 741 

Lovell,  Mansfield 651,652,783 

Mississippi,  Ordnance  Ofi&cer  of 783 

War  Department,  C.  S 741, 

742, 745, 747, 749, 751, 752, 765, 773, 791, 830, 837, 840, 869, 872, 874 


Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Battalions:  8th,  553,  585,  595.  Batteries:  Beauregard,*  553; 
Bond’s,*  551,552;  Gibson’s,*  647,847;  Lamon’s,*  551,552;  Orleans,* 
595,647,847;  Saint  Mary’s  Cannoneers,*  531-533,535,548,550,640; 
Washington,*  647, 837, 847.  Regiments:  1st,*  585, 586. 

Cavalry — Companies:  Wilson’s,*  837. 

Infantry — Battalions:  Lewis’,*  837;  Thomas’,*  595;  Waddill’s,  340,347. 
Companies:  Lartigue’s,*  513,552;  Mullen’s,*  513,522.  Regiments:  1st 
(Regulars),  492,  495, 798, 810, 819,  835 ; 1st,  2d,  748 ; 3d,  742, 743;  4th,  742, 
748, 832,  847  ; 13th,  594,  747,  778,  785,  791,  799,  808, 825,  847 ; 16th,  17th, 
18th,  19th,  594,  847;  20th,  552,  647,  832,  842  ; 22d,  524,553,585;  23d, 
585;  26th,  585,  624;  27th,  28th,  585;  Beauregard,*  837;  Confederate 
Guards,*  595;  Continental,*  837 ; Chalmette,*  513, 522, 563, 567 ; Cres- 


cent,* 607,647,837,842,847;  Jeff.  Davis,*  Sumter,*  837. 

Lovell,  J.  Mentioned. 574 

Lovell,  Mansfield. 

Assignments  to  command 643 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 570, 777, 778, 883 

Beauregard,  G.  T 647, 648, 651, 889 

Bragg,  Braxton - 648 

Davis,  Jefferson 645,760,883 

Johnston,  A.  Sidney 761 

Jones,  Samuel 647, 879, 882-884 

Lee,  Robert  E 652, 6S2 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 651, 652, 783 

Mississippi,  Governor  of 653 

Mitchell,  J.  K 649 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 646,651 

State  Department,  C.  S 646 

Van  Dorn,  Ear] 884 

War  Department,  C.  S 646,650,653, 

657, 753, 754, 758, 764, 765, 767, 769,  774,  781, 783, 785-788, 790,  791, 795- 
799, 804, 805,  807-809, 811, 813,  815-818, 820-825, 827-829, 832,  839-841, 
847, 850, 852, 853, 863, 864, 866-868, 870-873,  876-878,  882,  883, 885, 887 

Whittle,  W.  C 649, 650 

814 


Mentioned 417, 507,  515, 539, 540, 555, 556, 558, 559, 564,  565, 

568-572, 574-597, 599,  600, 602-625, 628-645, 654, 655,  658,  745,  746,  751, 
761, 762, 780-782, 784, 792,  802, 814, 819,  866, 872, 878,  881,  883,  887,  889 


State  Militia. 


932 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Lovell,  Mansfield — Continued. 

Eeports  of 

Bayou,  Grand  Caillou,  La.  Capture  of  blockade-runner  in 656 

Biloxi  and  Pass  Christian,  Miss.  Affairs  at,  April  3-4,  1862  502 

New  Orleans,  La.  Operations  in  defense  of,  Apr.  18-May  1, 1862 . . 510, 512, 518-.520 

Quitman,  Fort,  La.  Evacuation  of,  etc.,  April  27-May  8, 1862 656 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 556- 

567,570-575, 637 


Lovell,  W.  S. 

Mentioned 463, 514, 516, 517, 565, 574, 609, 622, 634, 761, 776, 787, 795, 822 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La...  596-599 

Lowndes,  Rawlins.  Mentioned - 324,361 

Lucas,  Thomas  E.  Mentioned 268 

Lunt,  William  W.  Mentioned 132 

Lusk,  William  T.  Mentioned 199 

Lyman  Dudley,  Sloop. 

Mentioned 294,295 

Seizure  of,  October,  1861.  Communications  from 

Antonio,  Charles 295 

Bowen,  W.  L.  L 294 

Mayo,  George  Upshur - 294 

Lynch,  E.  Mentioned 12,13 

Lyons,  Benjamin  R.  Mentioned 50-52, 55, 206 

McArthur,  William  M.  Mentioned 138,160 

McBlair,  Charles  H.  Mentioned. 93-95,367,368 

McCall,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 170 

McCan  & Harrold.  Mentioned 625 

McCann,  Provost-Marshal.  Mentioned 634 

McClellan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 239, 241, 440, 450, 669 

McClellan,  Captain.  Mentioned 612 

McClellan,  George  B. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 179 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  as  General-in-Chief,  see  Army  Headquarters.) 

Instructions  to  Butler  (New  Orleans) 694 

Mentioned 45, 179, 181, 192, 224, 253, 255, 257, 350, 673, 686, 687, 694, 705, 815 

Orders,  congratulatory. 

Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  January  1,  1862 66 

Santa  Eosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9, 1861 457 

McClenzey,  William.  Mentioned 486 

McCollough,  John  B.  Mentioned 117, 119 

McCorkle,  D.  P. 

Mentioned 609, 631 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 631,632 

McCorkle,  W.  H.  Mentioned 72 

McCorkle,  William  W.  Mentioned 299 

McCormick,  Thomas.  Mentioned 476 

McCoy,  Joseph  Davis.  Mentioned 522,529,612,854 

McCreery,  W.  W.  Mentioned 414 

McCulloch,  Ben.  Mentioned 788 

McDonald,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 517,554,570,616 

McElhany,  John.  Mentioned 116,117 

McFarland,  Walter. 

Mentioned 471, 473, 475, 497, 685 

Eeport  of  bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about  Pensacola,  Fla.,  Novem- 
ber 22-23,  1861  488 


INDEX. 


933 


Page. 

McGowan,  Samuel.  Mentioned 70,74,75 

McGrail,  P.  Mentioned 448 

McIntosh,  Charles  F. 

Mentioned - 527, 533, 537,  G14 

Eeport  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 537 

Mack,  John.  Mentioned 476 

McKay,  James.  Mentioned 308,342 

McKean,  William  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 712 

Brown,  Harvey 669 

Mentioned 465, 467, 469, 471, 669, 711, 713, 715 

McKee,  Mr.  Mentioned 29 

Mackie,  Dr.  Mentioned  742 


McLaughlin,  A.  Mentioned 

McLaws,  Lafayette.  Mentioned. 


287, 288 
..  842 

..  621 
..  822 
..  277 

..  506 


McLean,  John.  Mentioned 

McLean,  W.  P.  Mentioned 

McMahon,  J.  Mentioned 

McMillan,  J.  W.  Mentioned  

McNutt,  John.  Mentioned 170,178 

McRae,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 528-530, 534, 538, 548, 559, 563, 604, 612, 613, 887 

McRae,  C.  J.  Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 866 

McRae,  John  J. 

Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 781 

Mentioned 786, 791, 798 

McRee,  Fort,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  January  1,  1862.  Eeports  of 

Bragg,  Braxton 497 

Brown,  Harvey 495 

MeVoy,  A.  Mentioned 860 

Mader,  G.  W.  Mentioned 494 

Maffit,  J.  M.  Mentioned 118 

Mafdt,  John N.  Mentioned. 28, 37, 341 

Magenta,  Steamer.  Mentioned 597 

Magner,  James.  Mentioned 170 

Magnitzky,  Frederick.  Mentioned 485 

Magnolia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809,833 

Magrath,  A.  G.  Correspondence  with  Eobert  E.  Lee 349 

Mahon,  Edward.  Mentioned 476 

Mahoney,  John.  Mentioned 299 

Maine,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 168, 169 

Maine  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery— iffafter/es  {Independent) : 1st,  682, 686,  687,  706 ; 2d,  3d,  4th,  5th, 

6th,  682,  683,  687. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  686. 

Infantry— /?e^//77e/;fs ; 8th,  141,  160,  172,  179,  185,  190,  237;  9th,  125,  130, 

132, 175, 180, 185, 196,  237 ; 12th,  464,  682,  687, 688,  694, 696,  706,  716 ; 13th, 
681-683,  687,  694,  696,  699,  706;  14th,  681,  682,  687,  694,  696,  706;  15th, 
681-683,  687,  694,706,707. 

Mallard,  William  V.  Mentioned 329 

Mallory,  Stephen  R.  Mentioned 301, 

513,  561-563,  599,  600,  608,  610,  611,  617,  623,  625,  628,  654,  655,  729, 
747,  772,  783,  795,  799,  811,  812,  826,  843,  850,  873,  878,  891-893 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  JSavy  Department,  C.  S.) 

Manassas,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned. 513, 522, 528, 529, 548. 559, 563, 602-604, 610, 612, 613, 773 


934 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Manigault,  A.  M. 

Assignments  to  command 344 

Correspondence  witli 

Lee,  Robert  E 321, 337, 452, 359 

Pemberton,  John  C 417,425 

Mentioned 269, 344, 420 

Manigault,  Joseph.  Mentioned 312, 407, 417 

Mann,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 549 

Manning,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 509 

Manston,  Richard.  Mentioned 490 

Maria  A.  Wood,  U.  S.  Schooner.  Mentioned 500, 659 

Marianna,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 408 

Marion,  Steamer.  Mentioned 180,190,221,223 

Marks,  J.  M.  Mentioned 578 

Mars,  John.  Mentioned 116 

Marshall,  Robert.  Mentioned 60,61 

Martial  Law. 

Charleston,  S.  C 313,318 

Florida 427 

Louisiana 718, 856, 857, 860, 865,  888 

Mobile  and  surrounding  country 866 

New  Orleans,  La 718, 856, 857, 860, 865, 888 

Martin,  I.  Mentioned 21 

Martin,  J.  M.  Mentioned 94 

Martin,  Vincent  F.  Mentioned 37, 38 

Martin,  William  E.  * 

Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Robert  E 33,  34, 36 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 34-36 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 34 

Mentioned 69 

Reports  of 

Beaufort,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  December  6-7,  1861 36 

Port  Royal  Ferry,  Coosaw  River,  S.  C. 

Engagement  at,  January  1,  1862 74, 75 

Expedition  to,  December  6-7,  1861 36 

Mary,  Steamer.  Mentioned 661 

Mary  Frances,  Steamer.  Mentioned 29 

Mason,  Pardon.  Mentioned  146 

Massachusetts,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 466,679 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 173,174 

War  Department,  U.  S 168, 169, 174, 678 

Massachusetts  Troops.  Mentioned. 


A.xt\\\QTj— Batteries  {Independent):  2d,  681,  686,687,  706,  707,  709;  4th,  464, 
465,506,508,  509,  678,  682,  686,687,  696,  705,  706,  708;  6th,  506,  682,  686, 
687,  705-709 ; 7th,  687. 

Cavalry — Battalions : 2d,  508, 509, 682, 688, 696, 705, 706, 708.  Regiments : 1st, 
237. 

Infantry— /?e^//newfs ; 17th,  681,686-688;  22d,  23d,  25th,  174;  26th,  174, 
464,465,504,  505,  509,  677,681,682,687,694,696,  705,  706,  708;  28th,  237; 
30th,  506, 508, 509, 682, 687, 688, 694, 696, 697, 706, 708;  31st,  506,  681,  682, 


687,  694,  699, 702,  706, 708. 

Massey,  Hugh.  Mentioned 475 

Matagorda,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 


INDEX. 


935 


Page. 

Matanzas,  Steamer.  Mentioned 190,702,703,705,708,714 

Mates,  John.  Mentioned 42 

Mather,  S.  W.  Mentioned Ill 

Mathis,  B.  Mentioned 42 

Maury,  H.  Mentioned 793 

Maxwell,  A.  E.  Mentioned 492 

May  River,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  on,  March  19-24,  1862.  (See  Summary  of 
Principal  Events,  p.  2.) 

May,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 385,428 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Augusta,  Ga.,  Mayor  of.) 

May,  Robert  Ii.  Mentioned 609 

Mayflower,  Steamer.  Mentioned 44, 98, 99, 152, 245, 267 

Mayo,  George  Upshur.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 294 

Means,  J.  H. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 362 

Mentioned 348,  359, 361 

Meigs,  Montgomery  C.  Mentioned 173,224,673,709 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Quartermastei'-GeneraV s Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Melchers,  F.  Mentioned 15, 16 

Memminger,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 372, 764, 844, 845, 883 

Memminger,  R.  W.  Mentioned 406, 414 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Mercer,  H.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  E.  Leo 386 

Mentioned 277,  299,  306,  307,  314,  362,  363,  379 

Merchant,  Captain.  Mentioned 859 

Mercury,  Tug-boat.  Mentioned 702 

Merrimac,  Steamer.  Mentioned 593 

Merrimac,  U.  S.  S.  (C.  S.  S.  Virginia.)  Mentioned 134,863 

Merrill,  Alonzo  B.  Mentioned 132 

Merrill,  George.  Mentioned 170, 177 

Metzner,  Albert.  Mentioned 121 

Mexico,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 

Miami,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 504,714 

Michigan  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry— /?e^//ne/7fs ; 6th,  506, 694,  705, 706, 708 ; 8th,  42, 48-50, 52-54, 58, 66, 

91, 92, 176, 180, 185, 206, 237. 

Mickle,  B. 

Correspondence  with  Richard  F.  Floyd 356 

Mentioned 354-356 

Micks,  T.  R.  Mentioned 461 

Middle  and  Eastern  Florida,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Confederate  troops  in.  Returns 

December,  1861  364 

January,  1862 371 

Dilworth,  W.  S.,  assigned  to  command 413 

Finegan,  Joseph,  assigned  to  command 432 

Grayson,  John  B.,  assigned  to  command 267 

L imits  extended 297 

Merged  into  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida 309, 428 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 ; No.  118,  418. 

Re-established 432 

Smith,  E.  K.,  assigned  to  command 288 

Trapier,  James  H.,  assigned  to  command 293,407 


936 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Middleton,  J.  I.,  jr.  Mentioned 13,106 


Mikell,  T.  W.  Mentioned 

Milan,  French  Steamer.  Mentioned. 
Milhollen,  J.  F.  Mentioned 


330 

531,675,810 

105, 107, 108 

Military  Complications.  Communications  from 

Alabama,  Governor  of 803 

Bragg,  Braxton - 787 

Davis,  Jefferson 878 

Dilworth,  W.  S 315 

Florida,  Governor  of 341, 354, 402, 412 

Georgia,  Governor  of 318 

Jackson,  H.  R 362 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 305, 306, 313 

Lee,  Robert  E 349,  376, 424 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 869,872,878 

Lovell,  Mansfield 870 

Pemberton,  John  C 407, 418-421, 430, 431 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 345 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 372 

War  Department,  C.  S 318,  319, 418, 420, 421, 425, 869, 870, 874 

Warthen,  Thomas  J 305 

Miller,  Captain.  Mentioned 81, 82 

Miller,  Colonel.  Mentioned 859 

Miller,  John  L.  Mentioned 72 

Milligan,  James  F.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 297 

Milliken,  Mr.  Mentioned 816 

Mills,  T.  B.  Mentioned 800-802 

Mills,  T.  S.  Mentioned 463 

Milton,  Steamer.  Mentioned 679 

Milton,  John.  Mentioned 126, 

269, 292, 294, 310, 311, 316, 399, 404, 408, 409, 428, 868, 869, 870, 872, 874 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Florida,  Governor  of.) 

Minnesota,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 15, 24, 863 

Miramon,  Steamer.  Mentioned 560,744,829,833,839,841 

Mississippi,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 513, 517, 530, 559, 563, 573, 575, 578, 583, 

595, 597,  598, 608-611, 617,  618, 621,  622,  625, 627,  628,  630, 631,  642,  654 

Mississippi,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 509, 529 

Mississippi,  U.  S.  Transport. 

Itinerary  of  voyage  of,  to  Ship  Island,  Miss 699 

Mentioned 681,  699-702, 705,  708, 714 

Mississippi. 

Military  departments  embracing 695 

Operations  in.  Southern.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 780,792 

Lovell,  Mansfield 791,790,799 

McRae,  John  J 781 

Mississippi,  Governor  of 780 

War  Department,  C.  S 785,796 

(See  also  Biloxi,  Miss.;  Pass  Christian,  Miss.,  and  Ship  Island,  Miss.) 
Mississippi,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 780,792,872 

Lovell,  Mansfield 653 

Mississippi,  Ordnance  Officer  of  Correspondence  with  Louisiana,  Gov- 
ernor of 783 


INDEX. 


937 


Page. 

Mississippi  River.  Affair  at  Southwest  Pass,  October  12,  18G1.  Communica- 
tions from 

Brown,  Harvey fiG9 

McKean,  William  M C69 

Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries : Vaiden,  647,  832,  847. 

Infantry — Battalions : 1st,  819, 848  ,*  3d,  847.  Regiments  : 3d,  502, 585, 778, 

780,  781,  785,  791, 799, 805, 808, 813,  817, 825  ; 5th,  819  ; 7th,  781, 832, 847  ; 

8th,  660,  819, 848, 857;  9th,  460,779,784,798,819,824,  894;  10th,  460, 819 ; 

20th,  340, 347, 847  ; 24th,  338, 340, 346, 364,  368, 371, 400, 403, 406,  408, 409- 
411, 768, 778 ; 27th,  662, 794, 806, 819, 839-841, 857, 868. 

Missouri.  Affairs  in  generally.  Communications  from  War  Department,  C.  S.  788 
Mitchell,  Archibald. 

Mentioned — 620 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 620 

Mitchell,  J.  C.  B.  Mentioned 335, 340 

Mitchell,  John  K. 

Correspondence  with 

Court  of  Inquiry.  Fall  of  New  Orleans,  La 618 

Lovell,  Mansfield 649 

Mentioned 514, 520, 526-528, 530, 532, 537, 552, 564, 565, 

569, 572, 574, 576, 589-591, 600, 603, 607, 610, 611, 614, 617, 618,  631,  641 

Reports  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 536-539, 541 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 611-615 

Mobile,  Ala. 

Defense  of,  measures  for.  Communications  from 

Alabama,  Governor  of 739, 803, 886 

Bragg,  Braxton 771 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 726-728, 740, 743, 745, 750, 753 

Lee,  Robert  E 886 

Mobile,  Committee  of  Safety 804 

Mobile,  Mayor  of 738 

War  Department,  C.  S 729,739,741,744,773,802,866 

Withers,  Jones  M 729,747,779 

Martial  law  in 866 

Mobile,  Ala.,  Executive  Committee  of  Safety.  Correspondence  with  Ala- 
bama, Governor  of 804 

Mobile,  Ala.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S..  738, 741, 744 
Mobile,  Army  of. 

Confederate  troops  near  Mobile  designated 815 

Organization  of,  February  1,  1862 819 

Strength  of,  February  1,  1862,  819 ; March  31,  1862,  868. 

Withers,  Jones  M.,  assigned  to  command 815 

Mobile,  Steamer.  Mentioned 737 

Moise, . Mentioned 742 

Monitor,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 134,863 

Monroe,  James.  Mentioned 716 

Montezuma,  Ship.  Mentioned 122 

Montgomery,  J.  B.  Mentioned 513, 561, 595? 

598,  603,  604,  612,  648,  812,  813,  822,  833, 850,  953, 854, 864,  865, 876, 877 

Moody,  John  M.  Mentioned 72 

Moody,  Paran.  Mentioned 251 

Mooney,  Mr.  Mentioned 415 

Moore,  Andrew  B.  Mentioned... 739,747 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Alabama,  Governor  of.) 


938 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Moore,  Charles  B.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 666 

Moore,  Henry. 

Mentioned 123, 172 

Eeportof  occupation  of  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  by  Union  forces,  February  11, 

1862  89 

Moore,  John  V.  Mentioned 353 

Moore,  Private.  Mentioned 4.54 

Moore,  Private.  Mentioned 476 

Moore,  Thomas  O.  Mentioned 513, 

562,  564,  581,  597,  622,  626,  628,  633,  637,  648,  654,  655,  65>^,  740, 
743,  752,  765,  778,  787,  788,  832,  847,  850,  851,  864,  865,  870,  879,  889 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Louisiana,  Governor  of.) 

Moorehead  Samuel.  Mentioned 116 

Moran,  John.  Mentioned 449,475 

Morgan,  E.  D.  Mentioned 173 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  York,  Governor  of.) 

Morgan,  Michael  R.  Mentioned 170,178 

Morgan,  William.  Mentioned 476 

Morrill,  Lot  M.  Mentioned 168-170 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Maine,  Governor  of.) 

Morris,  C.  M.  Mentioned 29, 30 

Morris,  John.  Mentioned 486 

Morrison,  David. 

Mentioned 48, 59, 206 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862  55 

Morrison,  J.  H.  Mentioned 68,414 

Morrow,  John,  jr.  Mentioned 101,102 

Morse,  C.  N.  Mentioned 532,549 

Morton,  J ackson.  Mentioned 316 

Mosher,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 527,529,538,604,612,613 

Mosely,  M.  Mentioned 299 

Moulton,  Albert  A.  Mentioned 97,99 

Mount  Vernon,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 700,701 

Mullen,  W.  G.  Mentioned 513 

Mulvihill,  Flan.  Mentioned 485 

Mumford,  William  T.  Mentioned 548 

Munitions  of  War. 

Deficiencies  in,  reported  by  Confederate  officials 41, 275, 276, 

283,  284,  289,  292,  299,  310,  315-320,  327-329, 331, 334,  346, 382, 399, 728, 
739,  741,  745,  749,  750,  754,  758,  761,765-767,782,794,872,  879-882,  886 
Fabrication  of,  and  supplies  of.  Communications  from 

Alabama,  Governor  of 803 

Florida,  Governor  of 299, 308, 319, 325 

Georgia,  Governor  of 284,318,320 

Johnston,  A.  Sidney 761 

Lambert,  Richard 814 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 283 

Lee,  Robert  E 370 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 747, 765 

Lovell,  Mansfield 754,760,761,769, 

786,  788,  790,  804,  805,  813,  814,  816,  820-822,  825,829,832,839,841,850 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 7'82 

Pemberton,  John  C - 416,418-421,423,428 


INDEX. 


939 


Pago. 

Munitions  of  War — Continued. 

Fabrication  of,  and  supplies  of.  Communications  from 

Soutli  Carolina,  Governor  of ‘292, 315,  318, 321, 322, 320, 328, 3CC 

Trapier,  J.  H 417 

Twiggs,  David  E 729,746 

War  Department,  C,  S 284,285,319, 

321,  323,  327,  378,  380,  416,  418,  4‘20,  421,  425, 744,  745, 747, 754,  758, 76‘2, 
764,  765,  767,  783,  785,  791,  796,  797,  808,  809, 817, 818,  8‘23,  829,  840, 863 

Munroe,  Q.  Mentioned 20 

Murdaugh,  F.  M.  Mentioned 29 

Murray,  E.  C.  Mentioned ; 631 

Murrell,  Mr.  Mentioned 804 

Music,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 527,529,012 

Myer,  Albert  J. 

Correspondence  with  Isaac  I.  Stevens 65 

Mentioned 51,63,65 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 64 

Myers,  A.  C.  Mentioned 380 

Myers,  F.  J. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  Jones 855 

Mentioned 602 

Nachon,  Rev.  Father.  Mentioned 531 

Nashville,  Steamer.  Mentioned 430,840,841,886 

Navy  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jetferson 629,  655, 832, 844, 893 

Farrand,  Eben 893 

Florida,  Governor  of 287 

Hollins,  George  N 873 

Johnston,  J.  D 800 

War  Department,  C.  S 728,729,782,796,799 

Neaffie,  Steamer.  Mentioned 461-463,474,481 

Nelms,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 490, 494, 847 

Nelms,  Llewellyn  A.  Mentioned 299,461,463 

Nelson, . Mentioned 382 

Nelson,  J.  H.  Mentioned 662 

Nelson,  P.  Mentioned 115 

Nelson,  S.  O.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  Ch'leans,  La.,  Committee  of 
Safety.) 

Nelson,  William.  Mentioned 66 

Nesbit,  R.  Mentioned 426 

New  England,  Department  of. 

Butler,  Benjamin  F.,  assumes  command 667 

Constituted.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  436.) 

Orders,  General,  series  1861:  No.  1,  667;  No.  2,  669. 

New  Hampshire,  Governor  of  Correspondence  with  War  Dept.,  U.  S 168, 169 

New  Hampshire  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry— /?e5r//ne/7fs ; 3d,  97-103,123,172,179,  185,  190,  237,  245;  4th,  100, 

124, 125, 129, 130, 175, 180, 185,  193,  ‘237,  239 ; 8th,  507,  682,  683,  686,  687, 694, 

706 

New  London,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 467,  468 

New  Orleans,  La. 

Attack  on. 

Barnard’s  plans  for 684,  685,  691 

Instructions  to  Butler 694 

Suggestions  of  Butler 687, 688 


940 


INDEX, 


Page. 

New  Orleans,  La. — Continued. 

Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of.  Testimony  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T 600-602 

Brickell,  D.  W 575-578 

Bridges,  William  M - .587 

Brien,  J 592 

Capers,  W.  C 593 

Clinch,  Henry  A 586, 587 

Conrad,  C.  M 622-625 

Cooke,  F.W.  C 633-635 

Devereux,  W.  H.  [J.  G.] 594,595 

Fry,  Edward 594 

Gwathmey,  W 615 

Higgins,  Edward 588-592 

Hobart,  Edward 592 

Hollins,  George  N 610,611 

James,  S.  L 568,569 

Kelley,  A.  D - 643-645 

Kennon,  Beverly 599,600 

Lanier,  W.  L 638 

Lovell,  Mansfield 556-567,570-575,637 

Lovell,  W.  S 596-599 

McCorkle,  D.  P 631, 632 

Mitchell,  Archibald 620-622 

Mitchell,  John  K 611-615 

Nichols,  R.  F 581 

Palfrey,  E.F 619,620 

Poindexter,  C.  B 604,605 

Powell,  E 635 

Robertson,  W.  B 595,  .596 

Sinclair,  Arthur 608-610 

Smith,  M.  L 581-586 

Stinson,  Joseph 632, 633 

Tift,  Nelson 625-628,630 

Toutant,  A.  J 636,637 

Venable,  C.  S 615,616 

Ward,  W.  H ! 607,608 

Warley,  A.  F 602-604 

Whittle,  W.  C 617, 618 

Williams,  T.  S 578-580 

Wolfe,  Samuel 606 

Woodlief,  Peter  W 616,617 

Expedition  against.  Organization,  etc. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 673 

Army  Headquarters 673, 677, 694,  699 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 673,  681,  685,686,  699,  702 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 678 

War  Department,  U.  S 673, 677, 687 

Itinerary  of  voyage  of  steamer  Mississippi  to  Ship  Island,  Miss 699 

Foreigners  at.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 723 

Martial  law 718, 856, 857, 860, 865,  888 

Measures  for  defense  of.  (See  De;partment  No.l.  Affairs  in,  generalli/.) 


INDEX. 


941 


Page. 

New  Orleans,  La. — Continued. 

Operations  against  and  capture  of,  April  18-May  1,  1862.* 

Address  to  soldiers  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip 544 

Articles  of  capitulation  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip 544 

Casualties  (Confederate  forces)  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip 550 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 596,629 

Army  Headquarters 694 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 706,708,710,712-714,716 

Court  of  Inquiry 571, 628, 643 

Davis,  Jefferson 554,630,655,657,884 

Farragut,  D.  G 712 

Higgins,  Edward 543,544 

Lee,  Kohert  E 652 

Lovell,  Mansfield 570, 646-653, 884, 885 

Mississippi,  Governor  of 653 

Mitchell,  J.  K 618 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 629,655 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 646-651 

Porter,  David  D 543 

Sinclair,  Arthur 618 

Tift,  A.  T .1 631 

Tift,  Nelson 631 

War  Department,  C.  S 554,655 

Whittle,  W.  C 650 

Demand  for  the  surrender  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  La.,  and 

reply  thereto 543, 544 

Message  transmitting  to  House  of  Representatives  Confederate  Con- 
gress the  proceedings  of  Court  of  Inquiry 554 

Orders.  (Butler) 717,720-722,724 

Reports  of 

Brock,  Samuel 538 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 503,506 

Court  of  Inquiry.  (Proceedings,  etc. ) 554 

Duncan,  Johnson  K....  . 521,535,539,540,542 

Higgins,  Edward 547,549 

Huger,  T.  B 537,538 

James,  S.  L 519,520 

Lovell,  Mansfield 510,512,518-520 

McIntosh,  C.F 537 

Mitchell,  John  K 536-539,541 

Phelps,  John  W 508 

Eenshaw,  F.  B 536 

Smith,  M.  L 553 

Squires,  M.  T 550 

Stephenson,  John  A 540 

Warley,  A.  F 537 

Sketch  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip 546 

Proclamation  to  people  of.  (Butler.) 717 

Sanitary  condition  of.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 723 

Shepley,  George  F.,  appointed  military  commandant 724 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Committee  of  Safety.  Correspondence  with  Jefferson 
Davis 831,846 


* Includes  bombardment  and  capture  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 


942 


INDEX. 


Page. 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with 


Butler,  Benjamin  F 723 

Davis,  Jefferson 884 

New  Smyrna,  Fla.  (See  Smyrna,  Fla.) 

Newton,  Thomas.  Mentioned i 477 


New  York,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S.  169, 170, 172 
New  York  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Regiments  {Light) : 1st,  173. 

Engineers— /?e^//ne/7fs : Ist,  138, 141,  146, 150,  151, 152, 154, 159,  160,  180-183, 

185, 190,237. 

Infantry— /?e^//77e/7fs : 5th,  681,  686-688;  €th,  439,440,442-458,461,471-473, 
475,479,481,497,500,501,667,673-675,717;  43d,  172;  46th,  120-122,137, 

146, 150, 154, 160, 171, 172, 179, 185, 189, 196, 237 ; 47th,  47-50, 54, 55, 89, 123, 

171,  172, 179, 185, 190, 237 ; 48th,  47-50,  52,  54,  55, 66, 141, 151, 152, 159, 172, 

179,  185,  190,  237;  49th,  50th,  172;  75th,  497,  673,675,717;  79th,  48-52, 

55-57, 59-61, 179, 185, 237. 

Niagara,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 444,469,474,475,484,490,669,691 


Nichols,  Edward  T.  Mentioned 509 

Nichols,  L.  Mentioned  299 

Nichols,  R.  F. 

Mentioned 581 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 581 

Nicholson,  J.  W.  A.  Mentioned 83 

Noble,  T.  J.  Mentioned 853 

Nobles,  William  H.  Correspondence  with 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 200 

Stevens,  Isaac  I •. 200,201 

Suydam,  James  Adrian 201 

Nolan,  Mr.  Mentioned 324 

Nolan,  William.  Mentioned 481 

NoiTis,  James.  Mentioned 17 


North  America,  Steamer.  Mentioned 508, 509, 705, 708, 714 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries:  Branch’s,  109.  Wilmington  (?)  {Moore’s),  324,326. 
IniantTj— Regiments : 18th,*  323,  324,  326,  357;  25th,  312,  323,  326,  3.57; 


37th,  .335. 

Norwich,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 

Noyes,  Captain.  Mentioned 

O’Bannon,  L.  W.  Mentioned 

O’Brien,  Edward.  Mentioned 

Ocean  Pearl,  Ship.  Mentioned 

Ocean  Queen,  Steamer.  Mentioned. 

O’Doud,  Michael  M.  Mentioned 

Ogden,  A.  N.  Mentioned 

Ogden,  H.  D.  Mentioned 

Ogier,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 

Ohlenroth,  Edward.  Mentioned 

Oladowski,  H.  Mentioned 

Oliver,  Jose.  Mentioned 

Ollinger  & Bruce.  Mentioned 

Olmstead,  Charles  H. 
Correspondence  with 

Hunter,  David 


154 

325 

492,  752, 757 

484 

717 

....  180,214 
....  451,452 

548 

858 

13 

488 

492, 752, 836 

864 

894 


134 


Designation  changed  from  8th,  November  14,  1861. 


INDEX. 


943 


Page. 

Olmstead,  Charles  H. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Robert  E 389 

Mentioned 137-139, 147 , 107 

O’Neal,  Judge.  Mentioned 13J 

O’Neal,  Peter.  Mentioned 299 

Oneida,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 753 

Lambert,  Richard 814 

Lee,  Robert  E 367,  375,  399 

Lovell,  Mansfield 646, 651 

War  Department,  C.  S 348 

Oregon,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 502,596,605 

Oriental,  Steamer.  Mentioned 190 

Orizaba,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 

O’Rorke,  P.  H. 

Mentioned 138, 142, 146, 151-153, 160 

Report  of  condition  of  the  works  of  investment  of  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga., 

February  28,  1862 143 

Osceola,  Steamer.  Mentioned 3, 186 

Oswald,  G.  W.  Mentioned 34, 37, 38, 67, 70, 74, 75 

Ottawa,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 48, 49, 51,  59rb3, 83, 84, 124 

Owens,  C.  D.  ' 

Mentioned 13 

Report  relative  to  subsistence  stores  for  Forts  Beauregard  and  Walker  and 

at  Beaufort,  S.  C 21 

Owens,  J.  A.  Mentioned 38 

Owens,  James  B.  Mentioned 316 

Owens,  R.  S.  Mentioned 70 

Owens,  William  A.  Mentioned 94 

Page,  L.  R.  Mentioned 555, 556, 581, 600, 606, 644 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Court  of  Inquiry.  Fall  of  New  Orleans,  La.) 
Palfrey,  E.  F. 

Mentioned 574,594,619,749,770 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La .. . 619, 620 

Palfrey,  John  C.  Mentioned 685, 688, 693, 697, 704 

Palmer,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 698 

Palmer,  F.  G. 

Mentioned 78-81, 114-117, 119 

Report  of  affair  on  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  March  29,  1862  117 

Pamlico,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned  502 

Panola,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 

Pargoud,  Steamer.  Mentioned 597 

Paris,  Burdett.  Mentioned 854 

Parker,  Beverly.  Mentioned 299 

Parker,  Francis  S.,  jr.  Mentioned 492 

Parkersburg,  Steamer.  Mentioned 180,702 

Parliament,  Ship.  Mentioned 714 

Parsley,  O.  G.,  & Co.  Mentioned 376 

Parsonage,  William.  Mentioned 448 

Pass  Christian,  Miss.  (See  Biloxi  and  Pass  Christian,  Miss.  Affairs  at,  April 
3-4,  1862.) 

Patterson,  Joshua  J.  H.  Mentioned 299 


944 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Patterson,  Mr.  Mentioned 20 

Patton,  Captain.  Mentioned 574 

Patton,  General.  Mentioned 601 

Paul,  Aide-de-Camp.  Mentioned 324 

Paulsackel,  Carl.  Mentioned 122 

Pawnee,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 210,238 

Pearce,  Joseph.  Mentioned 574,578,631 

Peerless,  Steamer.  Mentioned.. 3,186 

Pelouze,  Louis  H.  Mentioned 137, 138, 146, 160, 177, 264, 310 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Thomas  W.  Sherman.) 

Pemberton,  John  C. 

Assignments  to  command 345, 402, 407 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 407,416,419-421,430 

Dilworth,  W.  S 424 

Donelson,  Daniel  S 109-111 

Drayton,  Thomas  F 110,  419, 428 

Dnnovant,  R.  G.  M 110 

Evans,  Nathan  G 415,434 

Georgia,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 410,431 

Georgia,  Governor  of 421,433 

Gregg,  Maxcy 108, 109,  111,  421-423, 434, 435 

Lawton,  A.  R 418,420 

Lee,  Robert  E 344, 375, 395, 406, 423, 424, 429, 432, 433 

Manigault,  A.  M 417, 425 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 415,427 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of 405, 407, 415 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 433, 434 

Tilton,  N.  C 428 

Trapier,  J.  H 409, 410, 417 

Walker,  W.  S 416 

War  Department,  C.  S 94, 416-418, 420, 42:3 

Mentioned 74, 75, 334, 345, 349, 

366, 374, 395, 407, 410, 411, 421-423, 425, 428, 430, 434, 435, 635, 864, 886 

Reports  of 

Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  January  1,  1862 66 

Pulaski,  Fort,  Ga.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  April  10-11,  1862...  166 

Staff.  Announcements  of 414 

Pembina,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 48, 60, 124, 125, 152 

Penguin,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 111,388 

Pennington,  A.  C.  M. 

Mentioned 471, 473, 475, 478, 479, 497 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about  Pensacola,  Fla.,  Novem- 
ber 22-23,  1861  480 

Pennsylvania  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 45th,  2:37 ; 50th,  48-50, 57-59, 66, 88, 89, 176, 180, 185, 

197,  237  ; 55th,  117, 118, 123, 237  ; 76th,  237  ; 97th,  124, 126, 130, 237, 238, 

253  ; 100th,  48, 51, 57, 59-61, 176, 180, 185, 237. 

Pensacola,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned  529, 690, 691 

Pensacola,  Fla. 

Abandoned  by  Confederate  and  occupied  by  Union  forces.  May  9-12,  1862. 
Communications  from 

Couoley,  J.  F 665 

Forney,  John  H 663,664 


INDEX. 


945 


Page. 

Pensacola,  Fla.— Continued. 

Abandoned  by  Confederate  and  occupied  by  Union  forces,  May  9-12, 18C2. 
Communications  from 

Jones,  Thomas  M 

War  Department,  C.  S 663 

Operations  (preliminary).  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraTs  Office,  C.  S.  A 853 

Beard,  W.  K 859 

Bragg,  Braxton 835, 837, 852, 854, 857, 861, 866, 894 

Farrand,  Eben 893 

Jones,  Samuel 838, 

840, 843, 844, 846, 848, 849, 852, 853, 855, 856, 858, 862, 874, 890, 891 

Jones,  Thomas  M 869,870 

Lee,  Robert  E 868, 884 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 893 

War  Department,  C.  S 866, 886, 890, 893 

Reports  of 

Arnold,  Lewis  G - 658,659 

Jones,  Thomas  M 660, 663 

Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November  22-23,  1861. 

Orders,  congratulatory.  (Bragg.) 494 

Reports  of 

Allen,  Harvey  A 479 

Anderson,  Richard  H 494 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 472 

Blunt,  Matthew  M 487 

Bragg,  Braxton 488, 489 

Brown,  Harvey 469, 471, 472 

Chalfin,  Samuel  F 483 

Duryea,  Richard  C 476 

Hildt,  John  McL  485 

Jackson,  Richard  H - 477 

Langdon,  Loomis  L 484 

McFarland,  Walter 488 

Pennington,  A.  C.  M 480 

Robertson,  James  M 478 

Seeley,  Francis  W 481 

Shipley,  Alexander  N 486 

Operations  about.  Communications  from 

Alabama,  Governor  of 870 

Bragg,  Braxton 757,771,782 

Pemberton,  John  C 424 

War  Department,  C.  S 873 

(See  also  F/onda.  Operations  in  Western.) 

Union  troops  at,  status  of 665-668, 672 

U.  S.  dry-dock  at,  destruction  of.  Communications  from  Harvey  Brown..  665 
Pensacola,  Army  of.  (Confederate.) 

Confederate  troops  near  Pensacola  designated 754 

Gladden,  A.  H.,  assigned  to  command 754 

Jones,  Samuel,  assigned  to  command 816 

Orders — Circulars — November  21,  1861  770 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : No.  130,  494  ; Series  1862 : No.  5,  816. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  62,  849. 

Organization  of,  February  1,  1862 819 

60  R R— VOL  VI 


946 


INDEX, 


Pensacola,  Army  of.  (Confederate.) — Continued. 

Strength.  Eeturns  of 

September  1,  1861  725 

October  1,  1861 750 

November  1,  1861 762 

January  1,  1862  792 

Pensacola  Navy-Yard,  Fla.  Descent  on,  September  14,  1861.  Reports  of 

Bragg,  Braxton 438 

Brown,  Harvey 437 

Perrin,  A.  Mentioned 70,81 

Perry,  J ames  H. 

Mentioned 48-50,54,172 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 54 

Perry,  Madison  S.  Mentioned 276, 287-289, 291, 298, 301, 315 

Perryclear,  W.  H.  Mentioned 29 

Peter,  F.  Mentioned 548 

Petersen,  T.  Mentioned 16 

Petitt,  Steamer.  Mentioned. - 245 

Pettus,  John  J.  Mentioned 638, 778, 781, 792, 814, 817 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mississippi,  Governor  of.) 

Peytona,  Steamer.  Mentioned 597,598,609 

Phelps,  John  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-GeneraFs  Office,  U.  S.  A 679, 688, 693, 696, 698 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 675,723 

Mentioned 464, 465, 505, 506, 677, 678, 681, 682, 706, 707, 709, 710, 71 4 

Reports  of 

New  Orleans,  La.  Operations  against 508 

Ship  Island,  Miss.  Occupation  of,  December  3,  1861 465 

Philadelphia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 179 

Philips,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 713 

Philips,  George  W.  Mentioned 522,612,854 

Phillips,  W.  Mentioned 315 

Phoenix,  Tug.  Mentioned 612 

Pickens,  Fort,  Fla.  Table  of  distances  from 441 

Pickens,  Francis  W.  Mentioned 1,18,267,270,273, 

274,  278,  307-309,  314,  322,  335,  340,  345, 346, 348, 358, 415, 423-425, 430 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina,  Governor  of.) 

Pickett,  Joseph  G.  Mentioned 574,796 

Pierce,  Mr.  Mentioned 249 

Pierson,  Thomas  T^.  Mentioned 548 

Pike,  Fort,  La.  Recapture  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  27, 1862.  (See  Summary 
of  Principal  Events,  p.  437. 

Pillow,  Gideon  J.  Mentioned 756,763,769 

Pinckney,  Mr.  Mentioned 197 

Pinkney,  William.  Mentioned ^ 295 

Pinkney,  William  E.  Mentioned 553,5.54 

Plaznier,  Captain.  Mentioned 574 

Plimpton,  Josiah  I.  Mentioned 98,102 

Pocahontas,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 267 

Poindexter,  C.  B. 

Mentioned 515, 567, 604 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 604, 605 

Poindexter,  J.  R.  Mentioned - 534 

Poitevant,  Mr.  Mentioned 625 


INDEX. 


947 


Page. 

Polk,  Leonidas.  Mentioned 599, 

C47,  648,  742,  743,  761,  776,  783,  784,  791,  799,  817,  833,  850,  853 

Pont,  Rev.  Father.  Mentioned 493 

Pope,  Captain.  Mentioned 23,33-36 

Pope,  James.  Mentioned - 330 

Porter,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 42,52 

Porter,  David  D. 

Correspondence  with  Edward  Higgins 543,544 

Mentioned 504, 505, 508, 509, 529, 531-533, 544, 545, 547, 549, 591, 658, 659, 713 

Porter,  Horace.  Mentioned 134, 138, 142, 146, 152, 153, 156, 160 

Porter,  John  L.  Mentioned 816 

Port  Royal  Expedition. 

Destination  of,  etc.  (Confederate  advices.)  Communications  from 

Anderson,  J.  R 308 

Bragg,  Braxton 758, 762, 764 

Gatlin,  R.  C 310 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 309 

Milligan,  James  F 297 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 309,310 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 310 

War  Department,  C.  S 299, 306,  308, 761, 762,  764 

Organization  of. 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 169,171,177 

Connecticut,  Governor  of 172 

Lincoln,  Abraham 168, 171, 181 

McClellan,  George  B 179 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 173, 174 

New  York,  Governor  of 172 

Quartermaster-General,  U.  S.  A 187 

Saxton,  Rufus 186 

Sherman,  T.  W 168, 171, 174, 179, 183, 310 

War  Department,  U.  S 168-170,172-176,179 

Wool,  John  E 184 

Orders.  (Sherman’s) 170,  171,  175,  177-181,  183, 187 

Returns  of.  October  28, 1861 185 

Strength  of.  Retmns  of.  October  28,  1861 185 

Port  Royal  Ferry,  Coosaw  River,  S.  C. 

Engagement  at,  January  1,  1862. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Confederate  forces 75 

Union  forces 66 

Communications  from 

Jones,  James 71 

Rodgers,  C.  R.  P i 65 

Stevens,  Isaac  1 65 

Orders,  congratulatory. 

McClellan,  George  B 66 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 47 

Reports  of 

Barnes,  Dixon 72 

Brenholts,  Thomas  S 59 

Christ,  B.  C 57 

Cogswell,  William  S 61,62 


948 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Port  Royal  Ferry,  Coosaw  River,  S.  C. — Continued. 

Engagement  at,  January  1,  1862. 

Reports  of 

Donelson,  Daniel  S - 68 

Elliott,  William  St.  George 56 

Fenton,  William  M 53 

Fraser,  James  L ^ 54 

Jones,  Cadwalader 73 

Jones,  James 69 

Leasure,  Daniel 59 

Martin,  William  E 74,75 

Morrison,  David 55 

Myer,  Albert  J 64 

Pemberton,  John  C 66 

Perry,  James  H 54 

Shermao,  Thomas  W 44-46 

Stevens,  Isaac  1 47 

Tafft,  Henry  S 63 

Expedition  to,  December  6-7,  1861. 

Communications  from 

Martin,  William  E 33-36 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 34, 36 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of.. 34 

Reports  of  William  E.  Martin * 36 

Portsmouth,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned 507,713 

Potomac,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 450 

Potomska,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 83 

Powell,  E. 

Mentioned 574, 635 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 635 

Powell,  Levin  M.  Mentioned 440, 450 

Powell,  W.  L. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  Jones 856 

Mentioned 498,793,855 

Report  of  contest  over  the  British  schooner  Andracita  ( J.  W.  Wilder),  on 

the  coast  of  Alabama,  January  20,  1862 498 

Powers,  J.  A.  Mentioned 75 

President  C.  S.  (See  Jefferson  Davis.) 

President  U.  S.  (See  Abraham  LAncoln.) 

Preston,  John  S.  Mentioned 322, 335, 345, 358, 361, 390, 770 

Price,  Mr.  Mentioned 80 

Price,  John  W.  Mentioned 251 

Price,  Sterling.  Mentioned 788, 789 

Prim,  Joseph.  Mentioned 625 

Prince  of  W ales.  Schooner.  Mentioned 352 

Prioleau,  Dr.  Mentioned 30 

Prisoners  of  War.  Treatment,  exchange,  etc 134, 

139, 140, 228, 299, 300, 458, 809, 815, 822, 886 

Prisoners,  Political.  Arrest  and  treatment  of 506, 658, 665, 666, 722, 724 

Private  Property. 

Action  touching 5, 34, 38, 78-82, 100, 103, 

105, 107, 127-129, 187, 188, 191, 192, 198, 238, 242, 328, 331, 338, 369,  374, 
375, 386, 387, 391, 396, 409,  410, 414, 421-423, 661, 663, 665, 710, 717,  745, 
747, 749, 815, 843, 844, 849, 856, 859, 860, 867, 882,  883,  885-887,  889-892 
(See  also  Refugees  and  Abandoned  Lands  and  Slaves  and  Slave  Property.) 


INDEX.  949 

Page. 

Pulaski,  Fort,  Ga. 

Bombardment  and  capture  of.  April  10-11,  1862. 

Casualties.  Returns  of  Union  forces 166 

Communications  from 

Benham,  II.  W 139,140 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 139 

Hunter,  David 134,266 

Reports  of 

Benham,  Henry  W 135, 140 

Cooper,  E 165 

Hunter,  David 133 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 166 

Pemberton,  John  C 166 

Viele,  Egbert  L •. : . . 141, 142 

Surrender  of.  Demand  for 134 

Terms  of  capitulation  of 139 

Investment  works.  Report  of  P.  H.  O’Rorke  of  condition  of,  Feb.  28, 1862..  143 

Measures  for  defense  of.  Communications  from 

Claghom,  Joseph  S 277 

Lee,  Robert  E 389 

Operations  against.  Communications  from 

Beard,  Oliver  T 261 

Benham,  Henry  W - 259, 260, 262, 264, 265 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 144, 147-150, 193 

Hunter,  David 266 

Serrell,  Edward  W 245 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 192, 193, 195, 196, 216, 219, 235, 236, 245, 253 

Viele,  Egbert  L 261,265 

Pulaski,  Fort,  Ga.,  Commanding  Officer.  '(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see 
Charles  H.  Olmstead.) 

Purcell,  Patrick.  Mentioned 475 

Purseglove,  Mr.  Mentioned 625 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Aruold,  Lewis  G 715 

Brown,  Harvey 667 

Saxton,  Rufus 186, 208 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 183,201,221 

War  Department,  U.  S 173, 187 

Queen  of  the  West,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 598 

' Quigley,  A.  J.  Mentioned 551,552 

Quin,  O.  Mentioned .* 21 

Quitman,  Fort,  La.  Evacuation  of,  April  27-May  8,  1862.* 

Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 657 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 657 

War  Department,  C.  S 657 

Report  of  Mansfield  Lovell 656 

Rabb,  E.  A.  Mentioned 22,24 

Rains,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  E.  Lee 396, 397 

Mentioned 384, 385, 401, 776, 786, 808, 813, 814 

Ramsey,  Major.  Mentioned 748 

Randlett,  James  F.  Mentioned 101 


* Includes  capture  of  blockade-runner  in  Bayou  Grand  Caillou,  La. 


950 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Randolph,  George  W.  Mentioned 419-421, 424, 427, 429, 558, 

560-563, 572, 604, 637, 638, 645, 646, 663, 869, 871, 877, 880, 882,  888,  890 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Bepartmmt,  C.  S.) 

Randolph,  V.  M.  Mentioned 624, 862 

Ranson,  Dunbar  R.  Mentioned 124, 126, 197, 199, 256 


Ravenel,  W.  C.  Mentioned. 


13 

766 

21 

28 

916 

116 

690 

467 

716 


Rawle,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Raysor,  T.  E.  Mentioned 

Read,  Midshipman.  Mentioned 

Read,  J.  P.  W.  Mentioned 

Ream,  Isaac.  Mentioned 

Reamy,  Tug.  Mentioned 

Reed,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Reed,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Reese,  ChaunceyB. 

Mentioned 441, 453 

Report  of  action  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.,  Cctoher  9,  1861 450 

Refugees  and  Abandoned  Lands. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  GfiSce,  U.  S.  A - 192,224 

Colcock,  C.  J 330, 331 

Nobles,  William  H 200, 201 

Phelps,  J.  W 679 

Saxton,  Rufus 186 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 200, 203, 205, 218, 222, 240, 244 

Stevens,  Isaac  1 201 

Treasury  Department,  U.  S 249 

War  Department,  U.  S 175, 176, 227, 249 

Wright,  Horatio  G 243,244 

Orders.  (Sherman.) 222 

Renshaw,  P.  B. 

Mentioned 522-524, 528, 540, 612 

Report  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 536 

Renshaw,  William  B.  Mentioned 509,701 

Resolute,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 522, 529, 604, 612, 613 

Reynolds,  E.  McD.  Mentioned 437 

Reynolds,  T.  A.  Mentioned 374 

Reynolds,  William  H.  Mentioned 103 

Rhett,  Alfred.  Mentioned 82, 320 

Rhode  Island,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S.  168, 169 
Rhode  Island  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Regiments  {Heavy) : 3d,  90,  101,  138,  141,  142,  146,  151,  154,  159, 
180-183, 185, 190, 237. 

Richardson,  Major.  Mentioned 413 

Richmond,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 469, 474, 490, 529, 669, 750 

Ried,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 64 

Rion,  J.  H.  Mentioned 382 

Ripley,  James  W.  Mentioned 686 

Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

Assignments  to  command 267, 323, 344 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 267, 269  309-311 

Elford,  C.  J 361 

Evans,  Nathan  G 384 


INDEX. 


951 


Page. 

Ripley,  Roswell  S. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Robert  E 323, 329, 

335, 336,  339, 349, 352, 358, 360, 369, 370, 382,  384, 385, 387,  389-391,  394 

Martin,  William  E 34-36 

Means,  J.H 362 

Pemberton,  John  C 415,  427 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector-General  of 336 

War  Department,  C.  S 273,306 

Mentioned 8, 9, 23, 33-35, 42, 103, 267, 271, 311, 312, 323, 344, 

351,  357, 359, 360, 363, 364-366, 384, 395, 405, 406, 418, 420, 425,  433,  434 
Report  of  evacuation  of  Rockville,  S.  C.,  by  Confederate  forces,  December 

17,  1861 39 

Rives,  Caul.  Mentioned 568 

R.  J.  Breckinridge,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 612 

Roanoke,  Steamer.  Mentioned 3, 179 

Robertson,  Henry  C. 

Mentioned 30 

Statement  of  occurrences  at  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  November  7-8,  1861 29 

Robertson,*  James  M. 

Mentioned 440, 441, 445, 446, 453, 455, 470, 471, 473, 475, 497 

Reports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla.  Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November 

22-23,  1861 478 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9, 1861 451, 452 

Robertson,  John  H.  Mentioned 320 

Robertson,  W.  B. 

Mentioned 547, 595 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La..  595, 596 

Robinson,  C.  L.  Mentioned 251 

Rockville,  S.  C.  Evacuation  of,  by  Confederates,  Dec.  17, 1861.  Reports  of 

Branch,  J.  L 40 

Budd,  T.  G 40 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 39 

Rockwell,  Mr.  Mentioned 205 

Roder,  JohnW.  Mentioned 478 

Rodgers,  C.  R.  P. 

Correspondence  with  S.  F.  DuPont 65 

Mentioned 45-50, 52, 59, 61-64, 83, 84, 134, 136, 137, 146, 160 

Rodgers,  John.  Mentioned 151, 152, 219 

Rogers,  Horatio,  jr.  Mentioned 146 

Rogers,  W.  H.  Mentioned 388 

Rosa,  Rudolph. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  W.  Sherman 196 

Mentioned 120,122,146,150,172 

Report  of  affairs  on  Whitemarsh  and  Wilmington  Islands,  Ga.,  March  30- 

31,  1862 121 

Rose,  Hugh.  Mentioned 8,13,17 

Roseborough,  S.  Y.  Mentioned 74 

Ross,  A.  Mentioned 162 

Rousseau,  L.  Mentioned 624 

Routh,  William  R.  Mentioned 299 

Royster,  T.  J.  Mentioned 524,549 

R.  R.  Cuyler,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 465, 466 


952 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Ruggles,  Daniel. 

Assignments  to  command 751 

Mentioned 458, 

560, 751, 757, 759, 770, 790, 805, 815, 822, 825, 827, 829, 832, 836, 842, 877 

Russell,  John  H.  Mentioned 437 

Rutledge,  John.  Mentioned 29 

Ryan,  J.  Mentioned 526, 549, 592 

Sabal,  Emile  T.  Mentioned 302 

Sabine,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 32 

Sachem,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 714 

Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla.  Affair  at,  April  7, 1862.  Report  of  R.  S.  Smith..  502 
Saint  Augustine  Creek,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  near,  Mar.  28,  1862.  Reports  of 

Beard,  Oliver  T 112 

Viele,  Egbert  L 112 

Saint  Charles,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 598, 609 

Saint  Johns,  Steamer.  Mentioned 10 

Saint  Philip,  Port,  La. 

Bombardment  and  capture  of.  (See  New  Orleans,  La.) 

Sketch  of 546 

Sale,  John  B.  Mentioned 868 

Salla,  Joseph  R.  Mentioned 691 

Salomon,  E.  Mentioned 878, 879 

Salvo,  James. 

Mentioned - 119 

Report  of  affair  on  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  March  29,  1862  X..  119 

Salvor,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  October,  1861.  Communications  from  Florida,  Governor  of 308 

Mentioned 308 

Sams,  Major.  Mentioned 37 

Sannius,  John  S.  Mentioned 251 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla. 

Action  on,  October  9,  1861. 

Communications  from  J.  P.  Anderson 299 

Orders,  congratulatory. 

Bragg,  Braxton 460 

McClellan,  George  B 457 

Reports  of 

Anderson,  Richard  H 460 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 444,446 

Bragg,  Braxton 458,459 

Brown,  Harvey 438,439,442,443,446 

Duryea,  Richard  C 452 

Hildt,  John  McL 448 

Jackson,  Richard  H 456 

Langdon,  Loomis  L 454 

Reese,  Chauncey  B 450 

Robertson,  James  M 451,452 

Seeley,  Francis  W 455 

Shipley,  Alexander  N 453 

Tower,  Zealous  B 443 

Wilson,  William 446,447 

Reconnaissance  on,  March  27-29,  1862.  Reports  of 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 499 


INDEX. 


953 


Page. 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.— Continued. 

Reconnaissance  on,  March  27-29,  1862.  Reports  of 

Closson,  Henry  W 500 

Table  of  distances  on,  from  Fort  Pickens 441 

Sapard,  Captain.  Mentioned 7, 11 

Savannah,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861 : No.  300, 296. 

Strength  of  Confederate  troops  in,  September,  1861 286 

Savannah  River,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  up,  March  7-11,  1862.  Report  of  John 

H.  Jackson 97 

Saxon,  Tug.  Mentioned 464,693,714-716 

Saxton,  Rufua. 

Correspondence  with 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 186, 208 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 171,174 

Mentioned 170, 177, 187, 200-202, 221 

Sayre,  Calvin  L.  Mentioned 463 

Scanlan,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 16, 17 

Scanlan,  S.  E.  Mentioned 28 

Schafer,  Charles.  Mentioned 449 

Schofield  & Markham.  Mentioned 625,626 

Schonborn,  Louis.  Mentioned 485 

Schooner  Channel,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  up,  February  23-26,  1862.  Report 

of  Isaac  I.  Stevens 91 

Schwickart,  Philip.  Mentioned 122 

Sciota,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 

Scott,  Thomas  A.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S.) 

Scott,  William.  Mentioned 448 

Scott,  Winfield.  Mentioned 184, 300, 668, 672 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Army  Headquarters.) 

Screven,  John.  Mentioned 374 

Seabrook,  Mr.  Mentioned 116 

Seabrook,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 113, 114, 119 

Seabrook,  Henry.  Mentioned 79,113,114,119 

Seabrook,  Joseph.  Mentioned 113,114,119 

Seabrook,  Paul  H.  Mentioned 9 

Seabrook  W.  Mentioned 114, 119 

Seale,  R.  Mentioned 781 

Sears,  Alfred  F.  Mentioned 142,152,242 

Seddon,  James  A.  Mentioned 554 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S.) 

Sedgwick,  John.  Mentioned 254 

Seeley,  Francis  W.  * 

Mentioned 440-442, 445,  449, 471, 473-475, 480, 497 

Reports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla.  Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November 

22-23,  1861 481 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9,  1861 , 455 

Seldy,  Captain.  Mentioned 186 

Semmes,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 734 

Semmes,  Raphael.  Mentioned 624 

Seneca,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 50, 60, 83, 210, 388 

Serrell,  Edward  W. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 245 

Mentioned 13S 


954 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Seward,  William  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  State  Department,  U.  S.) 

Seymour,  William  J.  Mentioned 534 

Shackleford,  Major.  Mentioned 284 

Shaffer,  J.  W.  Mentioned 258 

Sharritt,  Amos.  Mentioned 299 

Shauer,  Theodore.  Mentioned 483 

Sheldon,  V.  Mentioned 627 

Shepherd,  Private.  Mentioned 1 38 

Shepard,  F.  B.  Mentioned 745 

Shepley,  George  F. 

Assignments  to  command 724 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 714,716 

Mentioned 706,707,724 

Sherman,  Captain.  Mentioned 604,612 

Sherman,  Thomas  W. 

Assignments  to  command 168, 258 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-GeneraPs  Office,  U.  S.  A 188-J90, 192, 193, 195, 198, 

203, 205, 210, 216, 218, 219, 222, 224, 226, 235, 240, 242, 243, 248, 250, 253 

Army  Headquarters 168, 

169, 171, 177, 207, 210,211, 214, 224-226, 235, 236, 238, 240, 247 

Emery,  Sabine 196 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 149, 150, 193, 212 

Hunter,  David 257 

Lincoln,  Abraham 181 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 173, 174 

Nobles,  William  H 200 

Quartermaster-GeneraPs  Office,  U.  S.  A 183, 201, 221 

Eosa,  Eudolph 196 

Saxton,  Eufus 171,174 

Stevens,  Isaac  1 197-199,205 

Union,  Steamer.  Captain  of 310 

Viele,  Egbert  L 245 

War  Department,  U.  S 168, 176, 179, 209, 211, 216, 227, 254 

Wilson,  J.H 191,215,219 

Wright,  Horatio  G 97, 

125, 126, 128, 220, 221, 223, 239, 241, 243-245, 249, 253, 256, 257 

Mentioned 6, 45, 54, 64, 66, 89, 97, 121, 125, 

135,  138,  142,  147-153,  168-172,  174,  17.5,179,184-186,191,200,201,208, 
218,  226,  228,  237,  238,  245,  248,  253,  256,258-260,263,297,678,692,699 
Orders,  congratulatory.  Engagement  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  Coosa w Eiver, 

S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 47 

Proclamation  to  people  of 

East  Florida ^ 251 

South  Carolina 4 

Eeports  of 

Beauregard,  Fort,  S.  C.  Capture  of,  November  7,  1861 3,5 

Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  Coosaw  Eiver,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  January  1, 

1862  44-46 

Venus  Point,  Ga.  Action  at,  February  15,  1862  90 

Walker,  Fort,  S.  C.  Capture  of,  November  7, 1861 3, 5 

Staff.  Announcements  of 170, 175, 177 

Shonnan  Expedition.  (See  Poi't  Bayal  Expedition.)  • 

Shingler,  W.  F.  Mentioned 116,120 


INDEX. 


955 


Ship  Island,  Miss. 

Affair  at,  September  17,  1861.  Communications  from  David  E.  Twiggs 739 


Defense  of,  measures  for.  Communications  from 

Duncan,  J.K ”30 

Smith,  Martin  L 734 

Twiggs,  David  E 728-730 

Evacuation  of,  by  Confederates.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 738 

Twiggs,  David  E ”39 

War  Department,  C.  S 741 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  troops,  December  3,  1861.  Reports  of 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 463,465 

Phelps,  J.  W 465 

Operations  of  Union  forces  about.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 681 

Phelps,  J.  W 675, 679, 688, 693, 696, 698 


(See  also  Biloxi  and  Pass  Christian j Miss.  Affairs  at,  April  3-4,  1862.) 


Shipley,  Alexander  N. 

Mentioned 440, 441, 444-446, 471, 473, 475, 497, 500 

Reports  of 

Pensacola,  Fla.  Bombardment  of  Confederate  lines  about,  November 


22-23,  1861 486 

Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.  Action  on,  October  9,  1861 453 

Shorter,  Eli  S.  Mentioned 806 


Shorter,  J.  Gill.  Mentioned .302, 806, 810, 836, 840, 848, 853, 859,862,  866, 875,879,886,892 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Alabama,  Governor  of.) 


Shryock,  George  S.  Mentioned 527, 532, 603 

Shrink,  Francis  J.  Mentioned 187, 264 

Silloway,  J acob.  Mentioned 447, 481 

Simmons,  S.  Mentioned 22 

Simpson,  W.  D.  Mentioned 70 

Sims,  Philip  L.  Mentioned 299 

Sinclair,  Arthur. 

Correspondence  with  Court  of  Inquiry.  Fall  of  New  Orleans 618 

Mentioned 327, 597, 598, 608, 609, 618, 631 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 608-610 

Skates  & Co.  Mentioned 726,727,729 

Sketches  of 

Edisto  Island,  S.  C 279 

Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  La 546 

Slark,  Stauffer  & Co.  Mentioned 625 

Slaughter,  J.  E.  Mentioned 459, 492, 752, 757, 798, 803, 820, 857 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property.  References  to 34,79-82,111,131,338 

Slee^r,  Gilman  E.  Mentioned 130 

Slemmer,  Adam  J.  Mentioned 469 

SlideU,  John.  Mentioned 748 

Slocomb,  Mr.  Mentioned 625 

Sloman,  B.  W.  Mentioned 29 

Smart,  H.  C.  Mentioned 38 

Smith,  Alexander.  Mentioned 837 

Smith,  Edmund  Kirby. 

Assignments  to  command ; 288, 293 

Mentioned 288, 291, 295, 325, 789 


956 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Smith,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 138, 258 

Smith,  G.  W.  Mentioned 741,842 

Smith,  Howard.  Mentioned 574 

Smith,  J.  B.  Mentioned : 854 

Smith,  J.  R.  Mentioned 534 

Smith,  Martin  L. 

Correspondence  with  David  E.  Twiggs 734 

Mentioned.  ..  511, 512, 514, 515, 518, 519, 559, 563, 565, 567, 573, 574, 581, 584, 597, 613, 
624, 625, 634, 638, 641, 642, 651, 654, 730, 742, 746, 834, 842,  843,  863,  882 

Report  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 553 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 581-586 

Smith,  Melancthon.  Mentioned 465, 467, 509 

Smith,  M.  Whit.  Mentioned 301 

Smith,  R.  S. 

Correspondence  with  W.  S.  Dilworth 503 

Report  of  affair  at  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla.,  April  7,  1862 502 

Smith,  W.  D. 

Assignments  to  command 433 

Mentioned 433 

Smith,  W.  E.  Mentioned 299 

Smith,  W.  J.  Mentioned 117,118 

Smyrna,  Fla.  Affair  at,  March  23,  1862,  Report  of  W.  S.  Dilworth Ill 

Soule,  Pierre. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 887 

Mentioned 519,858 

South,  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 248 

Hunter,  David,  assigned  to  command 248 


Orders — Circulars — series  1861:  October  26,  183;  November  4,  185. 

Orders,  General,  series  1861:  (Sherman)  No.  1,  170;  No.  5,  171;  No.  11, 177; 
No.  13,  178;  No.  15,  179;  No.  16,  180;  No.  19,  181;  No.  24,  187;  No.  29, 
No.  32,  189.  Series  1862:  No.  1,  47;  No.  9,  222;  (GiUmore)  No.  17,  156; 


(Hunter)  No.  1,  257;  No.  2,  258;  No.  3,  264. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861 : No.  10,  175. 

Subdivisions  of  / 

Northern  District. 

Benham,  H.  W,  assigned  to  command 258 

Limits  defined 258 

Southern  District. 

Brannan,  J.  M,  assigned  to  command 258 

Limits  defined 258 

Western  District. 

Arnold,  Lewie  G,  assigned  to  command 258 

Limits  defined 258 

Union  troops  in. 

Location  of,  on  South  Atlantic  coast,  April,  1862 263 

Organization  of,  February  28,  1862 237 

Strength  of,  February  28,  1862 237 

South  Atlantic  Coast.  Affairs  on,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 218 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 278,341 

Army  Headquarters, 224-226 

Davis,  Jefferson 400, 435 


INDEX.  957 

Page. 

South  Atlantic  Coast.  Affairs  on,  generally.  Communications  from— Cont’d. 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 278 

Gill,  W.  G 332 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  Jos6 278 

Hunter,  David 254,263 

Lee,  Eobert  E 314, 327, 335, 346, 348, 367, 370, 375, 397, 406, 432, 433 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 348 

Pemberton,  John  C 407,428,432,433 

Saxton,  Eufus 208 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 192, 

198, 201,  203,  207,  209,  214, 216,  221,  226, 235,  236, 240,  242, 247,  254,  257 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 433, 434 

War  Department,  C.  S . . . . 313,  314, 319, 338, 340, 347, 348, 352, 371, 378, 380, 390, 415 
War  Department,  U.  S 211 

South  Carolina. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 334 

Lee,  Robert  E 349, 351, 365, 369 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 273, 345 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 268, 271, 272, 315, 326,  340, 363 

Trapier,  J.  H 313 

War  Department,  C.  S 273,275,318 

Military  departments  embracing 248, 309 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 271,341 

Anderson,  J.  R 308,311 

Benbam,  Henry  W 265 

Christ,  B.  C 206, 207 

Colcock,  C.  J 330,331 

De  Treville,  Richard 383 

Drayton,  Thomas  F 329,331,373,374 

Elford,  C.  J 361 

Emery,  Sabine 196 

Evans,  Nathan  G 354, 359, 382, 384, 415 

Fellows,  E.  Q 266 

Gregg,  Maxcy 423 

Jones,  James 341 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 311 

Lee,  Robert  E 312, 329, 335, 339, 343, 

344,  346,  347,  358,  364,  369,  374,  375,  382, 385, 386, 390, 394, 395, 423, 424 

Manigault,  A.  M 321, 337, 352,  359, 425 

Means,  J.  H 362 

Pemberton,  John  C 405, 415, 417, 419-422, 427, 429, 434, 435 

Ripley,  Roswell  S.  267, 269, 306, 309-311, 323, 329, 336, 352, 360, 384, 387, 389, 391 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 188-190, 210, 214 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 336 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 306, 310, 311 

Stevens,  Isaac  1 197-199,205 

War  Department,  C.  S 308, 309, 319 

Wilson,  J.  H 191,215 

(See  also 

Barnwell  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  February  10,  1862. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  December  7,  1861. 

Beauregard,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  November 
7,  1861. 

k ' 


958 


INDEX. 


Page. 

South  Carolina — Continued. 

Operations  in. 

(See  also 

Bluffton,  S.  C.  Operations  near,  February  20-24,  1862. 

Bull  Eiver,  S.  C.  Beconnaissance  on,  February  23-26,  1862. 

BraddocWs  Point,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  November  10-11,  1861. 

Charleston,  S.  C.  Operations  against  {proposed). 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Sinking  of  stone  fleets  at  entrance  of,  De- 
cember 20,  1861,  and  January  20,  1862. 

Chisolm’s  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  December'  17,  1861. 

Edisto  Island. 

Affair  on,  March  29,  1862. 

Expedition  to,  January  22-25,  1862. 

Occupied  by  Union  forces. 

February  11,  1862. 

April  5,  1862. 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.  Beconnaissance  on,  November  8,  1861. 

May  Biver,  S.  C.  Beconnaissance  on,  March  19-24,  1862. 

Port  Boyal  Expedition. 

Port  Boyal  Ferry,  Coosaw  Biver,  S.  C. 

Engagement  at,  January  1,  1862. 

Expedition  to,  December  6-7,  1861. 

Bockville,  S.  C.  Evaouatedby  Confederate  forces,  December  17,  1861. 

Schooner  Channel,  S.  C.  Beconnaissance  on,  February  23-26,  1862. 

Walker,  Fort,  Si  C.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  November!,  1861.  ^ 

Wright  Biver,  S.  C.  Beconnaissance  to,  February  6,  1862. ) 

Proclamation  to  the  people  of.  (Sherman.) 4 

Ke-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 341 

Lee,  Robert  E 347 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 340 

War  Department,  C.  S 338,340,347 

Requisitions  on,  for  troops 371 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of.  Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Robert  E 345, 364 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 336 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of 404 

War  Department,  C.  S 1 273,405 

South  Carolina,  Department  of  (Confederate.) 

Constituted 267 

Merged  into  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida 309 

Ripley,  Roswell  S.,  assigned  to  command 267 

Strength  of  Confederate  troops  in,  September,  1861 285 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of  Correspondence  with 

Pemberton,  John  C 405, 407, 415 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 404 

War  Department,  C.S 404 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of  Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 318, 334, 366, 372, 435, 872 

Lee,  Robert  E 326,356,363,365 

Martin,  W.  E 34 

Pemberton,  John  C 433, 434 

War  Department,  C.  S 268, 

271, 272, 275, 292, 306, 308, 310, 311, 313, 315, 319, 321-323, 328, 338, 340 


INDEX. 


959 

Page. 


South  Carolina  Troops. 

Mentioned. 

Artillery — Battalions:  Palmetto,  326,  354,  358,  387,  389.  Batteries: 
Chesterfield,  311,326;  Lafayette,  326 ; Lamar’s,  326,  389;  Macbeth, 
326,  336,  354;  Marion,  335,  336,  339,  354,  359;  Washington,  114,  115, 
119,  120,  335,  336,  339,  359,  426.  Regiments:  1st,’'  7,  13-16,336. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  1st,  324,  360,  387;  4th,  426;  Nesbitt’s,  383,  426. 
Companies:  Charleston  Light  Dragoons,  324,  351;  Rutledge 
Mounted  Rifles,  324,  351;  Saint  James  Mounted  Rifles,  384; 
Screven’s,  7, 24 ; Tucker’s,  426.  Regiments : Martin’s,*  35-38, 68, 70, 
74, 75, 312, 323, 324, 326, 329, 351, 357. 

Infantry — Battalions : 7th,  382, 386 ; Enfield,  114, 115 ; Hatch’s,  326;  Lau- 
rens, 348,  349,  353,  357,  359,  383;  Lucas’,  326;  Manigault’s,  353,358; 
Moore’s,  114, 117, 358, 383.  Companies:  Chichester’s,*  389;  Citadel 
Cadets,*  326;  Claremont, *326;  College  Cadets,*  326;  McCord’s 
Zouaves,  311,  326;  Palmetto  Guard,  324;  Vigilant  Rifles,  326.* 
Regiments : 1st  {Provisional  Army),  268,  269,  271,  275,  310,  311,  328, 
372;  1st  (Volunteers),  268,  273,  285,  326;  Ist  (Rifles),  267-269,  285, 
329,  346,  357,  361,  370,  433;  1st*  (Rifles),  39-42,  353,  358;  10th,  268, 
269,  285,  352,  322,  360,  425,  426,  433,  434;  11th,  7,  11,  13,  14,  16,  17, 
20,  21,  24,  27-29,  268,  269,  323,  326,  351 ; 12th,  7,  10,  11,  24-29,  67,  69- 
75, 108, 110,  111,  268,  269,  285,  312,  323,  324,  326,  346,  351,  361,  384, 
422,  423,  433;  13th,  285,  312,  323,  324,  326,  343,  351,  423;  14th,  42,  67, 
69-73,  75,  108,  109,  285,  324,  326,  351;  15th,  8-10,  12,  17, 18,  22,  285, 
310,  323, 326, 351 ; 16th,  348,  349,  351,  353,  357-361, 363,  364, 383 ; 17th, 
348,  349,  351,  353,  357-360,  362-364,  383;  17th,*  353,  358,  359;  18th, 
19th,  20th,  384,  387;  21st,  426;  23d,  353;  24th,  387. 

Miscellaneous — Legions:  Harlee’s,*  360;  Holcombe,  78-82,  114-119, 


335,  336,  357,  358,  360,  383;  Pee  Dee,*  361. 

Number  in  Confederate  service  up  to  February  20,  1862 404, 405 

South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida.  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 309, 428, 432 

Lee,  Robert  E.,  assigned  to  command 309,312 


Orders,  General,  series  1861 : (Lee)  No.  1,  312 ; No.  2,  327 ; No.  4,  339.  Series 
1862 : No.  6,  402  ; (Pemberton)  No.  1,  414  ; No.  5,  432. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861:  (Lee)  No.  1,  322;  No.  2,  323;  No.  17,  344; 
No.  22, 347 ; No.  23,  348 ; No.  24,  349.  Series  1862 : (Pemberton)  No.  44, 


414 ; No.  20,  433. 

Pemberton,  John  C.,  assigned  to  command 402,407 

Strength  and  station  of  forces  in,  in  South  Carolina,  November  19, 1861 326 

Subdivisions  of. 

First  District. 

Established  and  limits  defined 344 

Manigault,  A.  M.,  assigned  to  command 344 

Strength  of  Confederate  troops  in,  December,  1861 360 

Second  District. 

Established  and  limits  defined 344 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861 : No.  217,  39.  Series  1862:  No.  10,  82. 

Ripley,  Roswell  S.,  assigned  to  command 344 

Third  District. 

Attached  temporarily  to  Second  Distric  t 345 

Established  and  limits  defined 344 

Evans,  Nathan  G.,  assigned  to  command 347 


State  Militia. 


960 


INDEX. 


Page. 

South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida.  Department  of.  (Confederate)— Cont’d. 
Subdivisions  of. 

Fourth  District. 

Established  and  limits  defined 344, 414 

Gregg,  Maxcy,  assigned  to  command 414 

Pemberton,  John  C.,  assigned  to  command 345 

Fifth  District.* 

Colquitt,  P.  H.,  assigned  to  command 433 

Donelson,  Daniel  S.,  assigned  to  command 414 

Established  and  limits  defined 414 

Sixth  District.! 

Drayton,  Thomas  F.,  assigned  to  command 345 

Established  and  limits  defined 345 

Spangler,  Charles.  Mentioned 477 

Spaulding,  Randolph.  Mentioned 18 

Sprague,  William.  Mentioned 168,169 

Squier,  H.  W.  Mentioned 59 

Squires,  M.  T.  • 

Mentioned 512,532-535,542,548,574 

Eeport  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 550 

Stanton,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 131,249,254 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S.) 

Star,  Steamer.  Mentioned 536,612 

Starke,  W.  E.  Mentioned 349 

Star  of  the  South,  Steamer.  Mentioned 180,190,239 

Star  of  the  West,  Steamer.  Mentioned 598 

State  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with  Mansfield  Lovell 646 

State  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 723 

Steffey,  James.  Mentioned 116 

Stelljes,  J.  Mentioned 16 

Stephenson,  Mr.  Mentioned 816 

Stephenson,  John  A. 

Mentioned 522-524, 539, 564, 590, 604, 612, 613, 773, 854 

Report  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 540 

Stevens,  Clement  H.  Mentioned 82 

Stevens,  Hazard.  Mentioned 52, 56, 57 

Stevens,  H.  K.  Mentioned 82 

Stevens,  Isaac  I. 

Assignments  to  command 180 

Correspondence  with 

Brenholts,  Thomas  S 197 

Christ,  B.  C 206, 207 

Myer,  Albert  J 65 

Nobles,  William  H 200, 201 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 197-199, 205 

Mentioned 44-47, 54, 59, 62-65, 179, 180, 182, 185, 199, 237 

Reports  of 

Barnwell  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  February  10,  1862 88 

Bull  River  and  Schooner  Channel,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  up,  February 

23-26, 1862  91 

Chisolm’s  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  December  17,  1861 42 

Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  January  1, 1862 47 


* Prior  to  March  19,  1862,  embraced  in  Fourth  District, 
t Prior  to  March  19,  1862,  designated  Fifth  District. 


INDEX. 


961 


81,115 

77,78, 113,  IM,  11  U,‘J72 


Stevens,  P.  F. 

Correspondence  with  Nathan  G.  Evans 

Mentioned 

Reports  of,  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

Adair  on,  March  29, 1862 115, 117, 119 

Expedition  to,  January  22-25,  1862 78 

Stevens,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 124,  125,  129 

Stevenson,  Carter  L.  Mentioned :J58,  376 

Stewart,  A.  P.  Mentioned 842 

Stickney,'Mr.  Mentioned 534 

Stiles,  W.  H.  Mentioned 8 

Stinson,  Joseph. 

632 

Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 632, 633 

Mentioned i:i8,258 

Mentioned 289 

Mentioned 522,  529,  604,612 


Mentioned 

Testimonj’-  of. 

Stockton,  S.  W. 

Stockton,  W.  T. 

Stonewall  Jackson,  C.  S.  S. 

Stovall,  M.  A.  Mentioned 

Strain,  M.  H.  Mentioned 

Stringfellow,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc., see  JSaynuel  Jones.) 

Strong,  George  C. 

Correspondence  with 

Biloxi,  Miss.,  Mayor  of 


284 

111 

874 


ro7 


Butler,  Benjamin  F 707 


Mentioned 704, 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  Benjamin  F.  Butler.) 

Stuart,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 

Stuart,  Henry.  Mentioned 

Stuart,  H.  M.  Mentioned 

Stuart,  M.  Mentioned 

Sturgis,  H.  L.  Mentioned 

Sturtevant,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 


•09 


172 

26 

29 


701 

854 

95 

17 


Styles,  C.  W.  Mentioned 

Suggart,  Z.  E.  Mentioned 

Sumner,  R.  B.  Mentioned 818,823 

Sutherland,  Charles.  Mentioned 454,  471,497 

Suydam,  James  Adrian. 

Correspondence  with  William  H.  Nobles 201 

Mentioned 200,201 

Szymanski,  Ignatius.  Mentioned  522,  533,  563, 579 

Tafft,  Henry  S. 

Mentioned 49^^51,  62,  64,65 

Report  of  engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1,  1862 6:1 

Taggart,  M.  C.  Mentioned 70 

Talemino,  Steamboat.  Mentioned :198 

Talley,  W.  H.  Mentioned 24-26,72,73 

Tardy,  John  A.  Mentioned 96,1*28,242 

Tatnall,  Josiah.  Mentioned 3, 7, 10, 24, 85, 90, 208, 3*22,  401,  624 

Tatnall,  J.  R.  F.  Mentioned 407,661 

Taylor,  Franck  E.  Mentioned 441,445, 

448,  449,  4.52,  456,  471,  473,  475,  4S3,  484,  497 
Taylor,  H.  R.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Ajyalachicola,  Fla.,  Citizens  of.) 

Taylor,  Jesse  C.  Mentioned 52 

GL  R R — VOL  VI 


962 


INDEX. 


Taylor,  J ohn  L.  Mentioned 

Taylor,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 

Taylor,  Lewis  B.  Mentioned 

Taylor,  Robert  B.  Mentioned .* 

Taylor,  Walter  H.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Robert  E.  Lee.) 

Teazer,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Telford,  Actio g Master.  Mentioned 

Templeton,  William  F.  Mentioned 

Tenbrink,  William.  Mentioned 


Page. 
..  116 
..  668 
535,  552 
199 
..  312 


737 

612 

59 

: 837 

Tennessee,  Steamer.  Mentioned 716,  808,813,  817,  818,  820,  822,829,  833,  850 

Tennessee.  Re-enforcements  for,  from  seaboard.  Communications  from 

Bragg,  Braxton 777,  824,  826,  829,8.34,836,894 

Davis,  Jefferson 435, 872 

Halleck,  Henry  W 704 

Jones,  Sdmuel 839 

Lee,  Robert  E 400,  403,  406,  432,  433 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 742, 830,  872 

Lovell,  Mansfield 825, 828,  832,  847 

Pemberton,  John  C 432-434 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 433,  434 

Trapier,  J.  H 93,  409,  411 

Twiggs,  David  E 743 

War^Department,  C.  S 390,  398, 823,  824, 827-829, 837,  872 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Ivdmiivj— Regiments : 8th,  68, 69, 71,  73,  75,  338,  .340, 341,  346,  347,  349,  357, 

432,  433 ; 16th,  68,  338,  340, 341,  346,  347,  349,  357,  432,  433. 

Terry,  Alfred  H.  Mentioned 30-,32,  136,  146,  159 

Terry,  T.  M.  Mentioned 749 

Texas,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 

Theodora,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned : 354 

Thomas,  Lorenzo.  Mentioned 177,216,238,255,672 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Thomas,  R.  B.  Mentioned 276 

Thompson,  J.  J.  Mentioned 299 

Thompson,  L.  L.  Mentioned 116 

Thompson,  R.  W.  Mentioned 138,258 

Thornton,  Captain.  Mentioned 109 

Tift,  A.  F. 

Correspondence  with  Court  of  Inquiry.  Fall  of  New  Orleans,  La 631 

Mentioned 575,  .576, 625,  630, 631 

Tift,  Nelson. 

Correspondence  with  Court  of  Inquiry.  Fall  of  New  Orleans,  La 631 

Mentioned 574-576,  578, 598,  609, 610, 625, 630, 631 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 625- 

628, 630 

Tillinghast,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 299 

Tilton,  N.  C.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 428 

Time,  Steamer.  Mentioned 451,460,470,474,477,478,480,481,488,494,846,856 

Tisdale,  Ferdinand.  Mentioned 142 

Todd,  John  W.  Mentioned 471,  475,  497 

Todd,  R.  B.  Correspondence  with  J.  L.  Lewis 850 

Tomkins,  D.  C.  Mentioned 70 

Tom.  Murray,  Steamer.  Mentioned 843,848,849,859,860 


INDEX. 


963 


Page. 


TompklnB,  Daniel  D. 

Correspondonce  with  War  Department,  U.  S 327 

Mentioned 175, 18G,  208 

Tompkins,  Frank  A.  Mentioned - 461 

Totten,  Joseph  Or.  Mentioned 147,084,685 

Tourtellot,  L.  C.  Mentioned 138 

Toutant,  A.  J. 

Mentioned 574,636 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 636, 637 

Tower,  Zealous  B. 

Mentioned 440,  441,  445,  447,  471,  475, 497 

Report  of  action  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.,  October  9, 1861 443 

Town,  Franklin  E.  Mentioned 64 

Townsend,  E.  D.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Army  Headquarters.) 

Townsend,  J.  H.  Mentioned 561, 598, 812, 816, 822, 833, 853, 854, 876 

Tracy,  Carlos. 

Mentioned 22, 29, 104 

Report  of  operations  near  Bluffton,  S.  C.,  March  20-24, 1862,  including  alfairs 
on  Buckingham  and  Hunting  Islands,  S.  C 106 

Tracy,  B.  L. 

Correspondence  with  J.  L.  Lewis 837 

Mentioned 595 

Trade  and  Intercourse 720-723, 873 

Trans- Mlasiasippl.  Re-enforcemonts  for,  from  Texas.  Communications  from 

War  Department,  C.  S 830 

Trapier,  James  H. 

Assignments  to  command 293,  323,  407, 413 

Cerrespondence  with  • 

Florida,  Governor  of. 307 

Lee,  Robert  E 364,  370, 380, 393, 398, 403,  406,  411,  414 

Pemberton,  John  C 409,  410,  417 

War  Department,  C.  S 292,  313, 318 

Mentioned 18, 270, 289, 

292, 293, 295-298,  302,  304,  308,  315,  317,  319,  323, 325,  326,  328,  :m,  346, 
352,  364,  368,  371,  379,  387,  393,  398-4C0, 402, 406-410, 412,  413, 427, 429 


Reports  of 

Amelia  Island,  Fla.  Evacuation  of,  by  Confederate  forces,  Mar.  3, 1862.  93 

Cedar  Keyes,  Fla.  Naval  descent  upon,  January  16,  1862 75,76 

Treasury  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S...  249 

Trepagnier,  Norbert.  Mentioned 858 

Trimble,  Isaac  R.  Mentioned 796,805,815,817 

Tucker,  John.  Mentioned 187 

TuUen,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 662 

Tuamey,  John. 

Mentioned 23 

Statement  of  occurrences  at  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  November  7-8, 1861 29 

Turel,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 662 

Turnbull,  C.  N.  Mentioned 704 

Turnar,  John  W.  Mentioned 136-138,146,160,258 

Turnsr,  Peter  J.  Mentioned 142 

Turner,  William  J.  Mentioned 341 

Turnipssed,  E.  B.  Mentioned  24,27,68,73-75 

Twiggs,  David  E. 

Assignments  to  command 643 


9G4 


INDEX. 


Twiggs,  David  E. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 738 

Duncan,  J.  K 730 

Lewis,  John  L 736 

Smith,  Martin  L 734 

War  Department,  C.  S 728-730,  738, 739, 743-747, 749, 750 

Mentioned 558,559, 

583,  588, 594,  622,  624,  643, 738,  740,  742, 745,  746, 748,  751, 766,  769, 777 
Tybee  Island,  Ga.  Occupation  of,  by  Union  trooiDS,  Nov.  24, 1861.  Report  of 

Robert  E.  Lee 32 

Tyler, . Mentioned 808,  815 

Tyler,  H.  B.  Mentioned 725 

Tyler,  John,  jr.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  fVar  Department,  6.  S.) 

Tyler,  John  S.  Mentioned 676 

Unadilla,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned..,, 152 

Union,  Steamer.  Mentioned 3, 186, 310 

Union,  Captain  of  Steamer.  Correspondence  with  Thomas  W.  Sherman 310 

Union  Troops. 

Casualties.  Engagement  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.,  January  1, 1862 66 

Location  of,  on  South  Atlantic  coast,  April,  1862 2C3 

Mentioned.  (Regulars.) 


Artillery — Regiments:  1st,  {Batteries)  A,  439-441,443,  444-457,471,473, 
483,484,675,  717;  F,  471,  473,  476,  675,  717;  L,  471,  473,477,500,675, 
717;  2d,  A,  667;  C,  471,  473,  487,  488,  675,  717;  H,  439-441,443-457, 
471,473,478,479,481,675,717;  K,  471,473,  481,675,717;  M,  667;  3d, 
E,  48, 124, 126, 130, 176, 180, 182, 185, 197-199,  237, 242, 256,  257. 
Engineers — Companies  : A,  146, 182, 667. 

Infantry — Regiments:  1st,  675;  3d,  439-441,  443-457,  471,  473,484-486, 


675,  717. 

Pioneers  (Weitzel’s),  705. 

Sappers  and  Miners:*  (Brown’s),  708. 

(For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States.) 

Status  of,  at  Pensacola,  Fla 665-668, 672 

Organization  of.  Returns  of 

Gulf,  Department  of  the,  March  31,  1862 706 

Port  Royal  Expedition,!  October  28,  1861 185 

South,  Department  of  the,t  February  28,  1862  237 

Strength  of.  Returns  of 
Florida,  Department  of. 

October  31,  1861 672 

December  31,  1861 675 

Gulf,  Department  of  the,  March  31, 1862 707 

Port  Royal  Ex])edition,t  October  28,  1861  185 

South,  Department  of  the,t  February  28,  1862  237 

Upshur,  John  H Mentioned 50 

Van  Benthuysen,  A.  C 492, 494, 495 

Vanderbilt,  Steamer  (Blockade  Runner).  Mentioned 560, 

593,  796, 797,  802,  807,  808,  813,  817,  818,  820-822,  825,  833,  839,  841,  864 

Vanderbilt,  Steamer  (U.  S.  Transport).  Mentioned 44,180,208 

Van  Dorn,  Earl. 

Corresi^ondence  with  Mansfield  Lovell 884 

Mentioned 740,  746,  803,  830, 842 

* Improvised.  t Designated  at  this  date  Expeditionary  Corps. 


INDEX. 


0G5 


Pil^O. 

Vail  Gcwder,  James  S.  Meutioned - 59,01 

Varuna,  U.  S.  S.  Meutioned 5*^9,(300,030,701 

Venable,  C.  S. 

Mentioned 517,  508,  570,  015, 035 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La — 015,010 
Venus  Point,  Ga.  Action  at,  February  15,  186*2.  Keports  of 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 90 

Viele,  Egbert  L 90 

Vermont  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  {Independent):  1st,  680,087,  700,707;  2d,  500, 08*2, 080, 

087, 700, 708. 

Infantry— /?e^//ne/7fs  : 7th,  507, 682, 683, 087, 094, 700,  707  ; 8th,  082,  083, 087, 

694,  700,  707,  710. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Defenses  of.  Communications  Irom 

Bragg,  Braxton 806 

Lovell,  Mauslield 783, 870, 883,  884 

Mississippi,  Ordnance  Officer  of 783 

Victoria,  Steamer 500,593,827-8*29,833,839,841 

Viele,  Egbert  L. 

Assignments  to  connnand 171 

Correspondence  with 

Beard,  Oliver  T *201 

Beuham,  H.  W 259-201, 204, 205 

Sherman,  Thomas  W. *245 

Wilson,  J.  H 20*2 

Mentioned 47,  54,  90,  98,  99, 121, 135, 

140, 147, 148, 151-153, 159, 170, 171, 175, 179, 182, 185, 220, 237, 259, 205 

Reports  of 

Pulaski,  Fort,  Ga.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  Ai)ril  10-11,  1862..  141, 142 
Saint  Augustine  Creek,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  near  the  mouth  of,  March 

28,  1862 112 

Venus  Point,  Ga.  Action  at,  February  15,  1862 90 

Villepigue,  John  B.  Meutioned 472, 

489-493, 757,  806, 810,  820, 837,  852,  853, 855, 856, 8^0 

Vincennes,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned 059,609,705 

Vinton,  Francis  L.  Mentioned 17*2 

Virginia,  C.  S.  S.  (U.  S.  Frigate  Merrimac).  Mentioned 134,803 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries:  Caroline,  108,340;  Leake’s,  07,09-71,74,340,422. 

Infantry — Regiments:  60th,  338,340,341,349,357. 

Vogdes,  Israel.  Mentioned 4*39-442, 444, 445, 448-451, 453-450, 458,  40*2 

Wabash,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 8,83,159,388 

Waddell,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 609 

Waddy,  J.  R.  Mentioned 414 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Wagener,  John  A. 

Mentioned 13, 10, 17 

Report  of  bombardment  and  capture  of  Fort  Walker,  S.  C.,  Nov.  7,  1861  ..  14 

Wagener,  Julius.  Mentioned 15 

Wagner,  Thomas  M. 

Mentioned 320 

Report  of  sinking  of  stone  fleet  at  the  entrance  to  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C., 

December  20,  1861 43 

Walker,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment  and  captm’e  of,  November  7,  1861. 

Casualties,  Confederate  forces 1*2 


966 


INDEX. 


'Walker,  Fort,  S.  C.  Bombardment  and  capture  of,  Nov.  7, 1861 — Continued. 


Reports  of 

Bedon,  Josiah 20 

Canaday,  D.  S 21 

De  Saussure,  W.  D 17 

Drayton,  Thomas  F 6 

Heyward,  William  C 16 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 3, 5 

Wagener,  John  A 14 

Walker,  Captain.  Mentioned 401 

Walker,  Charles.  Mentioned 476 

Walker,  David  S.  Mentioned 402 

Walker,  Leo.  D.  Mentioned 324, 329, 387 

Walker,  Leroy  P. 

Assignments  to  command 772, 815 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 764,765 

Mentioned 270,271, 

298,  305,  372,  726,  741,  743,  745,  761,  764,  772,  793,802,810,815,820,821 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  PTar  Department,  C.  S.) 

Walker,  Thomas  F.  Correspondence  with  John  L.  Lewis 837 

Walker,  W.  H.  T.  Mentioned 307 

Walker,  W.  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 416 

Mentioned 414 

Wall,  W.  H.  & Co.  Mentioned  294,295 

Wallen,  Henry  D.  Mentioned 688 

Walter,  George  H.  Mentioned 359 

Walter,  H.  W.  Mentioned 492, 752 

Walworth,  Mr.  Mentioned 729,730 

Ward  & Co.  Mentioned 627 

Ward,  George  T.  Mentioned 276,316 

Ward,  James.  Mentioned 549 

Ward,  W.  H. 

Mentioned 607 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La...  607,608 
War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S A 271,278,768 

Alabama,  Governor  of 739, 803, 870, 873,  886 

Anderson,  J.  R 308, 309,  311 

Apalachicola,  Fla.,  Citizens  of 286 

Bragg,  Braxton 376,  377, 744,  758, 761,  762, 

773,  777,  778,  788,  794,  797,  802,  803,  806,  809, 823, 824,  826-829, 834,  894 

Davis,  Jefferson 554, 655,  657,  888 

Dilworth,  W.  S 289, 296, 315 

Drayton,  Thomas  F 306 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 278, 743, 745 

Florida,  Governor  of. . 295, 297, 299,  304, 308, 319, 328, 334, 354, 378, 402, 404, 412, 878 

Forney,  John  H 663,886 

Georgia,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 415 

Georgia,  Governor  of 274, 284, 285, 310, 315,  318-321, 421, 425 

Grayson,  John  B 276 

Hubert,  P.  O 830 

Johnston,  A.  Sidney 761,762 

Jones,  Samuel 862, 866, 873, 891, 893 

Jones,  Thomas  M 886,  890 


INDEX.  967 

Page. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with — Continued. 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 272-274, 283, 285, 299, 305, 306, 309, 311, 319 

Lee,  Robert  E 312, 

314,  319,  320,  327,  335,  340,  346-349,  352,  371,  376-380,  390, 398, 400, 886 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 741, 

742,  745,  747,  749,  751,  752,  765,  773,  791,  830,  837,  840,  869,  872,  874 

Lovell,  Mansfield 646, 650, 653 

657,  753,  754,  758,  764,  765,767,769,774,781,783,785-788,  790,791,795- 
799,  804,  805,  807-809,  811,  813,  815-818,  820-825,827-829,832,839-841, 
847,  850,  852,  853,  863,  864,  866-868,  870-873,  876-878,  882,  883, 885, 887 

Mayo,  George  Upshur 294 

Milligan,  James  F 297 

Mobile,  Ala.,  Mayor  of 738,741,744 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 728, 729, 782, 796, 799 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 348 

Pemberton,  John  C 94, 416-418,  420, 423 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 273, 306 

Soul^,  Pierre 887 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 273, 405 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of 404 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 268, 

271,  272,  275,  292,  306,  308,  310,  311,  313,  315,  319,  321-323,  328,  338, 340 

Trapier,  J.  H 292, 313,  318 

Twiggs,  David  E 728-730, 738, 739, 743-747, 749, 750 

Walker,  L.  P 764,765 

Withers,  Jones  M 729 

Yulee,  D.  L 292 

War  Department,  U.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 677 

Army  Headquarters 677, 687 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 673,677,686,708,710 

Connecticut,  Governor  of 168, 169, 172 

Halleck,  Henry  W 704 

Hunter,  David 254, 263 

Lincoln,  Abraham 171 

McClellan,  George  B 179 

Maine,  Governor  of - 168,169 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 168, 169, 174, 678 

Moore,  Charles  B 666 

New  Hampshire,  Governor  of 168, 169 

New  York,  Governor  of 169, 170, 172 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 173, 187 

Rhode  Island,  Governor  of 168, 169 

Serrell,  Edward  W 245 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 168, 176, 179, 209, 211, 216, 227, 254 

Tompkins,  Daniel  D 227 

Treasury  Department,  U.  S 249 

Wool,  John  E 175,184 

Report  of  the  evacuation  of  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  by  the  Union  forces,  April 

9,  1862 131 

Warley,  A.  F. 

Mentioned 522, 527,  537,  612 

Report  of  operations  in  defense  of  New  Orleans,  La 537 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 602-604 


968 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Warren,  H.  B.  Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 728 

Warrior,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 522,  529,  612 

Warthen,  Thomas  J. 

Correspondence  with  Alexander  R.  Lawton  305 

Mentioned 305 

Washington,  Thornton  A.  Mentioned 312,  402,  406 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Bolert  E.Lee;  also  John  C.  Pemberton.) 


Water  Witch,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 750 

Watmough,  P.  G.  Mentioned 83 

Watson,  A.  B.  Mentioned 50,  52,  53 

Watson,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 697 

Wayne,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 377,  430,  431 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Georgia,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office,  C.  S.A.) 


W.  Burton,  Tug.  Mentioned 541,  542,  611,  612 

Webb,  L.  H.  Mentioned 69,70 

Webster,  Richard.  Mentioned 132 

Webster,  Steamer.  Mentioned 179 

Weed,  Connell  & Co.  Mentioned 376 

Weidenhammer,  M.  Mentioned 58 

Weitzel,  Godfrey.  Mentioned 505,  685,694,  704 

Welles,  Gideon.  Mentioned 184,  730 

Wells,  Mr.  Mentioned 625 

Wendall,  Charles.  Mentioned 451 

Wermes,  Charles.  Mentioned - 549 

Werner,  D.  Mentioned 13,  14,  16 

Werning,  John.  Mentioned 116 

West,  A.  P.  Mentioned 69,  70 

Western  Rivers.  Floating  defenses  for. 

Acts  of  Confederate  Congress 812,813 

Communications  from 

Hollins,  George  N 873 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 773 

Lovell,  Mansneld 809,816,  818,  832,  841,850,  864,  873,882 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 728 

War  Department,  C.  S 811,829,  853,  863,  866,  872,  873 

Western  World,  Steamer.  Mentioned 83,  98,  99 

West  Indian,  Brig.  Mentioned 270 

Whaley,  Joseph  S.  Mentioned 113,114 

Whaley,  Martha  M.  Mentioned - 80 

Whaley,  William.  Mentioned 79 

Wheat,  J.  T.  Mentioned 494,  495 

Wheeler  & Forestall.  Mentioned 625 

Wheeler,  Joseph.  Mentioned 744,759 

Wheldon,  C.  M.  Mentioned 723 

Whitaker,  Christian.  Mentioned 116 

White,  Captain.  Mentioned 14,16 

White,  E.  B.  Mentioned 354 

White,  William  J.  Mentioned 475 

Whitemarsh  and  Wilmington  Islands,  Ga.  Affairs  on,  March  30-31,  1862. 
Reports  of 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 120 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 122 

Rosa,  Rudolph 121 


INDEX. 


969 


Paga 

Whipple,  Thomas  J. 

Correspondcuco  with  Horatio  G.  Wright 239,  243 

Mentioned 239 

Whiting,  Captain.  Mentioned - C27 

Whitmore,  Steamer.  Mentioned 833 

Whitney,  Isaac.  Mentioned 132 

Whittemore,  Horace  O.  Mentioned 509 

Whittle,  William  C. 

Correspondence  with  Mansfield  Lovell G49, 050 

Mentioned ....  502, 520, 502, 503,  505, 509, 572, 574, 570, 003, 008-011, 013, 017, 050, 878 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  Now  Orleans,  La 017,018 

Wicks,  David  J.  Mentioned 477 

Wilcox,  C.  H.  Mentioned 29 

Wild  Gazelle,  Ship.  Mentioned 705 

Willcoxen,  John  B. 

Mentioned 103, 104, 100-108, 110 

Report  of  operations  near  Bluffton,  S.  C.,  March  20-24,  1802,  including 

affairs  on  Buckingham  and  Hunting  Islands,  S.  C 104-100 

Willey,  Captain.  Mentioned 29 

William  Batty,  Sloop. 

Mentioned 294, 295 

Seizure  of,  October,  1801.  Communications  from 

Antonio,  Charles 295 

Bowen,  W.  L.  L 294 

Mayo,  George  Upshur 294 

William  Heines,  Steamer.  Mentioned 809 

William  H.  Webb,  Steamer.  Mentioned 051,809 

Williams,  J.  J.  Mentioned 399 

Williams,  Thomas.  Mentioned 505, 098, 099, 702, 705-707, 710, 714 

WilUams,  T.  S. 

Mentioned 570, 578 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 578-580 

Willis,  Dr.  Mentioned 397,428 

Willis,  E.  Mentioned 13,21,29 

Wilmington  Island,  Ga.  Affairs  on,  March  30-31,  1802.  (See  Whitemarsh 
Island^  Ga.) 

Wilmington  Narrows,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  to,  Jan.  20-28,  1802.  Reports  of 

Lee,  Robert  E 85 

Wright,  Horatio  G 82 

Wilson,  James  B.  Mentioned 140,100 

Wilson,  James  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Sherman,  Thomas  W, 191,215,219 

Viele,  Egbert  L 202 

Mentioned 134, 135, 138, 141, 142, 140, 150, 152, 153, 157, 100, 219, 201, 204 

Wilson,  William. 

Mentioned 299, 440, 453, 454, 458, 074, 772 

Reports  of  action  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  Fla.,  October  9,  1801 440, 447 

Winfield  Scott,  Steamer.  Mentioned 3, 144, 180 

Winnemore,  J.  T.  Mentioned 574,035 

Winona,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 713 

Winship  & Co.  Mentioned 025,020 

Winslow,  Francis.  Mentioned 405 

Wissahickon,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 


970 


INDEX. 


Wisconsin  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 4th,  504, 506, 694, 705, 708. 

Withers,  Jones  M. 

Assignments  to  command 738,815 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  8.  A 747 

Bragg,  Braxton 779 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 740 

Johnston,  J.  D 801 

War  Department,  C.  8 729 

Mentioned 729, 738, 746, 752, 755-757, 

763,  765,  771,  772,  774,  779,785,796,800,  801,  815,816,819-821,837,880 

Withers,  R.  W.  Mentioned 740 

Wolfe,  Samuel. 

Mentioned 573, 606 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La 606 

Wolfe,  Samuel,  & Co.  Mentioned 560,573,584 

Wood,  Fort,  La.  Eecapture  of,  hy  Union  forces,  April  27, 1862.  (See  Summary 
of  Principal  Events,  p.  437. ) 

Wood,  Charles.  Mentioned 276, 294 

Wood,  S.  A.  M.  Mentioned 725,  820, 824 

Wood,  W.  L.  Mentioned 70 

Woodbury,  D.  P. 

Mentioned 227 

Notes.  Proposed  attack  on  Charleston,  S.  C 228-235 

Woodlief,  E.  D.  Mentioned 548 

Woodlief,  Peter  W. 

Mentioned 616 

Testimony  of.  Capture,  defense,  and  evacuation  of  New  Orleans,  La...  616,617 

Woods,  Mr.  Mentioned 500 

Wool,  John  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  8.  A 218 

War  Department,  U.  S 175, 184 

Mentioned 172,  218,  678 

Wright  River,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  to,  February  6,  1862.  Report  of  Oliver 

T.  Beard 85 

Wright,  A.  R 320 

Wright,  Edward 138,258 

Wright,  Horatio  G. 

Assignments  to  command 172 

Correspondence  with 

Bell,  Louis 129,255 

Benham,  Henry  W 127 

Bishee,  H.,jr 130 

Davis,  W.  G.  M 127 

Guss,  H.  R. 238 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 97, 

125, 126, 128, 220, 221, 223, 239, 241, 243-245, 249, 253, 256, 257 

Whipple,  Thomas  J 239, 243 

Mentioned 31,  32, 97, 151, 

170,  172,  175,  176,  180,  182,  185, 208, 226, 236, 237, 242, 248-250, 255, 260 

Proclamation  to  the  people  of  Jacksonville,  Fla 129 

Reports  of 

Amelia  Island,  Fla.  Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  March  4,  1862  ..  96 


INDEX. 


971 


Page. 


Wright,  Horatio  G. — Continued. 
lleports  of 

Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Evacuation  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  9,  1862 124 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  March  12,  1862  100 

Wilmington  Narrows,  Ga.  Reconnaissance  to,  January  26-28, 1862,  and 

naval  engagement 82 

Wright,  M.  H.  Mentioned 646 

Wright,  Thomas  S.  Mentioned 117,  118 

Yancey,  W.  L.  Mentioned 665 

Yankee  (C.  S.  Gunboat).  Mentioned 569 

Yankee  Blade,  Brig.  Mentioned 717 

Yates,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 13,  16,  17 

Youmans,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 24,  27 

Young,  Henry  E.  Mentioned 8,  13,  331 

Yulee,  D.  L. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 292 

Mentioned • 293,295,316 

Zollicoffer,  F.  K.  Mentioned  761 


o 


0 


