UNIVERSITY  OF 
ILLINOIS  LIBRARY 
AT  URBANA  CHAMPAIGN 
BOOKSTACKS 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/warofrebellion14unit 


4 


,\  v>  • 


THE 


WAR  OF  THE  REBELLION 


A COMPILATION  OF  THE 


OFFICIAL  RECORDS 


OF  THE 


UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


PREPARED,  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR, 


BY 


Lieut.  Ool.  EOBEET  N,  SCOTT,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery, 


AND 


PUBLISHED  PURSUANT  'TO  ACT  OF  CONGRESS  APPROVED  JUNE  16,  1880. 


LJ  C AT  £ 

SERIES  I— VOLUME  XIV. 


WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE. 
1885. 


PREFACE. 


By  an  act  approved  Jane  23, 1874,  Congress  made  an  appropriation- 

?rd  f wCreta7  °f  War  t0  begi“  tbe  Pub'i«ation  of  the  Official 
frate  l » the  Eebellion>  both  of  the  Union  and  Confed- 

ate  Armies,  and  directed  him  “to  have  copied  for  the  Public  Printer 

a reports,  letters,  telegrams,  and  general  orders  not  heretofore  copied 
or  printed,  and  properly  arranged  in  chronological  order.” 

JZrratUm!  continninS  such  Preparation  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time,  and  the  act  approved  June  16,  1880,  has  provided  “for 
he  printing  and  binding,  under  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of 
ten  thousand  copies  of  a compilation  of  the  Official  Kecords  (Union  and 

> eadv  fo  r ? Wf  °f  ^ Eebellion>  80  far  as  the  same  may  be 
eady  for  publication,  during  the  fiscal  year”;  and  that  “ of  said  num- 
ber, seven  thousand  copies  shall  be  for  the  nse  of  the  House  of  Kepre 
sentatives,  two  thousand  copies  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  and  one 
thousand  copies  for  the  use  of  the  Executive  Departments.”* 

recordsTtbe^r  ""  a ^ general  bublication  of  the  military 

o d , a“,  W"':m,braCe  a11  0fflcial  documents  that  can  be 

obtained  by  the  compiler,  and  that  appear  to  be  of  any  historical  value. 

aC‘  aPPr°Ted  JUDe  16>  188°-  Th«  approved 

b/,».  s,,.zr^z:i::r.iTis::cz  T,za??r 

-1  zrt 

havefomarded  to  snch  addre,a°W  “ r ^ 8 °f  th°Se  heretofore  published  they 

be  published  and  all  sets  tl  at  Th<\re“almni?  C0Pies  «*'  the  eleven  thousand  to 

hef,6h*^ 

cent,  added  thereto,  and  the  proceeds  of  such  sale  shall  he  covered  into’  the  Treasury^ 

"..r:7rr;:'r.;r  r - rr  * - — -dissss 

the  samu  wlm  +1  S’  ^eJ)re8entatlve8>  or  Delegates,  who  have  designated 

The  Secretary  ofWw  or6aniz»»rion0,  or  individuals. 


IV 


PREFACE. 


The  publication  will  present  the  records  in  the  following  order  of 
arrangement : 

The  First  Series  will  embrace  the  formal  reports,  both  Union  and  Con- 
federate, of  the  first  seizures  of  United  States  property  in  the  Southern 
States,  and  of  all  military  operations  in  the  field,  with  the  correspond, 
mice,  orders,  and  returns  relating  specially  thereto,  and,  as  proposed,  is 
to  be  accompanied  by  an  Atlas. 

In  this  series  the  reports  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  campaigns 
and  several  theaters  of  operations  (in  the  chronological  order  of  the 
events),  and  the  Union  reports  of  any  event  will,  as  a rule,  be  imme- 
diately followed  by  the  Confederate  accounts.  The  correspondence,  &c., 
not  embraced  in  the  11  reports  ” proper  will  follow  (first  Union  and  next 
Confederate)  in  chronological  order. 

The  Second  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns,  Union  and  Confederate,  relating  to  prisoners  of  war,  and  (so 
far  as  the  military  authorities  were  concerned)  to  State  or  political 
prisoners. 

The  Third  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Union  authorities  (embracing  their  correspondence  with 
the  Confederate  officials)  not  relating  specially  to  the  subjects  of  the 
first  and  second  series.  It  will  set  forth  the  annual  and  special  reports 
of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  the  General-in-Chief,  and  of  the  chiefs  of 
the  several  staff  corps  and  departments;  the  calls  for  troops,  and  the 
correspondence  between  the  National  and  the  several  State  authorities. 

The  Fourth  Series  will  exhibit  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  similar  to  that  indicated  for  the 
Union  officials,  as  of  the  third  series,  but  excluding  the  correspondence 
between  the  Union  and  Confederate  authorities  given  in  that  series. 

ROBERT  N.  SCOTT, 

Major  Third  Art .,  and  Bvt.  Lieut.  Col. 

War  Department,  August  23,  1880. 

Approved : 


ALEX.  RAMSEY, 

Secretary  of  War . 


CONTENTS. 


Operations 
Florida  . 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East 


Page. 

1-1025 


(V) 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOEUME  I. 


CHAPTER  I.  Page. 

Operations  In  Charleston  Harbor,  South 
Carolina.  December  20,  1860-April  14, 

1861 1-317 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  secession  of  Georgia.  January  3-26, 

1861  318-326 

CHAPTER  III. 

The  secession  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

January  4-20, 1861 326-330 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Operations  in  Florida.  January  6- August 
31,  1861 331-473 


CHAPTER  V.  Page. 

The  secession  of  North  Carolina.  Janu- 
ary 9-May  20, 1861 474-488 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  secession  of  Louisiana.  J anuary  10- 

February  19, 1861 489-501 

CHAPTER  VH. 

Operations  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

February  1-June  11,  1861  502-636 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Operations  in  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, and  Missouri.  February  7-May  9, 

1861 637-691 


V OXjTJME  II. 


CHAPTER  IX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  April  16-July  31,  1861.  1-1012 

VOEUME  III. 

CHAPTER  X.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  May  10-November  19,  1861.  1-749 

VOLUME  IT. 


CHAPTER  XI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  June  11, 1861-February  1, 1862.  1-174 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee. 

July  1-November  19, 1861  175-565 


CHAPTER  XIII.  Page. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  South- 
eastern Virginia.  August  1, 1861-Janu- 
ary  11,  1862 566-721 


VOLUME  T. 


CHAPTER  XIV.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Northern  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  August  1, 1861-March  17, 1862.  1-1106 

VOLUME  TI. 


CHAPTER  XV.  Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

August  21,  1861-April  11,  1862 1-435 


CHAPTER  XVI.  Page. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Al- 
abama, Southern  Mississippi,  and  Lou- 
isiana. September  1, 1861-May  12, 1862  . 436-894 


VOLUME  VII. 

CHAPTER  XVII.  Page. 

Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  N.  Alabama,  and  S.  W.  Virginia.  Nov.  19, 1861-Mar.  4, 1862.  1-946 

(VII) 


VIII 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES, 


VOLUME  VIII. 

CHAPTER  XVIII.  Page. 


Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  Nov.  19, 1861-April  10, 1862.  1-834 


VOLUME  IX 
CHAPTER  XIX.  Page. 


Operations  in  Southeastern  Virginia.  Jan- 
uary 11-March  17, 1862 1-71 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina.  January 
ll-August  20,  1862  72-480 


CHAPTER  XXI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  February  1-September  20, 

1862  481-736 


VOLUME  X— IX  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXI L 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  North  Mississippi,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia. 

March  4-June  10, 1862. 


Page. 


Part  I— Reports 1-927 

Part  II — Correspondence,  etc 1-642 


VOLUME  XI— IX  THREE  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

The  Peninsular  Campaign,  Virginia.  March  17-September  2, 1862. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  March  17-June  24 1-1073* 

Part  II— Reports,  June  25-September  2 1-994 

Part  III— Correspondence,  eto 1-691 


VOLUME  XII-IX  THREE  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  and  Maryland. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  March  17-June  25 1-818 

Part  II— Reports,  June  26-September  2 1-820 

Part  III— Correspondence,  eto 1-966 


VOLUME  XIII. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  the  Department  of  the 
Northwest.  April  10-November  20,  1862 1-981 


CHAPTER  XXVI 


OPERATIONS  ON  THE  COASTS  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA, 
GEORGIA,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST  FLORIDA. 


April  12,  1862-June  11,  1863. 


SUMMARY  OE  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS.* 

April  13, 1862. — Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  orders  emancipation  of  slaves 

at  Fort  Pulaski  and  on  Cockspur  Island,  Ga. 

14. 1862.  — Reconnaissance  on  Seabrook  Island,  S.  C. 

16. 1862.  — Skirmish  on  Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga. 

18. 1862.  — Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 

Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

19. 1862.  — Skirmish  on  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  special  duty  in 
the  Department  of  the  South. t 

29.1862.  — Engagements  at  Pineberry  Battery,  Willstown,  and  White  Point, 

S.  C. 

May  9,1862. — Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  orders  the  emancipation  of 

slaves  in  Florida,  Georgia,  and  South  Carolina,  and  authorizes 
the  arming  of  all  able-bodied  negroes  in  those  States. 

13. 1862.  — Abduction  of  the  steamer  Planter  from  Charleston,  S.  C. 

20. 1862.  — Bombardment  of  Cole’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Affair  on  Crooked  River,  Fla. 

21. 1862.  — Affair  near  Battery  Island,  S.  C. 

•22, 1862. — Expedition  to  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

25. 1862.  — Affair  between  James  and  Dixon’s  Islands,  S.  C. 

29. 1862.  — Skirmish  at  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 

June  3,  1862. — Skirmish^on  James  Island,  S.  C. 

6. 1862.  — Affair  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C. 

7. 1862. : — Skirmish  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

8. 1862.  — Skirmish  on  James  Island,  S.  C. 

8-  9,  1862. — Affairs  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

10. 1862.  — Skirmish  on  James  Island,  S.  C. 

12. 1862.  — Reconnaissance  on  Hutchinson’s  Island,  S.  C. 

13. 1862.  — Affair  at  White  House,  near  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 

* Of  some  of  the  minor  conflicts  noted  in  this  “ Summary”  no  circumstantial  reports 
are  on  file. 

tFor  instructions  to  Saxton  in  reference  to  abandoned  plantations,  etc.,  and  result- 
ing correspondence,  see  Series  III,  Vol.  II. 

1 R R — VOL  XIY 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


2 

June  15, 1862. — Naval  descent  upon  Saint  Mark’s,  Fla. 

16,  1862. — Engagement  at  Secessionville,  James  Island,  S.  C. 

21,  1862. — Engagement  at  Simmons’  Bluff,  S.  C. 

28-July  7,  1862. — Evacuation  of  James  Island,  S.  C. 

30-July  1,  1862. — Bombardment  of  Tampa,  Fla. 

July  4,  1862. — Affair  at  Port  Eoyal  Ferry,  S.  C. 

9,  1862. — Expedition  to  Fenwick’s  Island,  S.  C. 

9-10,  1862. — Demonstrations  against  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 

Aug.  8,  1862. — West  Florida  detached  from  the  Department  of  the  South  and 
annexed  to  the  Department  of  the  Gulf. 

10,  1862. — Capture  of  the  Confederate  steamer  General  Lee  in  the  Savannah 
River,  Ga. 

13,  1862. — Engagement  on  Black  River,  S.  C. 

21,  1862. — Affair  on  Pinckney  Island,  S.  C. 

Sept.  1,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  Ormsby  M.  Mitchel,  U.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command 

of  the  Department  of  the  South. 

3,  1862. — The  Tenth  Army  Corps  constituted  under  command  of  Maj.  Gen. 

Ormsby  M.  Mitchel,  U.  S.  Army. 

5,  1862. — Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Brannan,  U.  S.  Army,  temporarily  in  command 
of  the  Department  of  the  South. 

10,  1862. — Skirmish  on  tbe  Kilkenny  River,  S.  C. 

11, 1862.— Engagement  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla. 

17,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  Ormsby  M.  Mitchel,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 

the  Department  of  the  South. 

Engagement  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla. 

24,  1862. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Maj.  Gen.  John 
C.  Pemberton  in  command  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina 
and  Georgia. 

Affair  on  Skull  Creek,  S.  C. 

30-Oct.  3,  1862. — Reconnaissances  on  May  and  Savannah  Rivers,  Ga. 
30-Oct.  13,  1862. — Expedition  from  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  to  Saint  John’s 
Bluff,  Fla. 

Oct.  6,  1862. — Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  the  command 
of  East  Florida,  and  Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney,  C.  S.  Army, 
assigned  to  the  command  of  West  Florida. 

7,  1862. — Middle  and  East  Florida  embraced  in  General  Beauregard’s  com- 
mand. 

18,  1862.— Affair  at  Kirk’s  Bluff,  S.  C. 

22-23,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Coosa whatchie,  S.  C.,  and  engagements  at  the  Cas- 
ton  and  Frampton  Plantations,  near  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 

24,  1862. — Affair  on  Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C. 

27,  1862. — Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Brannan,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  temporary  com- 
mand of  the  Department  of  the  South,  vice  Mitchel,  deceased. 
Nov.  3-10,  1862. — Expedition  along  the  coasts  of  Georgia  and  East  Florida. 

4,  1862. — General  Beauregard’s  command  extended  to  the  Choctawhatchee. 
7,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Spaulding’s,  on  Sapello  River,  Ga. 

13-18,  1862. — Expedition  from  Beaufort  to  Doboy  River,  Ga. 

18,  1862. — Skirmish  on  Doboy  River,  Ga. 

Jan.  20,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  resumes  command  of  the 

Department  of  the  South. 

23-Feb.  1, 1863. — Expedition  from  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  up  the  Saint  Mary’s  River, 
in  Georgia  and  Florida. 

26,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Township,  Fla. 

27,  1863. — Naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Genesis  Point,  Ga. 

29,  1863.  —Expedition  to  Daufuskie  Island,  S.  C. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  SEABROOK  ISLAND,  S.  C.  3 

Jan.  -30,  1863.— Capture  of  U.  S.  steamer  Isaac  Smith  in  Stono  River,  S.  C. 

31,  1863. — Attack  on  blockading  squadron  off  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Affair  on  Bull  Island,  S.  C. 

Feb.  1,  1863. — Naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Genesis  Point,  Ga. 

18,  1863. — The  South  Carolina  Militia  called  into  service. 

28,  1863. — Destruction  of  the  Confederate  steamer  Nashville. 

Naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Ga. 

Mar.  3,  1863. — Naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Ga. 

9,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

Affair  at  Fort  McAllister,  Ga. 

10,  1863. — Union  forces  reoccupy  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

20,  1863. — Affair  in  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla. 

22,  1863. — Destruction  of  the  steamer  Georgiana,  off  Charleston,  S.  C. 

23-31,  1863. — Operations  near  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

24,  1863. — Affair  in  Ocklockonnee  Bay,  Fla. 

25,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

27,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Palatka,  Fla. 

29,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

31,  1863. — Jacksonville,  Fla.,  evacuated  by  the  Union  forces. 

April  7,  1863. — Engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

9,  1863. — Destruction  of  steamer  George  Washington,  near  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

10,  1863. — Skirmish  on  Folly  Island,  S.  C. 

12,  1863. — Destruction  of  the  steamer  Stonewall  Jackson. 

27,  1863. — Affair  at  Murray’s  Inlet,  S.  C. 

May  4,  1863 — Affair  at  Murray’s  Inlet,  S.  C. 

18-21,  1863. — Torpedo  operations  in  Skull  Creek  and  skirmish  on  Pope’s  Island. 
31,  1863. — Affair  on  James  Island,  S.  C. 

June  2,  1863. — Union  raid  on  the  Combahee  River,  S.  C. 

3,  1863. — Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army,  assigned  temporarily 

to  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South. 

4,  1863. — Expedition  from  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  to  Bluffton,  S.  C. 

8,  1863. — Affair  near  Brunswick,  Ga. 

11,  1863. — Attack  on  Darien,  Ga. 

11-13,  1863.— Operations  on  Little  Folly  Island,  S.  C. 


APRIL  14,  1862. — Reconnaissance  on  Seabrook  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  Enoch  Q.  Fellows , Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Edisto  Island , S.  (7.,  April  15,  1862. 

Lieutenant*:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  for  the  in- 
formation of  the  commanding  general : 

A reconnaissance  on  Seabrook  Island  was  made  yesterday  under  the 
cover  of  the  gunboat  Pocahontas.  The  force  consisted  of  a portion 
of  the  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  and  U.  S.  Marines  from  the 
Pocahontas,  covering  ground  which  had  not  been  visited  by  us  before, 
and  advancing  within  a mile  of  the  village  of  Rockville.  It  is  evident 
there  has  formerly  been  a large  picket  stationed  on  the  island,  but  has 
been  withdrawn,  there  being  no  evidence  of  any  of  late.  TIiq  rebel 
picket  can  be  seen  at  different  points  between  Rockville  and  Church 
Flats.  A reconnaissance  will  soon  be  made  by  the  Pocahontas  to 


4 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CHAr.  XXVI. 


Church  Flats,  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  the  force  there.  From  the  intel- 
ligence I get  from  contrabands  this  is  among  the  best  approaches  to 
Charleston.  The  distance  to  Church  Flats  is  5 miles ; from  there  to 
Charleston  15  miles.  It  is  reported  a battery  of  four  guns  exists  at 
Church  Flats.  The  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  is  but  2 miles 
from  Church  Flats.  No  intelligence  has  been  received  of  late  from  the 
main  land,  but  I shall  use  every  endeavor  to  obtain  all  the  intelligence 
I can. 

It  was  reported  yesterday  morning  that  the  enemy  were  erecting 
earthworks  at  Watt’s  Cut,  on  Jeliossee  Island.  I immediately  ordered 
the  point  to  be  shelled,  and  sent  a detachment  from  the  Third  New 
Hampshire  Volunteers,  under  cover  of  artillery,  on  the  island.  The 
earthworks  proved  to  be  simply  a shelter  for  the  picket  stationed  there. 
I propose  to  make  a reconnaissance  in  force  on  the  island  in  a few 
days,  and  am  in  hopes  to  capture  a few  of  the  enemy  on  picket  opposite 
Little  Edisto  Island. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  Q,  FELLOWS, 

Colonel  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers , Comdg.  Post. 

Lieut.  A.  B.  Ely, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


APRIL  16,  1862. — Skirmish  on  Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the  South. 
No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Benham,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Northern  District, 
Department  of  the  South. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — First  Lieut.  James  H.  Wilson,  U.  S.  Topographical  Engineers,  Chief  Topo- 
graphical Engineer  Department  of  the  South. 

No.  5. — Col.  William  M.  Fenton,  Eighth  Michigan  Infantry. 

No.  6. — Col.  Marcellus  Douglass,  Thirteenth  Georgia  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter , JJ.  8.  Army , commanding  Department 

of  the  8outh. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Port  Royal , S.  C .,  April  17,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copies  of  letters  from  General 
Benham  and  Acting  Brigadier-General  Gillmore,  covering  a report  from 
Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers,  of  a reconnaissance  of 
Wilmington  Island,  made  yesterday. 

I regret  to  state  our  loss  at  10  killed  and  35  wounded.  Our  men, 
however,  behaved  nobly,  and  beat  back  double  their  numbers. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army , Washington. 


Chai>.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  ON  WHITEMARSH  ISLAND,  GA. 


5 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Benham , U.  8.  Army , commanding  North- 
ern District , Department  of  the  South. 

Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

• Hilton  Head , 8.  C.,  April  17,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  report  from  Acting 
Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillraore,  commanding  at  Tybee  Island,  with  a copy 
of  report  of  reconnaissance  by  Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson  on  Wilmington 
Island,  transmitted  therewith,  for  the  consideration  of  the  major-gen- 
eral commanding  the  department,  said  reconnaissance  having  been 
ordered,  as  I understand,  by  General  Gillmore  since  the  capture  of  Fort 
Pulaski. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Charles  G.  H alpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  South. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore , 77.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Tybee  and  Cochspur  Islands , Ga.,  April  17,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding  the  district,  that  I ordered  a reconnaissance  of  Wilming- 
ton Island  yesterday  by  Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  escorted  by  seven  com- 
panies of  the  Eighth  Michigan  (about  400  men)  and  a field  piece.  The 
object  was  to  ascertain  the  position  of  affairs  on  t^t  island,  on  which 
repeated  examinations  on  a small  scale  had  been  made,  to  complete  the 
examination  commenced  by  Colonel  Bosa  some  days  since,  determine 
the  character  of  the  firm  land  and  streams,  and,  above  all,  to  see  if  any 
preparations  by  the  enemy  for  boat  expeditions  against  the  hulk  in 
Lazaretto  Creek  or  on  the  left  of  my  position  were  being  made.  The 
reconnaissance,  so  far  as  these  points  required  it,  was  entirely  successful, 
but  I regret  to  be  under  the  necessity  of  stating  that  the  enemy  was 
met  there  in  force  (800).  A skirmish  ensued.  The  enemy  was  driven 
off,  and  10  of  our  men  killed  (including  one  lieutenant)  and  35  wounded. 
Everything  was  brought  off. 

I inclose  Lieutenant  Wilson’s  report  of  the  skirmish.  His  report  of 
the  reconnaissance,  with  a complete  map  of  the  island  and  its  water- 
courses, will  be  sent  this  p.  in.,  or  he  will  bring  it  up  in  person.  I send 
the  wounded  up  this  morning  on  the  Honduras. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMOBE, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  A.  B.  Ely, 

. Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Northern  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South. 


6 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.  XXYI. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  James  U.  Wilson , U.  S.  Topographical  Engineers , Chief 
Topographical  Engineer  Department  of  the  South. 

On  Board  the  Steamer  Honduras, 

Off  Wilmington  Island , Ga.,  April  17,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  for  the  information  of 
the  general  commanding: 

Escorted  by  seven  companies  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  Volunteers, 
commanded  by  Colonel  Fenton,  and  a small  detachment  of  the  Rhode 
Island  Artillery,  I embarked  on  the  steamer  Honduras  at  Goat’s  Point 
about  8 o’clock  yesterday  morning,  for  the  purpose  of  making  a recon- 
naissance of  Wilmington  Island.  Proceeding  through  Lazaretto  Creek, 
Tybee  River,  and  Wilmington  Narrows  to  Screven’s  plantation,  two 
companies,  G and  B,  about  115  men,  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Pratt,  were  landed,  with  orders  to  march  at  once  to  the  southwestern 
end  of  the  island,  skirting  Turner’s  Creek  on  the  right,  so  as  to  cover 
the  boat  party,  which  was  to  follow  that  stream  to  Wilmington  River. 
Ascending  to  the  junction  of  Oatland  and  Turner’s  Creeks,  the  balance 
of  the  command,  in  all  about  300  men,  were  landed  at  Gibson’s  planta- 
tion. 

The  first  company  ashore  was  directed  to  move  at  once  to  the  south- 
west end  of  Whitemarsh  Island,  skirting  Turner’s  Creek,  and  with  in- 
structions to  leave  a small  picket  at  the  intersection  of  the  roads  from 
Gibson’s  and  Oatland  to  Turner’s  till  another  company  should  arrive 
at  that  point. 

A third  company  was  to  be  thrown  out  on  the  road  to  the  ferry  at 
Carston’s  Bluff,  to  protect  the  boat  party  at  Oatland  Creek.  The  two 
remaining  companies  were  to  be  held  in  reserve  at  Gibson’s  plantation. 

Lieutenant  Colwell  and  16  men  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Volun- 
teers, with  one  light  6 pounder,  were  left  in  charge  of  the  steamer. 

The  gun  could  not  be  landed,  on  account  of  the  inability  of  the  boat 
to  lie  alongside  the  landing. 

Having  proceeded  through  Turner’s  to  Wilmington  River  I returned 
by  the  same  route  and  landed  at  Gibson’s.  Directly  after  arriving 
there  I was  infornTed  that  our  patrols  had  discovered  the  enemy  in 
force  at  or  near  Fleetwood’s,  and  had  seen  traces  of  them  all  the  way 
to  Turner’s.  Colonel  Fenton  had  already  given  orders  for  the  advance 
companies  to  fall  back  to  Gibson’s,  and  made  his  dispositions  for  repell- 
ing an  attack  and  covering  our  embarkation.  After  an  examination 
of  the  ground,  at  my  suggestion  one  company  was  thrown  farther  for- 
ward, to  take  shelter  behind  the  hedge  and  fence  surrounding  one  of 
the  houses.  The  colonel  had  already  designated  this  position,  and  sta- 
tioned another  in  the  woods  lining  the  marsh  on  the  left,  and  the  bal- 
ance behind  the  houses  and  trees  nearer  the  landing. 

After  these  dispositions  were  completed,  and  between  4 and  5 p.  m., 
the  rebels,  subsequently  ascertained  to  be  the  Thirteenth  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers, about  800  strong,  armed  with  Enfield  rifles,  preceded'  by  a 
heavy  line  of  skirmishers,  made  an  attack  upon  our  position.  After 
our  advance  line  had  delivered  its  fire  from  the  hedge  the  bugles 
sounded  “the  charge”  for  the  main  body.  This  was  confounded  with 
“ the  retreat.”  The  advance  line  abandoned  its  cover  and  fell  back 
through  an  open  space  toward  the  reserve.  While  in  this  somewhat 
confused  condition  the  enemy  advauced  rapidly,  pouring  in  upoi*  us  a 
steady  and  destructive  fire.  Our  men  replied  with  spirit  from  such 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  ON  WHITEMAESH  I SLAND,  GA.  7 

cover  as  could  be  obtained.  Order  was  soon  re-established  and  the 
rebels  held  in  check  for  an  hour  or  more.  After  the  ineffectual  efforts 
of  Colonel  Fenton  and  myself  to  form  enough  men  to  charge  their 
line  aud  drive  them  from  the  hedge  a portion  of  one  company  was 
carried  to  the  right,  and  under  cover  of  the  timber  skirting  the  marsh 
on  that  side  the  left  flank  of  the  enemy  was  met  and  frustrated  in  an 
attempt  to  move  in  that  direction. 

An  advance  on  the  left  and  along  the  whole  line  dislodged  the  enemy 
and  put  him  iu  full  flight.  He  fell  back  rapidly,  leaving  several  dead 
and  wounded  on  the  field,  and  was  closely  pressed  for  a half  or  three- 
quarters  of  a mile.  As  it  was  now  almost  night  it  was  not  deemed 
advisable  to  continue  the  pursuit  farther.  Our  skirmishers  were  grad- 
ually drawn  in;  strong  advance  guards  were  posted  well  out  on  both 
roads,  and  two  companies  again  posted  on  the  line  of  the  hedge  and 
the  fence  to  the  right/  After  having  made  these  admirable  dispositions 
of  his  force  to  secure  our  position  Colonel  Fenton  then  directed  the  re- 
moval of  our  killed  and  wounded  to  the  steamer,  and  after  holding  the 
ground  for  three  hours  the  entire  force  was  quietly  embarked  without 
further  accident,  though  it  must  be  confessed  had  the  enemy  renewed 
his  attack  while  we  were  engaged  in  embarking  we  should  have  suffered 
great  loss. 

Our  five  small  boats  could  not  remove  more  than  50  men  every  thirty 
minutes,  and  the  steamer  lay  in  such  a position  that  the  6-pounder 
could  not  be  brought  to  bear  without  jeopardizing  the  lives  of  our  own 
people. 

Our  loss  is  10  killed  and  35  wounded.  Among  the  former  is  Lieu- 
tenant and  Adjutant  Pratt,  who  fell  while  gallantly  cheering  on  the 
men.  Lieutenant  Badger,  in  command  of  the  advance  guard,  was  dan- 
gerously if  not  mortally  wounded  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy, 
but  in  the  hurry  of  their  retreat  succeeded  in  effecting  his  escape. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  cannot  be  ascertained.  Two  of  their  dead 
were  left  in  our  hands.  One,  mortally  wounded,  died  before  we  disem- 
barked ; the  balance  were  carried  off. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieut.,  Top.  Eng.,  and  Chief  Top.  Eng.  Dept.  South. 

Lieut.  W.  L.  M.  Burger, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces,  Tybee  Island,  Ga. 


Tybee  Island,  Ga.,  April  17,  1862. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  41,  I have  made  a re- 
connaissance of  Wilmington  Island,  and  have  the  honor  to  report  as 
follows : 

From  Goat’s  Point  through  Lazaretto  Greek,  Tybee  Eiver,  and  Tur- 
ner’s Greek  to  Screven’s  plantation  the  navigation  is  safe  at  halt- tide 
for  vessels  of  10  feet  draught.  The  channel  through  Wilmington  Nar- 
rows to  Saint  Augustine  Greek  is  obstructed  at  its  junction  with  Tybee 
Eiver  by  a well-constructed  barrier  of  piles  aud  live-oak  logs.  From 
this  fact  aud  its  relation  to  the  other  streams  I am  of  the  opinion  that 
it  is  navigable  for  gunboats.  Turner’s  Greek  is  also  navigable  at  half* 
tide,  but  as  its  main  entrance  into  Wilmington  Eiver  is  below  the  bat- 
teries occupied  by  the  enemy  there  is  no  advantage  to  be  obtained  by 
using  it.  Oatland  Greek  was  not  ascended,  but  from  the  size  of  its 
entrance  and  the  evidence  of  the  negroes  it  is  probably  not  uaviga- 


8 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


ble.  Moreover,  the  existence  of  the  batteries  at  Carston’s  Bluff,  just 
opposite  its  outlet,  would  render  it  unsafe.  The  location  of  the  roads, 
plantations,  and  other  features  of  the  islands,  as  laid  down  by  Colonel 
Bosa,  as  far  as  examined,  were  found  to  be  sufficiently  accurate  for  all 
military  purposes.  No  boats  of  any  description  were  found,  and  no  in- 
dications of  any  contemplated  attack  upon  our  guard  boat  in  Lazaretto 
Creek  could  be  perceived.  The  inclosed  sketch  will  give  all  additional 
information  necessary.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieut.,  Top.  Eng.,  Chief  Top.  Eng.  Dept,  of  the  South. 

Lieut.  W.  L.  M.  Burger, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  Hdqrs.  JJ.  S.  Forces , Tyhee  and  Pulashi , Ga . 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  William  M.  Fenton , Eighth  Michigan  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Michigan  Volunteers, 

On  Board  Steamer  Honduras , 

Off  Wilmington  Island , Ga .,  April  16,  1862 — 11  p.  m. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding,  that,  in  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  41,  I em- 
barked with  seven  companies  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  Begiment  as  an 
escort  to  Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers,  on  a recon- 
naissance of  Wilmington  Island.  Two  companies,  under  command  of 
Captain  Pratt,  were  landed  at  Screven’s  plantation,  with  orders  from 
Lieutenant  Wilson  to  skirt  Turner’s  Creek;  the  other  five  companies 
were  landed  at  Gibson’s  plantation.  Two  of  these  companies  were 
ordered  to  skirt  Turner’s  Creek ; a third  was  to  take  the  road  to  the 
right  toward  ferry  at  Carston’s  Bluff  to  protect  boat  party  up  Oatland 
Creek,  and  the  remainder  to  secure  the  landing.  After  one  company 
of  the  five  was  landed  Lieutenant  Wilson  proceeded  in  a boat  up  Tur- 
ner’s Creek.  Owing  to  the  small  number  of  boats  and  the  distance 
from  the  steamer  (which  was  grounded)  some  delay  occurred  in  the  dis- 
embarkation. I directed  Lieutenant-Colonel  Graves  to  follow  with  the 
second  company  to  skirt  Turner’s  Creek,  but  being  misdirected  he  took 
the  road  to  the  right  toward  Carston’s  Bluff,  and  on  landing  with  the 
remaining  companies  I received  information  from  him  that  the  enemy 
were  in  force  at  Fleetwood’s  plantation  and  to  the  left  of  the  wood.  This 
rendered  the  reconnaissance  of  Oatland  Creek  with  boat  unsafe,  and 
I ordered  the  companies  all  in,  and  stationing  the  remaining  companies 
to  guard  against  an  attack  at  our  landing  sent  out  strong  pickets  on 
both  roads.  I believe  the  advance  of  company  to  the  right  instead  of 
along  Turner’s  Creek  saved  my  command,  as  it  sooner  enabled  me  to 
post  the  men  to  advantage  and  take  a position  from  which  the  enemy’s, 
approach  could  be  observed.  The  enemy  proved  to  be  the  Thirteenth 
Georgia,  about  800  strong,  armed  with  Enfield  rifles.  As  they  ap- 
proached (about  4 o’clock  p.  m.)  with  a strong  body  of  skirmishers  in 
the  skirt  of  woods  below  the  road  the  companies  I had  stationed  to 
the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  in  accordance  with  my  instructions, 
opened  fire.  I immediately  sounded  the  charge  for  advance  of  com- 


Not  found. 


Chav  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  ON  WHITEMAESII  ISLAND,  GA. 


9 


panies  in  the  rear  of  first  line.  The  first  line,  mistaking  the  signal,  fell 
back  to  the  next  cover.  A constant  and  effective  fire  was  kept  np  on 
both  sides  from  cover  of  trees  and  bushes  for  an  hour  or  more.  Lieu- 
tenant Wilson,  who  had  returned  with  boat  party,  here  proved  of  great 
service  to  me.  He  took  a party  at  my  request  to  the  left,  and  I ordered 
a company  to  the  right  to  flank  the  enemy.  Both  operations  were  suc- 
cessful, and  in  a few  moments  the  enemy  retreated  in  confusion,  leav- 
ing several  dead  on  the  field,  followed  by  our  men  with  loud  cheers. 

It  being  now  about  sunset  I recalled  our  troops,  and  giving  to  Lieu- 
tenant Wilson  the  command  of  pickets  stationed  to  guard  against 
surprise,  formed  the  companies *in  line  as  originally  posted,  sent  the 
dead  and  wounded  in  boats  to  the  ships,  and  gradually  and  very  quietly 
under  cover  of  night  withdrawing  the  men  sent  them  on  board  as  fast 
as  our  limited  transportation  would  allow.  At  the  last  trip  of  the 
boats  I embarked,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Wilson,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Graves,  and  the  remainder  of  my  command,  at  about  10  o’clock 
p.  m.,  and  immediately  brought  on  board  the  two  companies  left  at 
Screven’s  plantation.  After  the  enemy  retreated  we  were  unmolested. 
It  is  due  to  the  officers  and  men  of  the  command  to  say  that  generally 
they  behaved  with  cool  and  intrepid  courage.  Adjutant  Pratt  fell 
dead  near  my  side,  gallantly  fighting  musket  in  hand  and  cheering  on 
the  men.  Our  loss,  I regret  to  say,  was  comparatively  heavy — 10 
killed  and  35  wounded  out  of  a command  of  300  men^  Among  the 
wounded  is  Acting  Lieutenant  Badger,  of  Company  C,  who  was  in 
charge  of  the  advanced  picket,  and  exhibited  undaunted  courage. 
He  with  one  of  his  men  was  made  prisoner.  Both  escaped,  and  were 
brought  in  when  the  enemy  retreated. 

The  captain  of  the  Honduras  is  deserving  of  great  credit  for  his 
kind  attention  to  the  wounded.  Indeed  he  afforded  us  every  facility 
for  the  comfort  of  officers  and  men  in  his  power.  I respectfully  refer 
to  Lieutenant  Wilson’s  report,  which  I have  read,  and  contains  some 
facts  not  embraced  in  this  report,  among  others  in  relation  to  the  men 
detailed  in  charge  of  the  field  piece  on  board  ship,  who  were  vigilant 
and  attentive. 

Herewith  is  transmitted  a list  of  casualties.* 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  M.  FENTON, 
Colonel , Commanding . 

Lieut.  W.  L.  M.  Burger, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tyhee  Island. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Col.  Marcellus  Douglass , Thirteenth  Georgia  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Carston’s  Bluff, 

April  21,  1862. 

Captain  : I take  this  the  first  opportunity  to  make  my  report  of  the 
engagement  between  a portion  of  my  command  and  a regiment  of  the 
enemy  on  Whitemarsh  Island  on  the  evening  of  the  16th  instant : 

The  island  lies  east  of  this  place,  and  between  is  the  island  called 
Oatland.  I have  for  some  time  kept  pickets  and  small  scouting  par- 

* Nominal  list  omitted. 


10  COASTS  OF  S.  C,,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

ties  on  Whitemarsk,  knowing  that  the  enemy  occasionally  visited  it. 
On  that  day  I had  sent,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Thomas  G.  Medders, 
of  Company  H,  a party  of  about  45  men  for  scouting  and  picket  duty. 

In  the  evening  1 took  with  me  Capt.  J.  T.  Crawford,  of  Company  Gi ; 
Lieut.  R.  T.  Bowie,  of  same  company,  and  37  of  their  men,  with  axes, 
across  to  Oatland  to  have  the  trees  on  the  island  cut  down.  I required 
the  men  to  carry  with  them  their  guns  and  cartridge  boxes. 

Soon  after  getting  there  and  about  3 p.  m.  one  of  my  pickets  came 
in  from  Whitemarsk  and  told  me  that  the  enemy  were  landing  at  Mr. 
Gibson’s  place,  on  the  point  of  Whitemarsk  next  to  Wilmington  River, 
and  that  a steamer  with  about  a regiment  of  men  on  board  was  lying 
in  the  river  some  400  or  500  yards  from  the  landing,  and  that  Lieu- 
tenant Medders,  with  his  men,  had  fallen  back  across  the  island  to  a 
cross-road  some  2 miles  from  where  the  enemy  were  seen.  I immedi- 
ately started  Captain  Crawford,  with  his  company  of  37  men,  to  the 
place  where  Lieutenant  Medders  had  halted.  I gave  to  Captain  Craw- 
ford instructions  to  remain  at  that  point  until  I could  return  to  camp 
and  get  an  additional  force,  and  also  directed  him  to  send  out  pickets 
from  the  cross-roads  in  two  directions,  one  leading  to  Gibson’s  place 
and  the  other  to  Turner’s  place,  which  is  on  the  point  of  Whitemarsk 
next  to  Augustine  Creek,  and  in  view  from  which  is  Skidaway  Island. 
I then  hurried  back  to  camp,  being  delayed  in  crossing  Augustine  Creek. 
Taking  with  me  three  comjjanies  (A,  B,  and  C),  commanded  respectively 
by  Lieut.  E.  L.  Connally  and  Capts.  James  McCallay  and  John  L. 
Moore,  I started  for  the  island,  hurrying  the  steamer  Leesburg,  at  my 
command  for  this  purpose.  In  order  to  take  two  chances  of  getting 
assistance  to  Captain  Crawford  I had  Captain  McCallay  to  land  from 
the  boat  on  Oatland,  just  across  from  the  battery  at  this  place,  and 
directed  him  to  hurry  over  to  the  cross-road  on  Wkitemarsh,  with  or- 
ders that  he  and  Captain  Crawford  should  remain  with  their  companies 
at  that  place  until  I could  reach  them  with  the  two  others,  and  not  to 
attack  the  enemy  until  I joined  them,  unless  they  should  ascertain  that 
there  was  only  a small  party  of  the  enemy,  instead  of  a regiment,  as 
reported  to  me  by  the  pickets.  My  reason  for  not  taking  the  three 
companies  directly  over  Oatland  to  Wkitemarsh  was  that  the  only  means 
of  crossing  the  stream  between  the  two  islands  was  a small  boat  that 
would  carry  about  10  or  15  men  at  once,  and  too  much  time  would  be 
consumed  in  this  manner.  I therefore  wenfr  on  the  steamer  with  Com- 
panies A and  C around  to  a landing  on  Wkitemarsh.  Being  delayed  at 
the  mouth  of  Whitemarsk  Creek  about  one  hour  the  boat  ran  aground, 
and  by  the  time  I could  get  my  men  all  on  land  it  was  near  5.30  o’clock. 

In  the  mean  time  the  pickets  posted  by  Captain  Crawford  discovered 
a party  of  the  enemy,  about  50  strong,  who  had  advanced  1J  miles 
across  the  island.  The  pickets  fired  on  them  and  fell  back  to  the  cross- 
road, and  reported  the  number  of  men  seen  to  be  about  50  or  75,  where- 
upon Captains  Crawford  and  McCallay,  after  distributing  between  their 
two  companies  the  scouting  party  under  Lieutenant  Medders,  deter- 
mined to  endeavor  to  surround  the  enemy  and  capture  or  kill  them. 
Captain  Crawford  with  his  force  went  the  road  toward  Gibson’s,  and 
Captain  McCallay  with  his  force  up  the  road  toward  Turner’s,  to  where 
another  road  turned  off  to  tbe  left  and  led  to  Gibson’s  place.  Both 
parties^  met  small  parties  of  the  enemy  and  the  firing  commenced,  the 
force  On  each  side  being  nearly  equal.  The  enemy  were  driven  back 
for  1£  miles  across  little  fields  and  skirts  of  woods  to  the  Gibson  house, 
where  they  sheltered  themselves  behind  a hedge  of  cedar,  and  brisk  fir- 
ing began. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  ON  WHITEMARSH  ISLAND,  GA.  11 

This  was  the  first  firing  I heard,  the  other  being  scattering  and  the 
noise  of  the  steamer  preventing  those  of  us  on  board  from  hearing  any- 
thing else.  As  soon,  however,  as  we  had  landed  and  the  reports  of  the 
guns  were  heard  I started  my  men  at  a double-quick,  having  then  2 or  2J 
miles  to  go.  This  distance  we  made  as  quickly  as  possible.  On  the 
way  I met  several  of  the  wounded  men  and  those  who  were  without 
cartridges  coming  back.  At  the  distance  of  about  half  a mile  or  less 
from  the  Gibson  house  I met  Captain  Crawford  with  his  men  retreating 
across  a small  field,  and  learned  from  him  that  he  and  Captain  McCallay, 
who  with  their  forces  had  divided  near  the  cedar  hedge,  had  been  over- 
powered after  having  sustained  heavy  loss  and  exhausted  their  ammu- 
nition, and  were  compelled  to  retreat,  and  that  the  enemy — a full  regi- 
ment— were  in  hot  pursuit.  Seeing  that  Captain  Crawford  and  all  his 
men  were  completely  worn  out  I ordered  them  to  the  rear,  and  formed 
my  men  in  single  rank  along  and  just  in  the  edge  of  a skirt  of  woods, 
ordering  them  to  lie  down  and  wait  for  the  command  to  fire.  Soon  the 
enemy  came,  shouting  as  they  came,  apparently  confident  of  overtaking 
and  capturing  the  small  party  who  had  so  long  held  them  in  check.. 
The  imprudence  and  impatience  of  one  man  prevented  me  from  getting 
the  enemy  completely  by  surprise,  and  I believe  in  our  power.  He, 
contrary  to  orders,  fired  too  soon,  and  knowing  that  a scattering  fire 
would  begin,  I gave  the  command  to  fire,  and  one  volley  checked  their 
progress  and  turned  them  back.  They  discharged  their  guns  at  us,  but 
without  effect.  I kept  my  men  in  their  position,  expecting  another  ad- 
vance, but  no  Yankee  showed  himself  again.  Soon  Captain  McCallay, 
about  whom  I felt  great  uneasiness,  came  in  from  a direction  to  the 
right  of  us,  some  of  his  men  wounded  and  the  rest  without  cartridges 
and  all  completely  exhausted. 

Night  had  then  come  on  us,  and  having  only  about  60  men  with  car- 
tridges and  physically  able  to  fight,  I deemed  it  imprudent  to  pursue 
the  enemy  to  their  boats,  knowing  their  overwhelming  force  of  800  men 
and  also  fearing  an  ambuscade,  as  a skirt  of  woods  through  which  they 
retreated  was  between  us,  and  we  could  not  then  ascertain  whether  they 
were  fleeing  or  awaiting  our  advance. 

On  the  next  day  I found  that  they  had  remained  on  the  island  only 
long  enough  to  gather  up  their  dead  and  wounded,  as  they  had  left 
knapsacks,  cartridge  boxes,  canteens,  haversacks,  overcoats,  blankets, 
&c.,  and  a number  of  guns,  all  of  which  we  gathered  up.  I also  saw 
the  doors  that  they  had  taken  from  the  houses  there  and  on  which 
they  had  borne  off  their  killed  and  wounded.  The  doors  were  very 
bloody. 

During  the  first  part  of  the  engagement,  and  while  Captains  Craw- 
ford and  McCallay  were  driving  the  enemy  before  them,  a Federal  lieu- 
tenant was  mortally  wounded,  and  from  him  the  fact  was  ascertained 
that  their  force  numbered  800  or  860;  it  was  the  Eighth  Michigan. 
Another  prisoner,  who  was  taken  with  the  lieutenant,  also  stated  that 
the  men  we  were  fighting  were  not  foreigners.  Several  caps  were  found 
with  the  letters  of  the  companies  to  which  the  wearers  belonged  on 
them,  showing  that  there  were  different  companies.  I also  learn  from 
the  officers  and  men  that  while  the  fighting  was  going  on  in  the  field  in 
front  of  and  from  here,  just  beyond  the  Gibson  house,  the  enemy  formed 
in  line  of  battle  and  their  entire  force  took  part  in  the  fight.  Some  time 
during  the  engagement  the  enemy  landed  some  artillery  (the  tracks  of 
the  wheels  were  found  by  us  the  next  day),  but  it  was  not  brought  into 
action  at  all,  and  I judge  was  carried  back  on  the  boat  as  quickly  as  it 
had  been  landed. 


12 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


The  officers  of  my  command  engaged  were  : Capt.  J.  T.  Crawford  and 
Lieut.  R.  T.  Bowie,  of  Company  G ; Capt.  James  McCallay  and  Lieuts. 
A.  W.  Pearce  and  J.  T.  Horsley,  of  Company  B ; Capt.  John  L.  Moore 
and  Lieuts.  T.  M.  Breed  and  J.  B.  Breed,  of  Company  C,  and  Lieuts.  E. 
L.  Connally  and  J.  0.  Steger,  of  Company  A.  Lieut.  Thomas  G.  Med- 
ders,  of  Company  H,  was  lieutenant  of  the  scouting  party  sent  out  in 
the  morning. 

The  whole  force  engaged  at  any  one  time  was  not  over  90,  some  hav- 
ing been  detailed  as  pickets  to  prevent  surprise  from  the  rear  and  to 
guard  the  steamer. 

Below  is  a list  of  the  casualties:* 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Officers 

2 

Kon-commissioned  officers  ' 

1 

Enlisted  men 

4 

12 

Total 

4 

15 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  could  not  be  ascertained,  except  approximately, 
by  going  over  the  ground  and  finding  the  bloody  places  which  marked 
where  they  fell.  There  were  quite  a number  of  these,  some  of  them 
indicating  that  those  shot  had  bled  very  freely.  Bloody  garments  were 
found,  some  caps  that  had  been  shot  through,  and  the  bloody  doors  upon 
which  they  had  borne  off  their  men;  guns  and  various  other  things  with 
blood  on  them  indicate  that  the  enemy  suffered  severely. 

I had  forgotten  also  to  mention  that  the  lantern  they  had  used  in 
searching  for  their  dead  and  wounded  was  found  the  next  day.  In 
their  haversacks  were  found  plates,  knives,  and  forks,  butter-crackers, 
meat,  &c.,  as  if  they  had  come  prepared  to  remain  on  the  island  a day 
or  two.  They  had  also  some  ground  coffee  that  they  drooped  in  their 
hurry.  The  guns  used  by  them  were  muskets,  some  of  them  large-bore 
Springfield  muskets  rifled. 

The  loss  on  our  side,  particularly  in  the  ranks  of  Captain  Crawford’s 
company  (G),  and  the  length  of  time  they  were  fighting,  show  with 
what  bravery  they  maintained  their  ground  against  overwhelming  num- 
bers— eight  or  ten  to  one. 

I cannot  omit  to  state  my  high  appreciation  of  the  skill  and  courage 
of  Captains  Crawford  and  McCallay  and  the  valor  of  officers  and  men 
under  them.  Captain  Crawford  had  command  of  the  party  until  I 
arrived,  and  in  his  judgment  and  valor  I have  entire  confidence.  Cap- 
tain McCallay  nobly  seconded  him  in  every  movement,  and  a braver, 
truer  man  cannot  be  found. 

Individual  instances  of  heroism  and  narrow  escapes  were  reported  to 
me,  among  them  that  of  Garland  Upshaw,  of  Company  B,  who  in  assist- 
ing in  bearing  off  a wounded  comrade  had  four  bullet-holes  made  through 
his  coat.  Upshaw  is  quite  a youth,  and  yet  is  considered  one  of  the 
best  scouts  in  the  regiment.  Private  Pilkinton,  of  Company  A,  was 
shot  just  as  he  had  loaded  his  gun,  and  after  falling  handed  it  to  Cap- 
tain McCallay,  requesting  him  to  discharge  it  at  the  foe.  Captain  Craw- 
ford and  his  men  were  nearly  surrounded,  and  though  exposed  to  fire 
from  three  directions  bravely  fought  until  they  had  no  cartridges  to 
use.  Captain  McCallay  had  a ball  shot  through  his  coat. 

I have  made  this  report  too  long,  and  yet  not  long  enough  to  do  full 
justice  to  the  men  who,  less  than  100,  in  a fair  fight  kept  back  800  well- 


* Nominal  list  omitted. 


Ciial\  XXVI.]  ABDUCTION  OF  STEAMER  PLANTER.  13 

armed  Yankees  for  nearly  an  hour,  and  retreated  only  because  they  had 
no  more  ammunition  with  which  to  fight. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  DOUGLASS, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

Oapt.  Mallory  P.  King,  A.  A.  G.,  Second  Brigade. 


APRIL  29,  1862. — Engagements  at  Pineberry  Battery,  Willstown,  and 

White  Point,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  E vans,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  Third 
Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Adams  Bun , S.  C , April  30,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the 
major-general,  that  the  enemy  came  up  the  Dawho  and  attacked  the 
battery  at  Pineberry,  and  after  an  engagement  of  four  hours  suc- 
ceeded in  landing  and  destroying  the  battery.  I immediately  repaired 
to  the  spot  and  made  preparations  to  meet  him.  After  going  up  the 
Pon  Pon,  near  Willstown,  I met  him  with  two  pieces  of  field  artillery, 
when  he  commenced  to  retire.  Watching  his  movements,  I again  in- 
tercepted him  near  White  Point  with  four  pieces  of  artillery  and  two 
companies  of  infantry  and  engaged  him  at  50  yards.  The  contest  lasted 
an  hour  very  hot,  and  no  doubt  many  of  the  enemy  were  killed  and 
wounded.  He  retired  in  a crippled  condition.  I am  expecting  a re- 
newed attack  to-day. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K G.  EVAKS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Capt.  J.  R.  Waddy,  A.  A.  G .,  Charleston , S.  (7. 


MAY  13,  1862. — Abduction  of  the  Steamer  Planter  from  Charleston,  S.  C.* 

REPORTS. 

• 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Military  Dis- 
trict of  South  Carolina. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  F.  G.  Ravenel,  C.  S.  Army,  Aide-de-Camp. 

No.  4. — Maj.  Alfred  Rhett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Ko.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

eIdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah , Ga .,  May  13,  1862. 

I have  just  learned  by  telegraph  that  steamer  Planter,  with  five 

* By  Robert  Smalls.  See  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  1, 

1862. 


14  COASTS  OF  S.  C;,  GA^  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 

guns  aboard,  intended  for  the  harbor,  was  stolen  in  Charleston  this 
morning. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond , Va. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  General  Roswell  8.  Ripley , G.  8.  Army , commanding  Second 
Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 


Hdqrs.  2d  Military  District  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  May  14,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a report  from 
Lieutenant  Ravenel,  aide-de-camp,  concerning  the  stealing  of  the 
steamer  Planter  from  this  post;  also  a report  from  Maj.  Alfred  Rhett, 
commandant  at  Fort  Sumter.  The  mischief  has  occurred  from  the 
negligence  of  the  captain  and  officers  of  the  boat  and  their  disobedience 
of  orders,  a copy  of  which  is  herewith  inclosed,  and  which  had  been 
repeatedly  urged  upon  them.  I shall  prefer  charges  against  them  at 
an  early  day  and  lay  them  before  the  general  commanding  the  depart- 
ment. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 


Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston,  8.  C. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  F.  G.  Ravenel,  C.  8.  Army,  Aide-de-Camp. 

- 

Hdqrs.  2d  Military  District  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston,  8.  0.,  May  13,  1862. 

General:  I have  to  report  that  the  steamer  Planter  was  stolen 
from  Southern  Wharf  at  between  3 and  3.30  o’clock  this  morning  and 
taken  to  the  enemy’s  fleet,  off  the  bar,  where  she  was  visible  till  late  in 
the  forenoon.  By  telegram  from  Stono  this  afternoon  it  is  reported 
that  she  has  gone  south.  The  Planter  is  a high-pressure  light-draught 
boat,  drawing  ordinarily  not  more  than  3£  to  4 feet,  and  has  been  em- 
ployed in  the  Confederate  service  in  the  transportation  of  ordnance, 
&c.,  to  and  from  the  various  posts  in  the  harbor  and  other  localities  in 
the  neighborhood.  She  was  under  the  command  of  C.  J.  Relyea  as 
master,  Samuel  H.  Smith,  a Charleston  pilot,  being  mate,*  and  Zerich 
Pitcher  engineer,  with  a colored  crew,  eight  in  number,  and  all  slaves. 
Neither  the  captain,  mate,  nor  engineer  were  on  board  at  the  time  of 
her  departure,  notwithstanding  paragraph  VIII,  in  Orders,  No.  5,  viz: 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ABDUCTION  OF  STEAMER  PLANTER.  15 

• 

All  light-draught  steamers  in  the  employ  of  the  Government  will  be  in  readiness 
to  move  at  once,  their  officers  and  crews  when  at  the  wharf  remaining  on  board  day 
and  night. 

Four  of  lier  colored  crew  and  one  of  the  colored  crew  of  the  steamer 
Etowah  are  missing,  and  are  supposed  to  be  parties  to  the  theft.  The 
Planter  was  to  have  taken  to  the  Middle  Ground  Battery  early  this 
morning  a portion  of  the  armament  for  that  fortification,  which  had 
been  put  on  board  yesterday  afternoon,  viz,  a banded  rifle  42,  one 
8-inch  columbiad,  one  8-inch  seacoast  howitzer,  and  one  32-pounder. 
She  had  also  mounted  for  her  own  use  one  32-pounder  and  a 24-pounder 
howitzer,  and  for  use  in  Fort  Sumter  a 10-inch  columbiad  carriage,  all 
of  which  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

From  an  examination  of  the  guard  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  wharf 
whence  the  Planter  was  stolen  it  would  appear  that  about  8 o’clock 
last  night  two  white  men  and  a white  woman  went  on  board  of  her,  and 
as  they  were  not  seen  to  return  it  is  supposed  that  they  have  also  gone 
in  her.  The  .sentinel  on  post  about  50  yards  from  where  the  Planter 
was  moored  noticed  her  movement  from  the  wharf  at  between  3 and 
3.30  o’clock,  but  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  stop  her,  presuming  that 
she  was  but  pursuing  her  usual  business.  The  Planter  after  leaving 
the  wharf  proceeded  along  the  bay  as  far  perhaps  as  the  Atlantic  Wharf, 
where,  after  a short  stoppage  and  the  blowing  of  her  whistle,  she  was 
turned  and  proceeded  on  her  course  to  sea.  She  passed  Fort  Sumter 
at  4.15  o’clock,  and  was  reported  by  the  sentinel  on  duty  to  the  officer 
of  the  day.  She  was  supposed  to  be  the  guard-boat  and  allowed  to 
pass  without  interruption. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  most  respectfully, 

F.  G.  RAVENEL, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Second  Military  District . 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Maj.  Alfred  Rhett , First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Headquarters  Artillery  Regiment, 

Fort  Sumter , S.  0.,  May  13,  1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  4.15  o’clock  this  morn- 
ing the  sentinel  on  the  parapet  called  for  the  corporal  of  the  guard  and 
reported  the  guard-boat  going  out.  It  was  so  reported  to  the  officer  of 
the  day,  and  as  it  is  by  no  means  unusual  for  the  guard-boat  to  run  out 
at  that  hour,  no  further  notice  was  taken  of  the  occurrence. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Major . 

Capt.  Leo-  D.  Walker, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


16  COASTS  OF  S.  a,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

MAY  20,  1862. — Bombardment  of  Cole’s  Island,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 


No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Ellison  Capers,  Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  1. 


Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  8.  R.  Gist , C.  S.  Army. 


Near  Battery  Island, 

[May  20,  1862] — 1.15  p.  m. 

Captain:  The  largest  gunboat  has  taken  position  near  Grimball’s 
Landing.  One  has  anchored  just  opposite  to  Legare’s;  another  is  at 
Battery  Island.  Three  only  have  passed  the  obstructions  near  Battery 
Island.  They  are  shelling  in  all  directions  at  intervals;  have  command 
of  the  roads  leading  to  Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands.  One  is  just  oppo- 
site to  the  point  where  the  general  and  myself  thought  of  placing  the 
rifled  guns,  within  400  yards  of  it.  I would  like  to  have  another  com- 
pany of  cavalry  for  a few  days.  One  is  not  sufficient  for  the  duties  of 
guards,  &c.,  across  this  island  and  up  the  Stono.  I would  like  to  have 
Hampton’s  if  it  can  be  spared.  The  boats  at  anchor  and  have  not  fired 
for  fifteen  minutes. 

Respectfully, 

S.  R.  GIST, 
Brigadier- General . 


Captain  Walker, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


On  the  Road  near  LegarIs’s, 

May  20,  1862 — 2.15  p.  m. 

Sir  : Two  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  entered  Stono  about  12  m. ; passed 
along  Goat  and  Cole’s  Islands  shelling,  and  are  now  at  anchor  around 
Kiawah  Point,  in  full  view  of  Battery  Island,  throwing  occasional  shells 
in  different  directions.  I have  withdrawn  the  troops  from  Cole’s  and 
from  Battery  Islands  and  fired  the  building  at  both  these  places.  The 
vessels  are  just  below  the  obstructions  in  the  river.  No  one  hurt;  all 
property  saved.  I will  keep  close  watch  and  report  further. 

. By  order  of  Brigadier- General  Gist: 

CARLOS  TRACY, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

Capt.  Leo  D.  Walker, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Ellison  Gapers , Tiventy-fourth  South  Carolina 

Infantry. 

Fort  Palmetto,  S.  C.,  May  20,  1862 — 10.30  a.  m. 
Captain  : The  two  gunboats  have  moved  to  a new  position  and 
are  now  at  anchor  outside  opposite  to  this  fort  and  in  full  view.  A 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


AFFAIR  ON  CROOKED  RIVER,  FLA. 


17 


schooner  has  just  come  up  from  the  south  and  is  now  at  anchor  along- 
side with  sails  up.  A large  steamer  under  sail  and  steam  passed  by 
and  spoke  the  gunboats.  A small  boat  rows  about  among  them  and 
the  clothes  are  hanging  on  the  line  of  the  larger  gunboat. 

Very  respectfully, 

E.  CAPERS, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Captain  Walker, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Secessionville , 8.  C. 

P.  S. — The  schooner  is  threatening  our  channel. 


Fort  Palmetto,  S.  C., 

May  20,  1862 — 12  m. 

Captain:  The  schooner  evidently  brought  buoys,  for  five  barges, 
after  being  engaged  in  sounding,  went  up  to  her,  came  off,  and  have 
planted  a buoy  in  the  channel,  or  at  its  mouth,  just  opposite  this  fort. 
The  buoy  formerly  on  the  bar  over  Folly  has  disappeared.  The  largest 
of  the  three  gunboats  is  now  about  to  join  the  two  smaller  from  the 
direction  of  Charleston  Bar. 

E.  CAPERS, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 


MAY  20,  1862. — Affair  on  Crooked  River,  Fla. 

Report  of  Capt.  Haley  T.  Blocker , Beauregard  Rangers , C.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

Camp  Gladden , Wakulla  County , Fla.,  May  21,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday  morning,  at 
3.30  o’clock,  I left  this  camp  with  a detachment  of  33  men  for  Crooked 
River,  at  which  point  we  arrived  at  1 p.  m.  In  a short  time  after  our 
arrival  I discovered  a boat  leaving  the  blockading  vessel  and  approach- 
ing the  mouth  of  said  river.  I immediately  placed  my  men  in  ambush 
on  Carr’s  Hill,  and  when  the  boat  came  opposite  we  opened  fire  on  the 
enemy  and  killed  or  wounded  all  the  party  of  21  except  4.  It  gives  me 
pleasure  to  state  that  my  men  acted  gallantly  throughout  the  whole 
affair.  There  was  no  one  hurt  on  our  side,  although  our  fire  was  re- 
turned from  the  boat.  Had  my  men  been  properly  armed  not  one  of 
the  enemy  could  have  escaped. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  T.  BLOCKER, 

Captain,  Commanding  Beauregard  Rangers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  Middle  and  Fast  Florida,  Tallahassee,  Fla. 

2 r r — VOL  XIV 


18 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.^  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

MAY  21,  1862.— Affair  near  Battery  Island,  S.  C. 


Report  of  Col . C.  H.  Stevens , Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  Infantry . 


Hdqrs.  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  S.  0.  Vols., 
Secessionville , S.  C .,  Jfay  21,  1862. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  orders  from  brigade  headquarters,  under 
date  of  20th  instant,  I this  morning  detailed  60  men  from  Company  E, 
Captain  Jones,  and  posted  them  as  pickets  near  Battery  Island.  The 
most  advanced  post  was  located  at  the  old  magazine,  at  the  northern- 
most end  of  the  Battery  Island  works,  and  consisted  of  1 sergeant,  1 
corporal,  and  4 men.  The  second  post  was  in  a thicket  some  250  yards 
nearer  the  causeway  leading  from  Battery  to  James  Island,  and  the 
main  support  of  20  men  was  posted  in  the  James  Island  woods  near  the 
road,  with  the  relief  of  30  men  at  a point  in  the  rear  not  far  from  the 
old  Legare  settlement. 

At  about  11  a.  m.  the  sergeant  in  charge  of  the  advanced  picket  sent 
back  a messenger  to  Captain  Jones,  in  charge  of  his  support,  that  a 
small  boat  had  left  one  of  the  steamers  lying  near  the  obstructions  in 
the  Stono  River  and  was  approaching  the  shore.  Before  any  support 
could  be  sent  forward  one  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  passed  up  the  river 
and  took  a position  enfilading  the  bridge  and  causeway,  where  she 
commenced  throwing  grape  and  shrapnel,  completely  cutting  oil*  all 
communication  with  the  pickets  and  closing  their  line  of  retreat.  It  is 
supposed  that  on  finding  themselves  cut  off  and  forgetting  the  barge 
which  had  been  seen  approaching  they  entered  the  magazine  to  pro- 
tect themselves  from  the  fire  of  the  vessel  and  were  made  prisoners  by 
the  landing  party.  The  second  picket  withdrew  in  time  and  escaped. 
The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  very  severe  and  penetrated  the  cover  of  the 
detachment  in  every  direction.  The  men  were  then  very  prudently 
withdrawn  until  the  firing  ceased,  when  they  resumed  their  first  posi- 
tions, except  the  picket  at  the  magazine,  which  was  not  re-established. 

Toward  evening  I retired  the  whole  picket  farther  in  the  direction  of 
Legare’s,  one  vessel  having  gone  down  the  river  to  Cole’s  Island  and 
the  two  others  dropped  down  to  the  line  of  juIes. 

I beg  to  commend  to  your  favorable  consideration  the  men  who  were 
captured,  and  should  an  opportunity  offer  for  exchange  would  be  much 
gratified  to  have  them  returned  to  the  regiment : Sergt.  Samuel  White, 
Corpl.  Calvin  Wilson,  Privates  Adam  Carter,  Charles  Carter,  B.  C. 
Hutson,  Andrew  Hutson. 

I am,  very  respectfully, 


C.  H.  STEVENS, 

Colonel  Twenty -fourth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Vols. 
Capt.  Joseph  Walker,  A.  A.  G.,  Secessionville , S.  C. 


MAY  22,  1862. — Expedition  to  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Evans , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Third 
Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Run , S.  0.,  May  23,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I proceeded  to  John’s  Island 
yesterday  with  Col.  John  Dunovant’s  command — eight  companies  of 


Chap.  XXVI.]  JAMES  AND  DIXON’S  ISLANDS,  S C.  19 

infantry,  the  Marion  Artillery,  and  two  companies  t>f  cavalry — with  the 
intention  of  driving  the  enemy,  should  he  be  found,  off  the  islands  to 
his  gunboats.  Leaving  Colonel  Means’  and  Colonel  Slaughter’s  regi- 
ments as  a reserve  at  Church  Flats,  with  the  force  above  named  I made 
a thorough  reconnaissance  of  both  islands  and  found  that  the  enemy 
had  returned  to  their  ships.  All  the  wagons  [negroes?]  were  imme- 
diately ordered  to  be  removed,  and  the  troops  had  collected  about  200 
before  I left,  and  are  now  at  Church  Flats.  As  there  are  greater  accom- 
modations in  the  city,  I have  directed  them  to  be  sent  to  workhouse 
to  be  fed  and  taken  care  of  by  the  owners.  I was  compelled  to  issue 
rations  to  them  till  provisions  could  be  secured  from  the  different  plan- 
tations. 1 have  still  one  infantry  [company]  and  cavalry  on  John’s 
Island  removing  the  negroes  and  destroying  whatever  cotton  is  found. 
When  this  work  is  finished  I will  withdraw  all  the  force  except  four 
companies  of  cavalry. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  E.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston,  S.  C. 


MAY  25,  1862. — Affair  between  James  and  Dixon’s  Islands,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Gist,  C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  James  Island  and  Dependencies, 

S 'ecessionville,  S.  C.,  May  25,  1862 — 8 p.  m. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  only  occurrence  of  interest  after 
the  departure  to-day  of  the  brigadier- general  commanding: 

Captain  Bonneau’s  gunboat  was  left  by  the  steamer  Chesterfield  at 
the  bridge  between  Dixon’s  and  James  Islands  this  morning.  The 
enemy  perceiving  the  steamer  Chesterfield  as  she  was  placing  Captain 
Bonneau’s  gunboat  in  position  fired  into  her  and  inflicted  a slight 
injury.  The  captain  of  the  Chesterfield  immediately  left  Captain  Bon- 
neau’s boat  and  ran  off  to  Secessionville.  On  my  arrival  here  about  5 
p.  m.  I ordered  the  Chesterfield  back  to  bring  off  the  gunboat.  Cap- 
tain Bonneau,  being  left  at  the  bridge,  was  directed  to  return  the 
enemy’s  fire,  but  not  to  fire  first.  The  enemy’s  gunboats  in  passing  the 
opening  between  Dixon’s  and  James  Islands  discovered  and  opened 
fire  on  Captain  Bonneau’s  boat.  The  fire  was  promptly  returned  by 
Captain  Bonneau.  The  enemy  fired  some  five  or  six  shots;  Captain 
Bonneau  some  fifteen,  when  the  enemy  retired  toward  Cole’s  Island, 
out  of  sight  and  out  of  range.  Captain  Bonneau  is  confident  that  he 
struck  the  enemy’s  boat  twice;  his  own  boat  was  untouched.  Colonel 
Stevens  reports  that  Captain  Bonneau  and  his  men  handled  their  guns 
with  great  accuracy  and  behaved  with  admirable  coolness.  After  the 
enemy’s  boats  had  retired  the  Chesterfield  went  down  and  brought  off 
our  boat.  I have  directed  Captain  Bonneau  to  resume  his  former  posi- 
tion near  Morris  Island. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  GIST, 

Brigadier  General,  Commanding. 

Capt.  Leo.  D.  Walker,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


20 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 
MAY  29,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  North- 
ern District,  Department  of  the  South. 

No.  2. — Col.  Benjamin  C.  Christ,  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  3.— Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Military  District  of  South 
Carolina. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second 
Brigade , Northern  District,  Department  of  the  South. 

Hdqrs.  2d  Brig.,  Northern  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Beaufort , S.  C.,  May  31,  1862. 

Sir:  My  previous  dispatches  and  telegrams  have  apprised  you  of  the 
steps  taken  by  me  to  make  the  demonstration  of  the  day  before  yester- 
day on  the  railroad  and  of  the  success  of  that  demonstration.  To  reca- 
pitulate briefly : 

1.  Your  telegram  reached  me  at  6 o’clock  p.  m.  on  the  28th,  and  I 
understood  the  telegram  as  directing  me  to  make  a strike  according  to 
the  original  programme,  even  though  it  should  cause  the  getting  afloat 
of  my  command  for  another  object  to  be  deferred  until  Saturday  morn- 
ing. I accordingly  made  my  arrangements  and  communicated  with 
you  by  telegraph. 

2.  Your  letter  per  Mattano,  which  reached  me  about  7 o’clock,  advised 
me  that  your  intention  was  that  the  stroke  should  be  made  with  my 
depot  force,  but  it  was  not  to  be  made  if  the  force  was  deemed  insuffi- 
cient or  if  it  would  endanger  the  getting  of  my  command  afloat  on  the 
evening  of  the  30th. 

3.  Being  satisfied  that  the  force  indicated  would  be  sufficient  to  strike 
the  railroad  at  Pocotaligo  and  that  by  proper  arrangements  I could 
get  the  force  afloat  in  season  1 simply  modified  the  orders  accordingly, 
all  of  which  I set  forth  in  my  dispatch  of  the  same  evening,  from  which 
I beg  leave  to  make  the  following  extract : 

Your  dispatch  (telegram)  never  reached  me  till  a quarter  before  6 o’clock  by  my 
own  or  6 o’clock  by  tbe  Beaufort  time  ; too  late  to  get  an  answer  through  to-night. 
I however  at  once  got  my  command  in  readiness  to  push  the  operation  on  the  rail- 
road so  far  as  possible  according  to  the  original  programme,  when  receiving  your 
letter  per  Mattam  I modified  it  so  that  the  Fiftieth  Regiment,  with  one  company  of 
the  Highlauders  and  one  company  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  as  fatigue  parties  and  one 
section  of  Rockwell’s  battery,  with  all  the  force  which  can  be  spared  from  the  cavalry, 
will  by  11  o’clock  start  for  the  ferry  and  he  crossed  by  daylight.  I shall  direct  them 
to  attempt  simply  the  destruction  of  the  road  in  the  vicinity  of  Pocotaligo  and  tbe 
Tulifinv  and  to  return  immediately.  I will  have  the  two  fatigue  companies  brought 
in  from  the  ferry  in  wagons  to-morrow  evening,  so  they  may  be  in  condition  to  go  on 
board  Friday  morning.  Early  in  tbe  morning  I shall  send  out  strong  detachments 
from  each  company  of  the  troops  destined  for  the  work  of  Friday  to  the  vicinity  of 
the  ferry  as  a reserve,  who  will  return  in  the  cool  of  the  afternoon.  The  force  which 
remains  will  under  the  several  colonels  prepare  for  Friday. 

4.  My  arrangements  for  bringing  boats  to  the  ferry  were  remarkably 
successful.  Lieutenant  Brown,  Eighth  Michigan,  was  dispatched  to  the 
advanced  posts  with  orders  to  Captain  Lewis  to  bring  to  the  ferry  all 
the  boats  at  Seabrook  and  other  points.  Lieutenant  Adams,  Fiftieth 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  was  sent  to  Ladies  Island  with  similar  orders 
to  Captain  Dimock,  in  command  on  that  island.  They  brought  twelve 
flats  and  boats  to  the  ferry  before  the  arrival  of  the  troops.  Twelve 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  POCOTALIGO,  S.  C.  21 

flats,  including  the  ferry-boat,  were  started  from  Beaufort  at  9.30  o’clock, 
each  flat  manned  by  a soldier  and  0 negroes,  all  under  the  charge  of 
Lieutenant  Donohue,  Eighth  Michigan,  and  reached  the  ferry  about  day- 
light. The  troops  commenced  crossing  at  3 p.  m.  Much  delay  occurred 
in  the  passage  of  both  the  cavalry  and  artillery.  The  infantry  com- 
menced their  march  at  5 a.  in.,  the  cavalry  at  6 a.  m.,  but  the  artillery 
not  till  8,  and  the  latter  were  furthermore  delayed  in  the -road  nearly 
two  hours  in  feeding  and  watering  their  animals.  The  officer  in  charge, 
Lieutenant  Cannon  (his  first  experience  in  service),  states  that  he  used 
every  exertion  to  push  up,  but  did  not  reach  the  advance  till  the  enemy 
had  been  routed.  The  inclosed  report  of  Colonel  Christ  will  give  the 
details  of  the  affair.  The  enemy  was  handsomely  driven  from  his 
position.  Two  prisoners  were  taken.  He  experienced  considerable 
loss  in  killed  and  wounded.  But  on  examining  his  cartridge  boxes 
Colonel  Christ  found  but  little  ammunition  was  left.  Although  his 
advance  were  in  direct  view  and  only  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  rail- 
road he  determined  to  fall  back  and  return  to  Beaufort.  As  he  fell 
back,  although  some  of  the  enemy’s  vedettes  kept  in  view  of  him,  no 
serious  attack  on  him  was  attempted,  and  the  return  was  very  leisurely 
made. 

5.  The  troops  designated  as  reserves,  viz,  25  men  from  each  company 
of  the  Eighth  Michigan  and  Seventy -ninth  Highlanders  not  on  other 
duty,  and  40  men  from  each  company  of  the  One  hundredth  Pennsyl- 
vania, moved  off  according  to  orders,  and  were  at  their  appropriate 
positions  at  the  ferry,  Camp  Stevens,  and  the  7 mile  post  at  the  time 
designated. 

6.  At  1 o’clock  I learned  that  the  troops  would  not  be  put  afloat 
until  the  31st,  and  at  3.30  o’clock  (having  gone  to  the  ferry  in  the  mean 
time)  that  Colonel  Christ  had  had  a sharp  engagement  with  the  enemy 
in  force  superior  to  his  own.  I then  determined  to  send  the  Highlanders 
to  Garden’s  Corners  as  a reserve,  and  afterward  sent  to  the  same  point 
the  Eighth  Michigan.  The  former  numbered  225  and  the  latter  150 
men.  The  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  were  advanced  to  the  ferry. 
These  forces  were  advanced  out  of  abundant  caution,  and  not  in  conse- 
quence of  there  being  esteemed  an  imperative  necessity  for  so  doing. 

7.  The  troops  all  returned  'in  good  condition,  the  force  of  Colonel 
Christ  of  course  much  fatigued.  They  all  recrossed  the  ferry  before  4 
o’clock  the  morning  of  the  30th,  and  had  therefore  marched  33  miles, 
fought  two  hours,  and  made  two  difficult  river  crossings  in  some  twenty- 
seven  hours.  This  I consider  a remarkable  case  of  endurance,  for  it 
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  weather  was  warm,  and  the  operation 
was  undertaken  on  the  jump  and  at  the  close  of  the  day. 

8.  The  operation,  in  short,  was  most  successful  as  a reconnaissance 
or  demonstration,  and  it  is  very  certain,  could  the  original  programme 
have  been  carried  out,  that  the  whole  line  would  have  been  broken  up 
from  Salkehatchie  to  Coosawhatchie.  It  proves  the  correctness ^of  the 
information  which  I had  previously  gained — that  the  enemy  was  not  in 
any  considerable  force  at  the  railroad. 

9.  The  crossings  at  the  ferry,  both  going  and  returning  and  through 
the  entire  operation,  were  in  charge  of  Captain  Lewis  and  Lieutenants 
Brown  and  Donohue,  Eighth  Michigan.  They  are  deserving  of  particu- 
lar mention  for  their  skill  and  endurance.  Captain  Cline,  One  hun- 
dredth Pennsylvania,  assisted  with  his  company  at  the  return.  I have 
to  return  my  acknowledgments  to  my  staff,  Captain  Stevens,  assistant 
adjutant- general;  Captain  Lusk,  aide  de-cam p,  and  Lieutenant  Porter, 
brigade  quartermaster.  Colonel  Christ  speaks  in  complimentary  terms 


22 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

of  my  aide,  Lieutenant  Lyons,  who  accompanied  liim  and  acted  as  his 
aide  during  the  affair. 

10.  Our  casualties  were  2 killed  and  9 wounded.  Captain  Parker  was 
among  the  killed — a most  gallant  officer,  conspicuous  for  his  gallantry 
in  this  affair,  and  an  officer  whose  whole  course  has  given  promise  of 
distinction. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Capt.  A.  B.  Ely, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Hilton  Head , 8.  C. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Col.  Benjamin  C.  Christ , Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Pocotaligo,  May  29,  1862. 

Dear  General  : After  a spirited  engagement,  which  lasted  two 
hours,  we  succeeded  in  driving  the  enemy  from  their  cover,  and  the 
cavalry  is  now  in  full  pursuit.  We  have  2 killed  and  5 wounded.  I 
regret  to  say  that  Captain  Parker  is  one  of  the  killed.  We  will  pro- 
ceed at  once  to  the  railroad.  The  battery  has  just  arrived.  We  should 
have  some  ambulances  to  bring  our  dead  and  wounded. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

B.  C.  CHRIST, 

Colonel  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

General  Stevens,  Beaufort , 8.  C. 

P.  S. — I have  just  learned  from  a wounded  prisoner  that  their  loss 
is  severe  and  that  their  force  was  at  least  800. 


Pocotaligo,  May  29, 1862. 

Sir:  Upon  investigation  I find  that  the  men  have  not  over  12  rounds 
of  cartridges  on  the  average.  I also  learn  from  negroes  that  the  des- 
perate stand  made  by  the  enemy  at  this  point  was  in  the  expectation 
of  re-enforcemeuts  from  Grahamville  and  McPhersouville.  At  the  lat- 
ter place  it  is  said  they  have  600,  and  they  expected  a larger  force  from 
the  former. 

After  consulting  with  the  officers,  and  in  view  of  your  orders  to  avoid 
a general  engagement,  I have  considered  discretion  the  better  part  of 
valor,  and  leave  2.30  o’clock  for  Beaufort. 

Yours, 


B.  C.  CHRIST, 

Colonel  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 


General  Stevens. 


Beaufort,  S.  C.,  May  30,  1862. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  to  orders  I left  Beaufort  at  10.30  o’clock  on  the 
evening  of  the  28th  with  my  regiment  and  one  company  of  the  Eighth 


CHAr.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  POCOTALIGO,  S.  C.  23 

Michigan  Volunteers,  Captain  Doyle,  and  one  company  of  the  Seventy- 
ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  Captain  Elliott,  and  proceeded  to  Port 
Royal  Ferry.  We  succeeded  in  getting  on  the  main  land  by  daylight, 
and  immediately  took  up  my  line  of  march  for  Pocotaligo  vi&  Garden’s 
Corners.  About  2 miles  from  the  ferry  we  commenced  driving  in  the 
enemy’s  pickets,  and  did  so  three  times  before  we  reached  Garden’s 
Corners.  At  this  point  I left  Company  E,  Lieutenant  Lantz  command- 
ing, and  at  this  point  also  Major  Higginson,  First  Massachusetts  Cav- 
alry, reported  to  me  with  80  men  and  horses.  I again  took  up  my  line 
of  march  for  Pocotaligo  via  the  Sheldon  road,  and  save  the  driving  in 
of  the  enemy’s  pickets  several  times,  which  caused  us  considerable  de- 
lay, we  reached  Pocotaligo  without  further  interruption. 

Here  the  enemy  had  chosen  a most  favorable  position,  and  we  suf- 
fered the  casualties  (which  I will  mention  hereafter)  in  a successful  effort 
to  dislodge  him.  As  you  reach  Pocotaligo,  you  do  so  over  a causeway 
about  a quarter  of  a mile  in  length,  flanked  partly  on  either  side  by  a 
marsh,  and  through  which  passes  a stream.  About  80  yards  from  the 
end  of  the  causeway  over  this  stream  was  a bridge  about  15  feet  wide, 
which  the  eneipy  had  so  far  destroyed  as  to  make  it  impassable  save  by 
passing  over  the  string  pieces,  about  6 inches  wide.  On  the  opposite 
side  of  the  marsh  from  Pocotaligo  there  is  a narrow  strip  of  woods. 
Through  this  we  skirmished,  and  then  ascertained  that  the  enemy  was 
posted  under  cover  of  trees  and  ditches  within  good  rifle-range  on  either 
side  of  the  causeway.  Some  small  firing  now  ensued  with  very  little 
effect  on  either  side.  It  however  became  evident  that  in  order  to  dis- 
lodge the  enemy  we  must  have  a nearer  range  for  our  arms,  and  the 
lamented  Captain  Parker  then  volunteered  to  take  his  company  across 
the  stream  on  the  string  pieces  and  let  them  drop  into  a ditch  on  our 
right,  where  they  would  be  partially  under  cover.  This  movement  was 
successful. 

After  some  considerable  time  I succeeded  in  passing  over  about  300 
men,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brenholtz,  who  gradually 
approached  the  opposite  side  of  the  marsh  and  succeeded  in  dislodging 
the  enemy  on  our  right,  which  was  followed  by  a charge  on  the  left, 
when  the  enemy  commenced  a rapid  retreat  to  the  woods.  As  soon  as 
it  could  be  done  I had  the  bridge  relaid,  and  immediately  ordered  the 
cavalry  in  pursuit,  but  the  enemy  having  taken  refuge  in  a wood  where 
cavalry  could  not  operate  successfully  I had  to  pursue  him  with  infantry, 
but  unfortunately  the  men  were  so  jaded  and  worn-out  with  their  long 
march  of  24  miles  that  they  could  not  pursue  him  as  rapidly  as  he  re- 
treated. 

At  this  time  Lieutenant  Cannon,  with  a section  of  the  Connecticut 
battery,  reported  himself,  having  just  arrived  on  the  ground.  In  my 
judgment,  if  the  artillery  had  been  on  the  ground  when  the  action  com- 
menced we  could  have  dislodged  the  enemy  in  a very  short  time  -and 
proceeded  to  accomplish  the  object  of  the  expedition  ; but  the  action 
itself  lasted  nearly  two  hours,  and  by  the  time  I could  recall  the  com- 
panies in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  and  again  get  ready  to  move  more  than 
three  hours  had  elapsed  ; besides,  the  men  had  so  much  reduced  their 
ammunition  that  I was  not  willing  to  risk  another  engagement,  which 
I had  every  reason  to  expect  awaited  me  at  the  railroad  to  where  the 
enemy  had  retreated,  and,  as  I had  been*  informed  by  the  negroes,  they 
were  sure  to  meet  re-enforcements  from  McPherson ville  and  Graham- 
ville. 

In  view  of  the  positive  orders  I received  to  return  to  Port  Royal 
Island  during  the  night,  and  to  avoid,  if  possible,  bringing  on  a general 


24  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai\  XX VI. 

engagement,  and  with  reduced  ammunition.  I deemed  it  prudent  to 
retire,  and  accordingly  arrived  at  Port  Royal  Perry  at  11  o’clock  p.  m. 
Small  detachments  of  cavalry  followed  us  as  far  as  Garden’s  Corners, 
when  the  outer  pickets  of  Company  E repulsed  them  by  unhorsing  one 
of  their  number.  At  Garden’s  Corners  I met  a detachment  of  the 
Eighth  Michigan  Regiment,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Graves  commanding, 
and  a detachment  of  the  Seven  ty-ninth  New  York,  under  command  of 
Captain  More.  As  soon  as  we  arrived  at  the  ferry  I immediately  com- 
menced to  cross  over,  and  by  3 o’clock  (morning)  the  entire  force  was 
on  this  side  the  Coosaw  River. 

Our  loss  during  the  engagement  was  2 killed  and  9 wounded,  for  de- 
tails of  which  I respectfully  refer  you  to  the  accompanying  report  of 
Dr.  Siemens,  regimental  surgeon.  What  the  enemy’s  loss  is  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  say,  but  from  all  I can  learn  it  must  be  much  greater  than  ours. 
We  captured  2 prisoners,  one  of  which  I have  already  sent  to  head- 
quarters, and  the  other  is  in  the  hospital,  wounded.  It  is  also  difficult 
to  state  the  force  of  the  enemy,  but  it  could  not  have  been  less  than 
from  600  to  800.  There  were  six  companies  of  mounted  riflemen,  be- 
sides infantry,  among  which  were  a considerable  number  of  colored 
men.  Among  the  killed  is  Capt.  Charles  H.  Parker,  Company  H,  who 
fell  while  gallantly  cheering  his  men  to  duty. 

Before  leaving  Pocotaligo  I had  the  bridge  over  that  river  destroyed. 
My  object  in  this  was  that  in  any  future  expedition  to  this  point  it 
would  prevent  the  enemy  from  cutting  off  our  retreat  by  sending  forces 
from  Grahamville. 

I regret  to  state  that  on  yesterday  morning,  near  Stewart’s  plantation, 
Lieutenant  Rush,  Company  B,  was  dangerously  wounded  by  the  acci- 
dental discharge  of  his  pistol. 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men 
under  my  command.  They  proved  themselves  soldiers  not  only  in  name 
but  in  deed.  I gratefully  acknowledge  the  assistance  of  Colonel  Bren- 
holts,  Major  Overton,  and  Adjutant  Rodgers,  of  the  Fiftieth  Pennsyl- 
vania Volunteers ; Major  Higginson,  of  the  First  Massachusetts  Cav- 
alry. and  of  Lieutenant  Lyons,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Stevens. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

B.  C.  CHRIST, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fiftieth  Regiment  Pa.  Vols. 

Capt.  H.  Stevens, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ro.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  S.  Walker , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Third  Military 
District  of  South  Carolina. 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville , S.  C.,  June  6,  1862. 
Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a sharp  engagement  occurred 
between  the  troops  under  my  command  and  the  enemy  on  the  29th 
ultimo. 

I was  absent  on  an  inspecting  tour  of  my  commaud  and  was  return- 
ing to  my  post  on  the  cars  when  informed  by  a trooper,  who  stopped  the 
cars,  that  he  had  been  sent  to  inform  me  that  the  enemy  in  force  were 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  POCOTALIGO,  S.  C.  25 

advancing  to  attack  the  railroad.  When  arriving  upon  the  field  I found 
that  Maj.  J.  H.  Morgan,  assisted  by  Oapt.  W.  L.  Trenholm,  had  made 
a judicious  disposition  of  a small  dismounted  force,  which  consisted  of 
Capt.  W.  L.  Trenholm’s  company  (Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen),  sta- 
tioned in  the  woods  at  Old  Pocotaligo,  38  men,  and  two  companies  (A 
and  D,  First  Battalion  Cavalry),  38  men,  lining  the  left  bank  of  Scre- 
ven’s Canal  as  ‘skirmishers.  A bridge  crossing  the  canal  had  been  pre- 
viously torn  up.  Generals  Pemberton,  Drayton,  and  Evans  had  been 
telegraphed  of  the  enemy’s  advance.  The  remaining  two  companies  of 
cavalry,  with  Capt.  D.  B.  Heyward’s  company,  were  held  in  reserve, 
with  the  dismounted  horses,' half  a mile  in  the  rear,  all  under  command 
of  Maj.  J.  H.  Morgan,  with  orders  to  be  in  readiness  to  charge  the  enemy 
when  required.  A number  of  these  men  were  without  long  arms. 

Upon  the  approach  of  the  enemy’s  advance  guard  the"  dismounted 
cavalry  companies  opened  fire  with  their  shot-guns  at  the  distance  of 
40  yards.  They  returned  the  fire,  and  commenced  deploying  to  the 
right  and  left  near  the  banks  of  the  canal.  The  Rutledge  Mounted 
Riflemen  fired  deliberately  one  shot  at  a time  at  intervals  as  the  enemy 
would  expose  themselves.  Five  companies  crossed  the  road  and  de- 
ployed to  the  right.  I should  judge  two  companies  deployed  to  the  left. 
Both  kept  up  a scattered  qnd  continuous  fire  with  long  range  guns. 
The  small  force  of  76  men  held  their  position  with  great  spirit  and 
tenacity  for  nearly  three  hours,  from  10.30  to  near  1.30. 

At  this  time  the  enemy  crossed  the  ditch  to  the  right  of  Lieut.  R.  M. 
Skinner’s  command,  thus  flanking  him,  and  enabling  them  to  cut  the 
Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen  from  the 'Causeway  in  the  rear.  Lieut.  R. 

M.  Skinner  was  shot  down,  and  his  men  retired  by  the  left  under  shelter 
of  the  ditch.  I ordered  the  Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen  to  retire,  which 
they  did  in  good  order.  Lieut.  R.  M.  Skinner  and  Private  Robert  Stuart, 
of  the  Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen,  were  brought  off  seriously  wounded. 

On  reaching  the  dismounted  horses  the  whole  command  retired  in 
good  order  to  a position  three-quarters  of  a mile  in  rear  of  the  former. 
Here  we  met  the  ammunition  which  had  been  sent  for,  and  the  whole 
force  was  resupplied.  The  enemy  had  been  held  in  check  so  long  and 
the  ground  was  so  difficult  for  cavalry  that  I deployed  two-thirds  of  my 
command  upon  the  banks  of  a ditch  crossing  the  road.  As  we  retired 
I detailed  a small  party  of  the  Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen  to  remain 
in  observation.  I sent  out  6 of  the  Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen  to  the 
left  under  Lieut.  L.  J.  Walker,  and  15  of  the  cavalry  battalion  under 
Maj.  J.  H.  Morgan.  I stationed  2 of  the  latter  within  400  yards  of  a 
sentinel  of  the  enemy  who  were  occupying  Old  Pocotaligo. 

At  4 o’clock  I received  a re-enforcement  of  three  pieces  of  a light 
battery,  under  Capt,  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  and  two  companies  infantry, 
Companies  I and  F,  of  the  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry,  Capts.  f 
Allen  C.  Izard  and  B.  F.  Wyman.  I placed  tli£  battery  in’  position 
to  command  the  road,  and  formed  the  infantry  as  skirmishers  along 
the  banks  of  a long  canal  running  nearly  at  right  angles  to  the  road. 
Learning  from  my  vedettes  that  the  enemy  were  retiring  I advanced  in 
pursuit  with  my  entire  force.  As  the  enemy  were  retiring  in  good  order 
I had  to  feel  my  way  carefully  with  skirmishers  deployed  to  avoid  am- 
buscade. Colonel  Means’  regiment  of  400  men  joined  me  in  the  night. 

We  continued  the  pursuit  till  10  o’clock:  at  night,  when  mv  advance 
guard  was  fired  on  by  their  rear  guard.  I rode  up  to  the  advance  and 
was  informed  by  Lieut.  L.  J.  Walker,  who  was  in  command  of  the 
advance  guard,  that  he  felt  assured  they  had  halted  at  Garden’s  Corners 
and  that  the  firing  was  by  their  outpost.  The  night  was  intensely  dark, 


26 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


the  country  intricate,  and  intersected  by  ditches,  by  roads,  and  woods, 
and  I was  fearful  of  risking  the  chances  of  a night  attack,  in  which  it 
would  be  impossible  to  distinguish  friend  from  foe.  In  my  judgment 
there  was  too  great  risk  of  that  most  melancholy  of  disasters  when 
friends  shoot  each  other  by  mistake  in  a blind  melee. 

The  country  was  so  broken  that  cavalry  could  not  operate.  My  in- 
fantry was  inferior  in  number  to  that  of  the  enemy.  It  was  reported 
to  me  that  the  infantry  could  not,  after  the  fatigue  of  the  day,  sustain 
the  march  of  12  miles,  which  would  have  enabled  them  to  get  in  the 
rear  of  the  enemy  by  another  route.  Had  they  attempted  it  the  enemy, 
if  disposed  to  retire,  could  cross  before  they  reached  it,  as  they  had  oniy 
3 miles  to  march.  The  probability  of  a gunboat  being  stationed  at  Port 
Boyal  Ferry  to  protect  their  retreat  was  an  element  to  be  duly  consid- 
ered. I was  forced  unwillingly  to  the  conclusion  to  halt  and  make  the 
attack  early  in  the  morning.  With  this  view  I ordered  Colonel  Phillips’ 
Georgia  Legion,  which  I was  notified  had  arrived  at  Pocotaligo,  to  join 
me  at  daylight.  The  entire  command  was  ordered  to  be  ready  to  march 
at  daylight. 

Early  in  the  morning  I advanced  as  far  as  Port  Koyal  Ferry,  where 
I found  the  enemy  had  crossed  during  the  night.  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott, 
jr.,  brought  up  his  artillery  and  battered  the  ferry- house,  which  sheltered 
their  pickets,  and  their  flat-boats,  with  which  they  had  effected  a cross- 
ing, at-the  range  of  250  yards.  As  stated  by  a corporal  of  the  enemy 
taken  prisoner,  their  force  consisted  of  twelve  companies  of  infantry, 
viz : Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Begiment,  one  company  of  Eighth  Michigan, 
one  company  of  New  York?  one  of  cavalry,  and  two  pieces  of  artillery. 
The  whole  force  I had  actually  engaged  was  76  men  rank  and  file.  One 
hundred  and  ten  were  in  reserve  and  holding  horses,  a considerable 
number  only  armed  with  sabers.  The  remainder  of  my  force  was  on 
picket  duty  and  watching  other  roads  by  which  the  enemy  might  ap- 
proach. The  smallness  of  the  list  of  killed  and  wounded  presented  after 
such  protracted  firing  is  accounted  for  by  the  thorough  protection  af- 
forded the  skirmishers  by  the  banks  of  the  canal,  of  the  shelter  of  which 
they  availed  themselves  in  retreating  by  a line  parallel  to  that  of  the 
enemy,  rejoining  their  horses  by  a circuit  to  the  left. 

I would  specially  commend  the  soldierly  bearing  of  Capt.  W.  L.  Tren- 
holm  and  Lieut.  L.  J.  Walker,  of  the  Butledge  Mounted  Biflemen; 
Lieut.  B.  M.  Skinner,  of  Company  A,  and  Sergeant  Lesesne,  of  same 
company;  Corpl.  W.  H.  Jeffers  and  Privates  Joseph  D.  Taylor  and  W. 
K.  Steadman,  of  the  Butledge  Mounted  Biflemen. 

I was  much  indebted  to  Capt.  W.  W.  Elliott,  acting  ordnance  officer, 
for  his  information  of  the  topography  of  the  country. 

Lieut.  Ed.  H.  Barnwell,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  showed 
great  zeal  and  gallantry,  and  was  exposed  to  a sharp  and  close  fire  while 
aiding  me  in  the  engagement. 

I cannot  too  highly  commend  the  pertinacity  and  spirit  shown  by  the 
small  command  of  the  First  Battalion  Cavalry,  under  Lieut.  B.  M.  Skin- 
ner, of  Company  A,  while  exposed  to  a close  and  rapid  fire  of  a greatly 
superior  force. 

The  Butledge  Mounted  Biflemen,  armed  with  a long-range  rifle,  were 
placed  at  a greater  distance  from  the  enemy.  Throughout  the  contest 
they  behaved  with  great  steadiness  and  courage,  and  illustrated  the 
excellent  discipline  and  drill  for  which  the  corps  is  conspicuous. 

Lieut.  L.  J.  Walker,  with  6 of  the  Butledge  Mounted  Biflemen,  formed 
the  advance  guard  while  following  the  enemy.  Lieut.  L.  J.  Walker  per- 
formed the  responsible  duty  assigned  him  with  skill  and  courage. 


Chap.  XX YI.] 


SKIRMISH  ON  JAMES  ISLAND,  S.  C. 
List  of  killed  and  wounded. 


27 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

RUTLEDGE  MOUNTED  RIFLEMEN. 

Privates 

2 

3 

1 

1 

1 

FIRST  BATTALION  CAVALRY. 

Company  A : 

Officers 

Privates 

Company  C : 

Privates 

1 

Grand  total 

2 

6 

1 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  is  supposed  to  have  been  larger,  but  could  not 
be  certainly  ascertained,  as  his  killed  and  wounded  were  carried  off  in 
wagons  seized  on  the  neighboring  plantations. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

» W.  S.  WALKER, 

Colonel , Commanding  Third  Military  District. 
Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  June  13,  1862. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  report 
of  the  engagement  of  May  29  between  the  troops  of  your  command  and 
a comparatively  large  force  of  the  enemy  at  or  near  Pocotaligo.  The 
major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  thauk  that  portion  of  the 
troops  engaged  for  their  gallant,  noble,  and  daring  conduct  on  that 
occasion  in  meeting  and  holding  in  check  a much  larger  force  for  sev- 
eral hours,  fighting  the  enemy  at  every  available  point  with  the  usual 
gallantry,  thus  saving  the  railroad  from  capture. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully, 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 
Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  Comdg.  Third  Military  District. 


JUNE  3,  1862. — Skirmish  on  James  Island,  S.  C. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — Lieut.  Ocran  H.  Howard,  Acting  Signal  Officer,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Col.  Ellison  Capers,  Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  4.— Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard,  Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Ocran  H.  Howard , Acting  Signal  Officer,  U.  S.  Army. 

Signal  Station,  Beaufort , S.  C.,  June  23,  1862* 
Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  1st  day  of  June  I 

* See  also  “ Confederate  Correspondence,  etc.  J under  dates  of  June  3-4,  1862,  post. 


28  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

embarked  at  Beaufort  on  board  the  United  States  transport  Flora,  with 
Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  commanding  Second  Division,  Department 
of  the  South,  for  James  Island,  South  Carolina.  On  Monday,  the  2d 
dune,  I reached  James  Island,  and  the  troops  were  landed.  On  Tues- 
day, 3d,  a reconnaissance  in  force  was  made  by  the  troops  composing 
the  First  Brigade.  That  the  gunboats  might  be  made  of  service  in 
this  affair  I was  ordered  by  Lieutenant  Keenan,  chief  signal  officer,  on 
board  the  United  States  gunboat  Un  ad  ilia,  Captain  Collins,  and  imme- 
diately opened  communication  with  Lieutenant  Keenan  on  shore.  The 
enemy  in  front  of  our  forces  held  a position  in  the  woods,  where  they 
had  planted  a masked  battery.  These  woods  were  entirely  concealed 
from  the  Unadilla  by  intervening  woods;  but  previous  to  the  advance 
of  our  troops  Lieutenant  Keenan,  so  stationed  that  he  could  see  both 
the  woods  occui>ied  by  the  enemy  and  the  gunboats,  had  so  directed 
the  fire  through  me  that  the  11-inch  shells  from  the  Unadilla  were 
doing  as  much  execution  as  if  the  enemy’s  position  had  been  in  plain 
sight.  When  our  forces  were  thrown  forward  General  Stevens  sent 
me  the  following  message:  “Fire  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  we* will 
take  their  guns.”  This  was  done,  and  the  next  message  was,  “ Cease 
firing.”  Soon  after  came  the  message,  “We  have  taken  three  of  their 
guns.”  Thereafter,  up  to  the  day  of  the  assault  upon  the  Tower  Bat- 
tery, hardly  a day  elapsed  that  I was  not  doing  signal  duty  on  board 
one  of  the  gunboats,  in  communication  with  Lieutenants  Keenan,  Taff't, 
or  Hickok.  I did  signal  duty  on  gunboats  Unadilla,  Pembina,  Henry 
Andrews,  Hale,  and  Ellen.  These  vessels  after  the  occupation  of  James 
Island  fired  hardly  a shot  except  under  my  directions,  and  in  all  re- 
connaissances I was  at  my  post  and  in  constant  communication  with 
the  signal  officer  on  shore. 

On  the  day  of  the  assault  on  the  Tower  Battery  I was  on  the  gun- 
boat Ellen,  and  for  an  account  of  services  rendered  that  day  I respect- 
fully refer  you  to  the  official  report  of  General  Stevens,  to  those  parts 
of  it  wherein  I am  mentioned,  once  in  connection  with  Lieutenant  Taff't 
and  again  by  myself. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  H.  HOWARD, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Acting  Signal  Officer . 

Samuel  T.  Gushing, 

Captain , Second  Infantry , Acting  Signal  Officer , in  Charge. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  C.  S.  Army . 

Headquarters  Eastern  Division, 

James  Island , S.  C .,  June  12,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Capers,  commanding  detachments  engaged  on  the  3d  inst.  on  James 
Island,  and  to  add,  from  personal  observation,  my  testimony  to  the  gal- 
lant bearing  and  conduct  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Capers  and  the  officers 
and  men  engaged  in  the  affair.  The  prisoners  were  forwarded  to  Charles- 
ton on  the  same  day  to  the  provost-marshal.  A short  time  after  the 


Chap.  XXVI.1 


SKIRMISH  ON  JAMES  ISLAND,  S.  C 


€i9 


engagement  Brigadier-General  Mercer  arrived  and  assumed  command 
and  made  the  subsequent  disposition  of  the  forces. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  B.  GIST, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  B.  Waddy, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept.  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 


Bo.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Ellison  Capers , Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina 

Infantry. 

Camp  24th  S.  0.  Vol.  Beot.,  Advance  Forces, 
James  Island , S.  <7.,  June  10,  1862. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  details  of  the  recent  en- 
gagement with  the  enemy’s  advance  at  Legar^’s  place,  below  Seces- 
sionville,  on  the  3d  instant: 

In,  obedience  to  your  direction  I left  the  camp  before  daylight  with 
four  companies  of  the  Twenty -fourth,  the  Marion  Bifles,  Pee  Dee  Bifles, 
Evans  Guard,  and  Colleton  Guard,  to  remove  the  guns  of  Captain 
Chichester’s  battery,  which  were  bogged  in  the  marsh  at  the  causeway 
below  Bivers’.  Arrived  at  Secessionville,  it  was  reported  to  me  by 
Colonel  Lamar  that  our  pickets  had  been  driven  in  to  Bivers’  and  that 
the  guns  were  covered  by  the  enemy.  I reported  this  to  the  general, 
who  ordered  me  to  take  my  companies  and  drive  him  back  until  the 
fire  of  his  boats  obliged  me  to  withdraw.  I moved  down  to  Bivers’ 
and  found  the  picket  force,  consisting  of  the  Beauregard  Light  In- 
fantry and  the  Charleston  Biflemen,  at  that  point  and  the  enemy’s 
advance  in  the  pines  just  in  their  front.  I ordered  these  companies  to 
join  my  command,  and  formed  my  line  at  the  head  of  the  causewav, 
racing  Legard’s ; threw  out  the  Marion  Bifles,  Captain  Sigwald,  as 
skirmishers,  and  ordered  him  to  push  on  and  draw  the  fire  of  the 
enemy.  This  was  well  and  promptly  done,  the  Marions  soon  occupy- 
ing the  pines  and  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  retiring.  I crossed  the 
causeway  by  flank  and  deployed  on  the  other  side,  throwing  my  com- 
panies forward  on  the  right,  when  we  engaged  the  enemy  warmly  until, 
our  fire  becoming  too  severe,  he  fell  back  to  the  edge  of  the  wood  on 
this  side  of  Legar6’s  old  field. 

After  a half  hour’s  firing  in  this  position  we  moved  into  the  wood 
and  drove  through,  the  enemy  retreating  across  the  old  field  to  the 
houses  beyond.  Our  way  was  now  unobstructed,  the  euemy  occupying 
the  Legare  houses  beyond  and  the  long  hedge  to  the  east  of  them, 
from  which  he  poured  in  a strong  fire,  most  of  which  passed  entirely 
oyer  us.  A regiment,  which  I afterward  ascertained  to  be  the  Twenty- 
eighth  Massachusetts,  constituted  his  reserve,  and  was  posted  below 
the  negro  houses,  a quarter  of  a mile  to  the  south.  I determined,  by 
a rapid  charge  on  the  main  buildings,  to  cut  off  the  advance  from  this 
support,  the  only  difficulty  being  that  at  Legar^’s  we  would  be  open  to 
the  river  and  within  a half  mile.  But  I resolved  to  attempt  it.  Just 
a / this  period  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard  with  his  command,  about 
stroDg,  reported  to  me  and  I assigned  him  a position,  and  ordered 
the  Evans  Guard,  Captain  Gooding;  Charleston  Biflemen,  Lieutenant 
Lynch ; Irish  Volunteers,  Captain  Kyau;  Beauregard  Light  Infantry, 


30 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Captain  White;  Sumter  Guard,  Lieut.  J.  Ward  Hopkins,  and  the  Cal- 
houn Guard,  Captain  Miles,  to  perform  this  duty,  while  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Gaillard  took  command  of  the  center  and  left  as  a reserve.  It 
was  well  and  nobly  performed,  22  prisoners  being  captured,  including 
a captain  and  sergeant,  all  of  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Begi- 
ment.  The  prisoners  in  our  possession  and  the  enemy  driven  back  to 
his  support  (which  promptly  took  position  in  and  behind  the  row  of 
negro  houses)  the  boats  opened  a brisk  fire  on  us,  while  we  received 
our  only  damaging  fire  from  the  negro  huts.  I therefore  ordered  a 
retirement  to  the  wood,  which  was  performed  in  good  order  and  under 
cover  of  the  fire  from  our  left,  where  the  remainder  of  the  Charleston 
Battalion,  with  three  of  my  companies,  were  posted.  I deemed  it 
proper  to  retire  the  force  beyond  the  causeway  to  Livers’,  where  I took 
position  by  the  general’s  directions.  I would  have  retained  the  wood 
had  I had  a force  sufficient  to  cover  my  right,  wrhich  was  open  to  the 
enemy  and  immediately  under  the  fire  of  his  boats. 

The  following  is  a.  list  of  the  casualties  of  the  Beauregard  Light 
Infantry,  Pee  Dee  Bifles,  and  Evans  Guard.*  The  report  of  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Gaillard,  which  is  herewith  forwarded,  shows  the  result  in 
his  command,  which  makes  our  total  injury  sustained  17  wounded  (1 
of  which  was  mortal)  and  1 missing. 

From  a prisoner  captured  on  Saturday  last  I learned  that  Lieutenant 
Walker  was  not  dangerously  wounded  and  was  doing  well,  being  held 
a prisoner  at  Legareville.  The  same  prisoner  informs  me  that  many 
of  the  enemy  were  wounded,  2 having  since  died,  and  that  several 
were  killed.  He  represents  the  regiment  engaged  to  have  been  the 
One  hundredth  Pennsylvania,  and  the  reserve  to  have  consisted  of  the 
Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts  and  Forty-ninth  New  York.f 

The  officers  and  men  under  my  command  behaved  with  coolness  and 
determined  bravery.  I have  no  special  mention  to  make  of  any  one 
for  distinguished  behavior.  Captain  Cline  surrendered  his  sword  to 
Captain  Byan,  of  the  Irish  Volunteers,  who  now  wears  it  as  a trophy 
of  his  gallantry.  To  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard  and  his  gallant  com- 
mand I return  my  thanks  for  their  prompt  and  efficient  support.  The 
companies  of  the  Twenty-fourth,  after  a long  march  and  without  break- 
fast, went  into  the  action  with  spirit  and  sustained  it  throughout. 

With  gratitude  to  God  for  our  success,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  col- 
onel, very  respectfully  and  trulv,  your  obedient  servant, 

ELLISON  CAPEBS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Twenty -fourth  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

Col.  C.  H.  Stevens,  Comdg.  Twenty -fourth  South  Carolina  Vols. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Charleston 

Battalion. 

Headquarters  Charleston  Battalion, 

Secessionville , S.  C.,  June  6,  1862. 

Sir  : Learning  on  Tuesday,  the  3d  instant,  that  you  were  engaged 
with  the  enemy  at  Legar^’s,  and  that  they  were  in  larger  force  than 

* Nominal  list  omitted  shows  1 officer  (Lieut.  A.  J.  Mims)  and  8 men  wounded. 
tTlie  Union  regiments  were  the  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts,  Eighth  Michigan, 
and  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania. 


Chap.  XXVI.  \ AFFAIR  AT  PORT  ROYAL  FERRY,  S.  C.  31 

yourself,  I assembled  the  five  companies  of  my  battalion  (one,  the 
Charleston  Kiflemen,  being  already  with  you)  to  re-enforce  you.  On 
reaching  the  scene  of  action  and  receiving  orders  I disposed  of  them 
as  you  directed.  Soon  after  joining  you  called  on  me  for  three  com- 
panies to  join  in  a charge  on  the  buildings  occupied  by  the  enemy,  and 
the  Irish  Volunteers,  Sumter  Guards,  and  Calhoun  Guards  were  desig- 
nated for  that  duty,  and  well  did  they  respond.  By  some  misappre- 
hension a part  of  the  Union  Light  Infantry  also  joined  in  the  charge, 
but  being  more  remote,  had  not  reached  the  buildings  when  our  forces 
were  ordered  to  retire. 

I would  here  remark  that  the  Charleston  Biflemen,  previously  under 
your  command,  was  designated  by  yourself  as  one  to  join  in  the  charge. 
I joined  in  the  charge  also,  but  seeing  you  up  with  them,  I fell  back 
to  take  charge  of  the  line  in  rear.  I cannot  in  consequence  designate 
any  particular  officer  or  man  as  deserving  special  note,  but  so  far  as 
my  observation  went  all  behaved  well.  Those  who  remained  in  rear 
kept  up  a steady  fire  on  the  enemy  until  ordered  to  retire. 

It  is  due  to  my  battalion  to  state  that  the  Charleston  Biflemen  had 
been  on  picket  duty  the  day  and  night  before,  and  the  other  five  com- 
panies had  been  on  duty  the  day  before,  and  were  not  relieved  until  3 
o’clock  Tuesday  morning. 

My  adjutant,  Second  Lieut.  Henry  Walker,  fell  severely  wounded  near 
the  buildings,  and,  I regret  to  say,  could  not  be  brought  from  the  field 
(though  a party  did  attempt  it),  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  following  is  a list  of  casualties  in  Charleston  Battalion  in  skir- 
mish of  June  3 : * 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  C.  GAILLABD, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Charleston  Battalion. 

Lieut.  Col.  Ellison  Capers. 


JUNE  6,  1862. — Affair  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  S.  Walker , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Third  Military 
District  of  South  Carolina. 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville , S.  (7.,  June  7,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a detail  of  20  men  of  the 
Beaufort  Artillery,  under  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  as  a boat  party,  sup- 
ported by  40  infantry  of  Company  I,  Eleventh  Begiment  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  Lieut.  E.  B.  Layless  commanding,  and  15  of  the  Butledge 
Mounted  Biflemen,  under  Lieut.  J.  C.  Warley,  the  support  being  under 
my  immediate  command,  proceeded  to  the  Port  Boyal  Ferry  on  the 
night  of  the  6th  instant  and  destroyed  the  flats  which  had  been  used 
by  the  enemy  on  the  night  of  May  29  in  crossing  the  river  to  attack  the 
railroad,  wounded  severely  2 of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  set  fire  to  the 
ferry-house.  No  loss  upon  our  side. 

I am  indebted  to  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  who  is  a sailor  as  well  as  a 
soldier,  for  the  efficient  organization  of  the  expedition.  He  exhibited 
coolness,  adroitness,  and  resolution  in  successfully  carrying  out  his 


* Nominal  list  omitted  shows  8 enlisted  men  wounded  and  3 missing. 


32 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


plans.  He  with  his  boat  party  performed  the  most  important  and  dan- 
gerous duty  of  the  expedition.  A few  rounds  of  spherical  case  were 
fired  to  sweep  the  causeway  while  the  flats  were  being  towed  off,  which 
had  the  effect  of  rousing  the  whole  island.  Capt.  William  Elliott, 
acting  ordnance  officer,  and  Lieut.  Ed.  H.  Barnwell,  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  efficiently  assisted  me  during  the  affair. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 

Colonel , Commanding  Third  Military  District. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


JUNE  7,  1862. — Skirmish  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Lieut.  R.  W.  Crawford , C.  S.  Army , First  South  Carolina 

Cavalry. 


Camp  Walker, 

John's  Island , S.  C.,  July  7,  1862. 

The  following  is  a correct  statement  of  the  casualties  of  the  pickets 
of  the  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteer  Cavalry  in  the  skirmish 
with  the  enemy  at  their  picket  post  on  John’s  Island,  June  7 : 

I was  placed  in  command  of  the  picket  post  at  the  fork  of  the  roads 
leading  to  Legareville  and  Haulover  Bridge,  which  picket  numbered  26 
men.  Not  expecting  to  be  placed  on  picket  when  we  left  camp,  we  had 
not  provided  ourselves  with  forage  and  provisions,  and  consequently 
were  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  sending  men  back  to  each  company 
to  procure  them,  which,  however,  was  not  done  without  the  consent  of 
the  captain  commanding  the  regiment,  and  which  also  reduced  us  to  18 
men.  My  orders  when  stationed  there  were  to  remain  at  the  fork  of 
the  roads  with  the  main  body  of  the  picket,  and  to  place  two  vedettes 
down  each  road  2 miles  distant,  with  orders  to  report  to  me  on  the  first 
appearance  of  the  enemy,  which  was  done  immediately  when  the  enemy 
appeared  and  fired  on  the  vedettes  on  the  Legareville  road.  I sent 
couriers  forthwith  to  report  to  Colonel  Means  (who  with  his  regiment 
was  only  2 miles  in  the  rear)  and  to  the  other  command  on  the  island, 
and  also  a courier  down  the  Haulover  road  for  the  two  vedettes  who 
were  2 miles  distant,  while  I with  the  remainder  of  the  pickets  advanced 
down  the  Legareville  road  and  met  the  enemy,  whose  force  I discovered 
to  consist  of  a company  of  cavalry  and  detachment  of  infantry  (or  men 
on  foot).  By  concealing  my  force  in  the  woods  I managed  to  engage 
and  detain  him  until  my  vedettes  on  the  other  road  arrived,  after  which 
we  retreated  in  good  order,  firing  as  we  went.  The  enemy’s  cavalry, 
perceiving  that  we  were  retreating,  charged  us,  and  three  or  four  of  my 
men  left  aud  fled.  Fortunately  for  them  I do  not  know  their  names  and 
am  unable  to  report  them,  as  they  justly  deserve.  The  men  were  all 
strangers  to  me  except  three  or  four,  as  our  companies  had  not  been 
together  but  a few  days,  and  there  were  only  two  men  from  my  own  com- 
pany. I learn  through  Colonel  Means  that  the  three  men  that  left  me 
did  not  stop  when  they  met  him  with  his  regiment,  but  ran  through  and 
reported  that  the  enemy,  were  just  behind,  which  contributed  to  his 
mistaking  us  for  the  enemy  as  he  did,  for  he  opened  fire  on  us  as  soou 


Ciiap.  XXVI] 


33 


SKIRMISH  ON  JAMES  ISLAND,  S.  0. 

as  we  came  in  range,  and  we  were  then  exposed  to  his  fire  and  that  of 
the  enemy  too. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  casualties.*  Number  of  horses  killed,  7. 
Respectfully  submitted. 

R.  W.  CRAWFORD, 
Lieutenant , Commanding  Picket. 


JUNE  8,  1862. — Skirmish  on  James  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Second  Division, 

James  Island , S.  (7.,  June  8,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  with  your  order  a 
reconnaissance  was  made  of  our  left  up  the  road  leading  from  Grim- 
ball’s  plantation  by  the  Forty-sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers 
and  a company  of  the  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  all  under  command 
of  Colonel  J.  H.  Morrow,  of  General  Hunter’s  staff.  Our  column  pushed 
up  as  far  as  the  church,  which  was  examined  last  evening  by  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Hawley,  Seventh  Connecticut,  and  Lieutenant  Lyons,  of 
my  staff,  and  meeting  with  a heavy  force  of  skirmishers  of  the  enemy 
it  was  deemed  prudent  to  withdraw.  Our  loss  was  2 killed  and  5 
wounded — all  of  the  Forty-sixth  Regiment. 

The  enemy’s  position  at  Secessionville  was  observed  from  our  right. 
A floating  battery  of  two  heavy  guns  was  seen  moved  close  to  the  vil- 
lage. Two  guns  on  field  or  siege  carriages  were  observed  on  the  work 
on  the  left  of  Secessionville. 

About  4 o’clock  I directed  Captain  Stevens,  of  my  staff,  with  a portion 
of  the  Third  New  Hampshire  to  move  across  thecauseway  between  our 
pickets  and  those  of  the  enemy,  and  pushed  forward  to  the  road  half  a 
mile  this  side  of  the  field  work  extending  toward  Newton’s  Cut.  Accord- 
iugly  the  regiment  was  moved  forward  across  the  marsh  and  a platoon 
of  cavalry  was  thrown  across  the  field  toward  the  wood  on  the  left. 
Captain  Donohoe’s  company  was  deployed  as  skirmishers  and  advanced 
rapidly  to  the  road  beyond  the  house.  A few  rods  this  side  the  house 
they  captured  a picket  of  4 of  the  enemy,  coming  upon  them  unexpect- 
edly. On  reaching  the  road  the  company  was  divided.  The  captain 
and  one  platoon  were  sent  directly  forward  to  examine  the  enemy’s 
rifle  pits  in  front  of  the  field  work  ; the  other  platoon  was  sent  up  the 
road  to  the  left.  When  the  captain  and  his  platoon  had  advanced 
within  200  yards  of  the  rifle  pits  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  them  witli 
one  field  piece  planted  some  distance  behind  the  rifle  pit,  firing  once  in 
three  or  four  minutes.  Soon  after  the  floating  battery  opened  with  a 
well-directed  and  well-sustained  fire,  but  none  of  our  men  were  touched. 
The  recall  was  then  given,  and  the  force  then  withdrew  in  good  order 
and  safety.  The  other  platoon  had  pushed  up  the  road  nearly  a half 
mile  when  ordered  to  fall  back.  Shortly  after  our  force  fell  back  two 
or  three  battalions  of  the  enemy  were  observed  to  be  posted  behind  the 
hedges  and  rifle  pits  in  front  of  the  field  work. 

Our  men  behaved  remarkably  well,  both  infantry  and  cavalry.  They 
manifested  the  greatest  alacrity  and  daring  throughout. 


* Nominal  list  omitted  shows  1 enlisted  man  killed  and  8 wounded. 


3 R R — VOL  XIV 


34 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


The  prisoners  consisted  of  a corporal  aud  3 privates  of  the  Charles- 
ton Rifle  Volunteers ; have  been  interrogated  by  Lieutenant  Wilson, 
who  has  taken  down  their  information  at  length,  and  to  whom  1 beg  to 
refer  you  for  further  particulars. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Capt.  A.  B.  Ely,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JUNE  8-9,  1862.— -Affairs  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Evans , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 
Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 

Headquarters  Second  Military  District, 

Adams  Run , S.  (7.,  June  11,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding,  that  I attempted  to  attack  the  enemy  at  Bryan’s, 
on  John’s  Island,  on  the  night  of  the  9th  instant.  Marching  my  forces 
within  3 miles  of  the  bridge,  I sent  out  a reconnoitering  party  to  the 
bridge  over  Aberpoolie  Creek,  and  after  a thorough  survey  of  the  house 
found  the  enemy  had  retired  to  Legareville  and  left  a small  cavalry 
picket  at  the  bridge.  I ordered  a company  of  cavalry  to  capture  the 
picket.  No  report  has  been  received  yet. 

In  this  connection  I regret  to  report  that  on  the  evening  of  the  8th 
instant,  on  retiring  from  the  enemy,  the  cavalry  pickets  were  fired  into 
by  a company  of  the  Seventeenth  Regiment,  which  resulted  in  wound- 
ing 4 men  mortally,  slightly  wounding  4 others.  This  sad  catastrophe 
resulted  from  the  fact  that  the  first  men  retiring  hallooed,  u Shoot  the 
Yankees ; they  are  just  behind.”  As  soon  as  the  remainder  approached 
our  soldiers  sent  to  support  the  picket  fired  into  them  with  the  above 
result. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th  instaut,  my  infantry  troops  much  wearied 
from  exposure,  I withdrew  to  the  main  land,  keeping  six  companies  of 
cavalry  and  the  Stono  scouts  on  the  islands.  The  approaches  to  the 
railroad  are  well  guarded.  I will  keep  the  major-general  informed  of 
any  movements  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  night  of  the  7th  instant,  on  a reconnaissance,  Captain  Jenkins, 
of  the  Rebel  Troop,  shot  and  captured  Private  Patrick  Hayes,  of  the 
First  Massachusetts  Cavalry.  He  refused  to  halt.  When  captured 
Jenkins  shot  him  through.  Attempting  still  to  escape,  his  horse  was 
immediately  shot  and  the  prisoner  secured  and  brought  to  camp.  He 
lingered  twenty-four  hours  and  died  in  our  camp.  He  informed  Captain 
Jenkins  that  Brig.  Gen.  Robert  Williams,  formerly  of  theU.  S.  Dragoons, 
commanded  on  James  Island. 

The  spirit  with  which  the  troops  of  my  command  underwent  their 
severe  exposure  is  worthy  of  the  highest  commendation.  Without  any 
food  for  twenty-four  hours  and  in  a drenching  rain  proves  that  they 
are  ready  to  repel  the  foe. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- General.  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.j  Charleston , S.  C. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  ON  JAMES  ISLAND,  S.  C.  35 

JUNE  10,  1862. — Skirmish  on  James  Island,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  John  L.  Chatfield,  Sixth  Connecticut  Infantry,  commanding  First  Bri- 
gade, First  Division. 

No.  3. — Capt.  Francis  M.  Hills,  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen . Horatio  G.  Wright , U.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  U,  S.  Forces,  Grimball’s  Plantation, 
James  Island , 8.  (7.,  June  12,  1862. 

Captain:  1 had  the  honor  on  the  10th  instant*  to  inform  you  of  an 
affair  between  our  pickets  and  a force  of  the  enemy,  consisting  of  the 
Forty-seventh  Georgia  Regiment,  supported  by  a reserve,  the  strength 
and  character  of  which  is  not  known.  Since  that  time  the  report  of 
the  commander  of  the  First  and  Second  Brigades,  First  Division,  and 
the  report  of  casualties  have  been  received,  copies  of  which  I inclosed 
From  the  latter  it  will  be  seen  that  our  loss  was  3 killed  and  19  wounded, 
1 of  whom  has  since  died.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  must  have  been  heavy, 
as  we  have  buried  14  of  his  dead,  and  6 of  his  wounded  have  been  taken 
to  our  hospital,  2 of  whom  have  since  died.  The  enemy  removed  many 
of  his  wounded  during  the  skirmish. 

The  forces  actually  engaged  in  the  affair  were  five  companies  of  the 
Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  Regiment,  Colonel  Guss  commanding; 
two  companies  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Regiment,  Captain  Hills  com- 
manding; two  companies  of  the  Forty-seventh  New  York  Regiment, 
Captain  McDonald  commanding,  and  four  pieces  of  Company  E,  Third 
XJ.  S.  Artillery,  Captain  Ransom  commanding.  The  reserve  of  the 
artillery  and  the  remainder  of  the  pickets  were  not  brought  into  actual 
conflict  with  the  enemy.  All  the  troops  engaged  conducted  themselves 
in  the  most  admirable  manner,  evincing  great  steadiness  and  coolness. 
At  no  time  was  the  line  of  pickets  forced  back,  and  the  repulse  was  so 
decided  that  the  enemy  did  not  venture  to  renew  it. 

The  naval  vessels  in  the  river  kept  up  a continual  fire  over  the  heads 
of  our  men,  and  as  their  practice  was  excellent  it  must  have  occasioned 
much  loss  to  the  enemy’s  reserves. 

We  need  have  no  occasion  to  doubt  the  reliability  of  our  troops  if 
they  all  behave  as  well  under  fire  as  did  those  engaged  in  this  affair. 
Colonel  Guss,  of  the  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  Regiment,  in  im- 
mediate command  of  the  pickets,  and  the  officers  and  men  of  his  regi- 
ment are  entitled  to  special  mention,  as  are  the  officers  and  men  of  two 
companies  of  the  Forty-seventh  New  York  and  the  two  companies  of 
the  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  actually  engaged,  and  I need  not  say  that 
the  artillery  sustained  the  well-earned  reputation  it  enjoys. 

Captain  Hamilton,  chief  of  artillery,  did  excellent  service  with  the 
infantry  after  his  artillery  was  posted,  and  received  a ball,  which  hap- 
pily occasioned  only  a slight  contusion.  From  the  vigor  and  persist- 
ence of  the  enemy’s  attack  I thought  a general  engagement  imminent 
and  had  the  forces  disposed  accordingly,  but  his  attack  in  front  was 
all  he  attempted. 

* See  Foster  to  Benham  of  that  d,ate  in.  “Correspondence,  etc.,”  post. 

t Nominal  list  omitted. 


36 


COASTS  OF  S.  a,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Acting  Brigadier-General  Williams  took  the  command  of  the  forces 
engaged  after  the  picket  were  strengthened  by  the  artillery  and  its 
supports. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ H.  G.  WEIGHT, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Capt.  A.  B.  Ely, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Northern  Bist ., 

Dept,  of  the  South , Steamer  Delaware. 


No.  2. 

Deports  of  Col.  John  L.  Chat  field,  Sixth  Connecticut  Infantry , command- 
ing First  Brigade , First  Division. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  First  Diy.,  U.  S.  Forces, 
James  Island,  S.  C.,  June  11,  1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the 
general  commanding,  that  yesterday  afternoon  six  companies  of  the 
Forty-seventh  New  York  Eegiment,  of  my  brigade,  stationed  as  picket 
guard  through  the  woods  in  front  of  the  left  of  our  lines,  were  attacked 
by  a superior  force  of  the  enemy  in  front  and  upon  the  left  flank  and 
were  compelled  to  retire,  the  outposts  being  driven  in,  which  they  did 
without  loss.  In  a few  minutes  afterward  the  Ninety-seventh  Pennsyl- 
vania Eegiment,  together  with  two  companies  of  the  Forty-seventh  New 
York,  posted  as  pickets  on  the  edge  of  the  woods  directly  in  front,  were 
attacked,  and  a sharp  engagement  followed,  lasting  some  minutes,  the 
enemy  being  kept  in  check  until  the  arrival  upon  the  ground  of  the 
artillery. 

I would  make  especial  mention  of  Colonel  Guss,  of  the  Ninety-seventh 
Pennsylvania  Eegiment,  and  the  officers  and  men  of  his  command,  com- 
mending them  for  the  admirable  conduct  and  coolness  they  displayed 
throughout  the  entire  engagement  until  the  enemy  were  i epulsed. 

I have  to  report  the  following  casualties  in  the  Ninety-seventh  Penn- 
sylvania Eegiment : Three  men  killed  and  7 wounded  (4  slightly).  Forty- 
seventh  New  York  Eegiment : Six  men  wounded. 

No  official  report  of  the  engagement  has  as  yet  been  received  from 
the  commanders  of  either  of  the  above-named  regiments  except  with 
regard  to  killed  and  wounded. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  L.  CHATFIELD, 

Col.,  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut  Vols.,  Comdg.  First  Brigade. 


Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  July  12, 1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  following  report : 

Since  the  expedition  to  James  Island  my  regiment  has  been  in  good 
condition.  We  were  ordered  from  here  on  the  night  of  June  1,  ticking 
three  days’  rations  and  nothing  but  blankets,  leaving  all  camp  equipage 
behind.  We  crossed  over  to  Seabrook  Island,  marching  the  next  day 
to  a point  opposite  John’s  Island,  where  we  bivouacked  until  2 o’clock 
on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  when  we  marched  across  John’s  Island  in 
the  midst  of  a very  heavy  rain-storm,  with  the  mud  knee-deep,  reach- 
ing Legareville,  on  the  Stono,  a distauce  of  15  miles,  at  2 p.  m.  I 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


SKIRMISH  ON  JAMES  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


3? 


had  been  the  day  before  assigned  to  the  command  of  a brigade,  com- 
posed of  the  Sixth  Connecticut,  Forty-fifth,  Seventy-sixth,  and  Ninety  - 
seventh  Pennsylvania,  and  Forty-seventh  New  York  Regiments. 

On  the  8th  my  command  was  divided  into  two  brigades,  there  being 
assigned  to  me  the  Sixth  Connecticut,  Forty-seventh  New  York,  and 
Ninety  seventh  Pennsylvania  Regiments,  the  command  of  which  1 con- 
tinued to  hold  until  our  return  here,  when  the  expedition  was  broken  up. 

On  the  evening  of  the  8th  and  morning  of  the  9th  we  proceded  up 
the  Stono  to  Grimball’s  plantation,  on  James  Island,  about  4J  miles 
from  Charleston,  where  we  landed  in  the  face  of  a severe  fire  from  the 
enemy.  Our  division  made  the  left  flank  of  the  position,  while  General 
Stevens’  division  occupied  the  ground  2 or  3 miles  to  our  right  and  cov- 
ering the  position  opposite  Legareville,  on  John’s  Island. 

Early  on  the  evening  of  the  10th  the  enemy  attacked  us  in  front,  and 
were  met  by  the  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  Regiment  and  two  com- 
panies of  the  Forty-seveuth  New  York  Regiment,  of  my  brigade,  who 
kept  them  gallantly  in  check  until  the  arrival  upon  the  ground  of  a 
portion  of  Hamilton’s  battery,  supported  by  four  companies  of  the  Sixth 
Connecticut,  soon  after  which  the  enemy  retired,  leaving  17  dead  and 
wounded  upon  the  field. 

Things  remained  quiet  until  our  attack  on  the  enemy’s  works  on  the 
morning  of  the  14th,  when  only  two  companies  of  the  Sixth  Connecticut 
were  in  the  field,  the  balance  of  the  regiment  being  on  picket. 

It  is  needless  to  give  you  a description  of  the  battle,  though  too 
much  cannot  be  said  in  praise  of  the  conduct  of  all  the  troops  engaged, 
who  fought  so  bravely  while  laboring  under  such  fearful  disadvantages. 

AVe  remained  on  the  island  until  July  7,  when  we  evacuated  it  en- 
tirely, to  await  re-enforcements  and  a more  favorable  opportunity. 

There  are  four  regiments  stationed  here — the  Sixth  and  Seventh 
Connecticut  and  the  Fifty-fifth  and  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania — all 
under  the  command  of  General  Wright.  This  island  is  probably  as 
favorable  a location  as  we  could  obtain  for  preserving  the  health  of  the 
men,  and  I presume  we  will  remain  here  in  summer  quarters. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  L.  CHATFIELD, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers . 

J.  D.  Williams, 

Adjutant- General  State  of  Connecticut. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  Francis  M.  Hills,  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Dear  Sir  : Having  command  of  the  two  companies  (H  and  I)  of  the 
Forty-fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  engaged  in  the  skirmish 
of  the  10th  instant,  I submit  you  the  following  report : 

My  command  was  stationed  along  the  inner  edge  of  the  woods,  sup- 
ported on  the  right  by  a company  of  the  Forty- seventh  Regiment  New 
York  Volunteers.  At  about  4.30  o’clock  the  enemy  made  his  appear- 
ance, driving  in  our  outside  picket  and  advancing  toward  my  command. 
The  enemy  in  his  advance  kept  up  a continual  fire,  which  was  rapidly 
and  furiously  responded  to  by  our  men.  He  was  compelled  to  retire, 
but  again  rallying  advanced  within  10  yards  of  us,  when  we  poured  a 
deadly  and  destructive  fire  among  them,  causing  the  utmost  confusion 


38 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  G\.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XXVI. 


and  again  obliging  them  to  fall  back.  This  proved  the  final  repulse,  so 
no  further  attempt  was  made  to  force  us  to  yield  our  position. 

The  casualty  in  my  command  was  1 mortally  wounded. 

I cannot  speak  in  terms  of  praise  too  high  concerning  the  valor  and 
coolness  of  my  command.  They  stood  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  not  yield- 
ing an  inch  of  ground,  and  displaying  the  courage  of  veteran  soldiers. 
Yours,  respectfully, 

FRANCIS  M.  HILLS, 

Captain  Company  J,  4:5th  Regt.  Pa.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Detachment. 

Col.  Thomas  Welsh, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , First  Division. 


JUNE  12,  1862. — Reconnaissance  on  Hutchinson’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Mag.  R.  J.  Jeffords , Sixth  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Sixth  Battalion  S.  C.  Vol.  Cavalry, 

Cliisholmville , June  14,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : I beg  to  report  that  on  the  night  of  the  12th  instant 
I advanced  in  three  boats  with  105  men,  being  detachments  from  Cap- 
tains Mulligan’s,  Smith’s,  and  Davis’  companies,  against  the  north 
end  of  Hutchinson  Island.  From  drums  heard,  I was  confident  the 
enemy  were  there.  I approached  the  settlement  and  deployed  as  skir- 
mishers. Before  the  proper  positions  assigned  had  been  obtained  the 
negro  watchman  gave  alarm,  and  a general  rush  was  made  to  pass  the 
skirmishers,  when,  after  proper  halting  and  warning,  entirely  disre- 
garded, I ordered  men  to  fire  before  I discovered  they  were  negroes. 
Some  10  were  killed  and  10  or  15  wounded.  Satisfying  myself  they 
were  negroes,  which,  from  high  brush,  corn  waist-high,  and  the  dark- 
ness of  night,  was  very  difficult,  I ordered  the  firing  ceased.  I closed 
up,  and  found  some  125  negroes  there,  with  various  kinds  of  provis- 
ions— say  corn,  bacon,  beef,  &c. — doubtless  left  them  by  the  enemy 
not  being  able  to  procure  any  transportation.  I ordered  fire  to  be  ap- 
plied to  the  houses,  which  before  I left  had  destroyed  about  every 
thing.  A few  muskets  found  were  destroyed.  The  director  or  overseer, 
with  his  wife  (the  latter  teaching  the  negroes),  had  left  for  Beaufort 
the  day  before.  The  enemy,  some  200  in  number,  had  left  the  island 
on  Sunday  previous.  As  gunboats  were  just  below,  and  three  of  them 
moving  up,  and  my  retreat  could  have  been  cut  off,  I left  the  island  so 
soon  as  all  provisions,  &c.,  were  well  destroyed.  Three  gunboats  now 
Jie  between  Chapman’s  Fort  and  Hutchinson  Island,  but  seem  to  have 
no  disposition  to  move  up  to  the  main-land.  They  were  engaged  some 
little  time  yesterday  in  shelling  the  island.  I noticed  planted  some  250 
acres  of  corn,  25  acres  of  potatoes,  and  10  acres  of  peanuts,  and  was 
told  cotton  was  planted  in  quantity  higher  up  on  the  island.  The  fine 
condition  of  the  planted  crops  indicates  conclusively  the  direction  of 
the  negroes  by  some  white  person  or  persons.  I shall  make  another 
move  in  a different  direction  in  a day  or  two. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  J.  JEFFORDS, 

Major  Sixth  Battalion  S.  C.  Volunteer  Cavalry , Comdg. 

Lieut.  E.  H.  Barnwell, 

A.  A.  A.  G.j  Third  Military  District , McPhersonville. 


C It  at*.  XXVI.]  AFFAIR  AT  WHITE  HOUSE,  S.  C. 

JUNE  13,  1862.— Affair  at  Y/hite  House,  near  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


39 


REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Lieut.  Col.  James  A.  Beaver,  Forty- fifth  Pennsylvauia  Infantry. 
No.  2. — Maj.  Christopher  Blanding,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  A.  Beaver , Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Outposts,  Graham's,  S.  C .,  June  14,  1862. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication of  yesterday  and  to  report  the  success  of  the  expedition. 
Iu  consequence  of  the  time  of  the  tides  we  were  unable  to  commence 
operations  until  late  in  the  evening.  The  gun  was  placed  iu  position 
shortly  before  6 p.  m.  and  we  immediately  opened  fire  upon  the  house, 
throwing  shells  into  it,  all  around  it,  and  very  considerably  beyond. 
The  firing  was  very  fine,  and  but  for  the  fact  that  the  fuses  were  alto- 
gether unreliable,  and  that  from  some  defect  in  the  gun  some  of  the 
shells  were  thrown  u end  oyer  end,”  and  thus  fell  short  of  the  mark, 
every  shot  would  have  taken  the  effect  desired.  After  shelling  the 
premises  for  more  than  an  hour  I embarked  with  about  120  men  in 
boats  ) effected  a landing  at  the  White  House  without  opposition.  The 
house  is  built  upon  an  island  which  is  connected  with  the  main  land 
by  two  causeways.  Pickets  were  stationed  at  these  causeways  and  a 
search  instituted  for  boats.  But  one  good  boat  was  found,  which  was 
brought  off.  Three  or  four  of  no  particular  value  were  destroyed,  and 
one  large  flat  was  found  with  a board  off  the  bottom  and  the  ends 
broken  out. 

After  remaining  about  an  hour  and  a half — fearing  that  the  tide 
would  leave  us — the  buildings  were  fired,  men  embarked,  pickets  drawn 
in,  and  all  safely  returned. 

Major  Blanding,  of  the  Third  Khode  Island  Artillery,  had  the  charge 
aud  oversight  of  the  firing  and  had  commapd  at  Buckingham  Ferry 
during  my  absence  on  the  opposite  shore.  To  his  good  judgment  and 
soldierly  qualifications  I desire  to  bear  testimony. 

Officers  and  men  behaved  with  remarkable  coolness  and  circumspec- 
tion, showing  that  dependence  may  be  placed  in  them  in  a time  oi 
actual  danger  aud  emergency. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

JAMES  A.  BEAVEE, 

Lieut.  Col.  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers , Comdq. 

Col.  W.  W.  Brown, 

Commanding  Post , Hilton  Head , 8.  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Christopher  Blanding , Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery. 

Intrenohments,  Hilton  Head , 8.  C .,  June  19,  1862. 
Governor — Dear  Sir  : T have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  a small 
affair  occurred  here  a few  days  since  which,  though  of  itself  not  of 


40  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AtfD  MtD.  AST)  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

much  importance,  yet  in  its  results  quite  so.  After  the  departure  of 
the  Charleston  expedition  our  force  within  the  intrenchments  of  all 
arms  did  not  exceed  600  effective  men.  Colonel  Brown,  in  command 
of  the  post,  felt  quite  anxious  for  the  safety  of  the  garrison  and  the 
immense  amount  of  stores  here,  and  I,  as  commander  of  the  Third  here 
and  all  the  intrenchments,  felt  no  less  so  ; therefore  I have  been  re- 
quired by  the  colonel  commanding  to  visit  all  the  outposts  on  this 
island  once  in  two  or  three  days.  Last  week  on  one  of  these  recon- 
naissances I learned  the  enemy  had  been  quite  active  on  the  main  land 
at  the  White  House,  so  called.  The  captain  commanding  the  outpost 
furnished  me  a boat  and  8 oarsmen  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  Pinckney 
Island,  the  nearest  point  to  said  house,  where  we  had  a small  picket 
distant  from  the  house  about  half  a mile.  On  landing  I discovered 
the  enemy  had  increased  their  force  there ; had  also  collected  a large 
number  of  boats,  sufficient  to  cross  600  or  700  at  one  time ; also  estab- 
lished new  pickets,  all  within  two  days;  that  they  were  constantly 
firing  on  our  men  and  boats  from  the  upper  windows  of  the  house, 
which,  being  three-story,  gave  them  a decided  advantage. 

On  my  return  to  camp  I recommended  the  destruction  of  the  boats 
and  house  by  placing  two  12-pounder  howitzers  on  board  of  a steamer 
and  shelling  the  place.  But  no  steamer  could  be  had,  as  the  Charles- 
ton expedition  had  taken  everything.  I then  proposed  to  the  colonel 
to  take  a siege  gun  to  the  nearest  point  (which  is  Buckingham  Ferry, 
distant  lj  miles)  and  shell  them  from  there,  under  cover  of  which  fire 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Beaver,  of  the  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania,  who  com- 
mands the  outposts,  could  cross  and  destroy  the  boats.  Colonel  Beaver 
verv  heartily  entered  into  the  arrangement.  So  the  next  morning  I 
took  a 30-pounder  Parrott  gun,  drawn  by  14  horses,  2 wagons  for  am- 
munition, forage,  and  plank  to  cross  poor  bridges,  and  a detachment, 
consisting  of  1 lieutenant,  1 sergeant,  2 corporals,  and  22  privates,  and 
marched  from  camp. 

I arrived  at  the  scene  of  operations  too  early  to  commence,  on  account 
of  the  tide.  I therefore  masked  my  gun  and  wagons  from  the  enemy 
until  5.30  p.  m.,  when  Colonel  Beaver  told  me  he  was  ready.  I then 
opened  fire.  The  third  shell  I put  through  the  house  (distant,  as  I 
said,  about  2,500  yards),  and  the  fourth  and  the  fifth,  having  got  the 
range  exact,  I shelled  the  woods  and  the  road  to  Bluffton,  and  as  the 
sun  was  about  half  an  hour  high  Lieutenaut-Colonel  Beaver  embarked 
in  six  boats  from  two  different  points  with  about  125  men.  I con- 
tinued shelling  until  they  had  nearly  reached  the  opposite  shore,  when 
I ceased  firing  and  awaited  the  resuit.  The  sun  went  down  ; there  was 
no  moon,  and  it  shortly  became  very  dark,  as  there  is  no  twilight  here. 
For  one  hour  and  a half  I looked  anxiously  to  the  opposite  shore,  at 
the  expiration  of  which  time  a glimmer  of  light  was  seen,  then  another, 
and  another,  and  in  a few  minutes  the  White  House  and  out-buildings 
were  in  a brilliant  blaze.  The  sight  was  a beautiful  one.  The  heavens 
were  lit  up  with  a lurid  glare  which  could  be  seen  far  inland,  and  the 
enemy  were  admonished  how  they  commenced  their  operations  under 
our  very  nose.  lu  a few  moments  boats  were  seen,  and  a blue  light 
told  me  they  were  our  friends,  as  I had  told  Colonel  Beaver  I should 
fire  upon  any  boats  approaching  without  that  signal.  Reverses  were 
provided  for,  but  none  occurred.  I told  Colonel  Beaver  I should  bring 
that  gun  back  and  did  so.  T waited  until  the  buildings  were  con- 
sumed, then  limbered  up  and  marched  back  to  camp,  which  I reached 
a little  after  midnight. 


CiiAr.  XXVT.]  ENGAGEMENT  at  SECESSTONVTLLE,  s.  c. 


41 


I regret  that  I am  unable  to  inclose  Lieutenant- Colonel  Beavers 
report,  as  it  lias  gone  to  headquarters.  When  it  returns  I will  forward 
a copy. 

The  Parrott  gun  is  a beautiful  arm,  but  the  xirojectile  is  faulty  and 
not  to  be  depended  upon.  About  one  shot  in  four  would  turn  end  over 
end.  I endeavored  to  remedy  it,  and  did  in  a measure  by  greasing 
them  and  packing  the  base  with  paper.  The  extreme  range  of  the 
piece  is  about  4 miles,  and  very  accurate  when  the  xirojectile  does  not 
turn.  I should  have  mentioned  that  after  Colonel  Beaver  embarked  I 
oxiened  lire  again  and  continued  it  until  he  had  crossed. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  Governor,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  BLANDING, 

Major , Comdg.  Third  E.  I.  Artillery , Hilton  Head , $.  C. 

His  Excellency  Gov.  William  Sprague,  Providence , E.  I. 


JUNE  15,  1862. — Naval  descent  upon  Saint  Mark’s,  Fla. 

Eeport  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Fine g an,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  Middle  and  Fast  Florida. 

Tallahassee,  Fla.,  June  17,  1862. 

I have  just  returned  from  Saint  Mark’s.  The  enemy  shelled  the  light- 
house for  several  hours;  sent  fire-boats  on  shore  and  burned  the  wood- 
work of  the  light  house  and  the  keeper’s  house  adjoining,  and  burned 
all  the  buildings  on  the  beach.  I had  a small  picket  guard  at  the  light- 
house. No  person  hurt. 

The  Seventh  Begiment  will  iiroceed  at  once  to  Chattanooga. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Eichmond , Va. 

7 7 ... 


JUNE  16,  1862. — Engagement  at  Secessionville,  James  Island,  S.  C. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the  South. 
No.  2. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

No.  3.— Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Benham,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Northern  District, 
Department  of  the  South. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Division. 

No.  5. — Col.  John  L.  Chatfield,  Sixth  Connecticut  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade,  First  Division. 

No.  C. — Col.  Henry  R.  Guss,  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  7. — Col.  Thomas  Welsh,  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  First  Division. 

No  S. — Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division. 

No.  9. — Col.  William  M.  F»nton,  Eightli  Michigan  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade,  Second  Division. 

No.  10. — Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley,  Seventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  11. — Lieut.  Col.  MacLelland  Moore,  Twenty- eighth  Massachusetts  Infantry, 


42 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CtiAt>.  X*VT. 


No.  12. — Liout.  Col.  Frank  Graves,  Eighth  Michigan  Infantry. 

No.  13. — Col.  Daniel  Leasure,  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  commanding 
Second  Brigade,  Second  Division. 

No.  14. — Col.  Rudolph  Rosa,  Forty-sixth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  15. — Lieut.  Col.  David  Morrison,  Seventy-ninth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  16. — Maj.  David  A.  Leckey,  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  17. — Col.  Robert  Williams,  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  commanding  Third 
Brigade. 

No.  18. — Lieut.  Col.  John  H.  Jackson,  Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

No.  19. — Capt.  Alfred  F.  Sears,  First  New  York  Engineers. 

No.  20. — Capt.  Alfred  P.  Rockwell,  First  Connecticut  Battery. 

No.  21. — Maj.  Edwin  Metcalf,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery. 

No.  22. — Capt.  Lucius  M.  Sargent,  jr.,  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry. 

No.  23. — Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia. 

No.  24. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces. 

No.  25. — Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Evans,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Military 
District. 

No.  26. — Col.  T.  G.  Lamar,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  27. — Maj.  David  Ramsay,  First  South  Carolina  (Charleston)  Battalion. 

No.  28. — Col.  S.  D.  Goodlett,  Twenty-second  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  29. — Col.  Johnson  Hagood,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry,  commanding  advanced 
forces. 

No.  30. — Lieut.  Col.  J.  McEnery,  Fourth  Louisiana  Battalion. 

No.  31. — Col.  C.  H.  Stevens,  Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  32. — Lieut.  Col.  Charles  H.  Simonton,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  33. — Lieut.  R.  A.  Blum,  Twenty-  fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  34. — Capt.  J.  E.  Adger,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 


No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  JJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  Depart- 
ment of  the  South. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  June  23,  1862. 

Sir  : On  the  13th  instant  I had  the  honor  of  informing  yon  that  we 
had  occupied  the  southwestern  portion  of  James  Island,  on  the  Stono 
River,  within  5 or  6 miles  of  Charleston,  intending  to  make  a rush  for 
the  reduction  of  that  city  as  soon  as  re-enforcements  should  arrive. 
As  we  failed  in  being  able  to  make  a coup  de  main  on  Charleston  in 
consequence  of  our  transportation  not  having  been  returned  to  us  from 
the  North,  the  enemy  had  time  to  throw  strong  re-enforcements  on 
James  Island,  rendering  an  advance  with  our  existing  force  extremely 
hazardous.  I therefore  determined  to  make  no  forward  movement, 
having  satisfied  myself  by  reconnaissances  of  the  increase  of  the  enemy’s 
strength  ; and  on  leaving  the  Stono  to  return  to  this  point,  where  mat- 
ters affecting  the  safety  of  the  command  in  other  portions  of  the  depart- 
ment called  for  my  presence,  I gave  positive  orders  to  General  Ben  ham 
that  no  advance  should  be  marie  until  further  explicit  orders  had  been 
received  from  these  headquarters.*  General  Benham  disobeyed  these 
positive  orders  and  clear  instructions,  and  the  result,  I deeply  regret  to 
say,  has  been  a disastrous  repulse,  only  redeemed  by  the  brilliant  con- 


See  Inclosure  No.  3 to  Hunter’s  report  of  June  27,  p.  46;  see  also  pp.  979-1015. 


Chai*.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  43 

duct  of  the  troops  while  engaged  in  the  assault  and  their  steadiness 
and  patient  courage  when  compelled  to  retire. 

I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  General  Benliam’s  report  of  his  assault 
upon  the  enemy’s  fortifications,  as  also  of  my  orders  forbidding  that 
any  such  movement  should  be  made.  You  will  see  that  General  Ben- 
ham  endeavors  to  evade  the  responsibility  of  having  violated  his  in- 
structions by  terming  his  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  works  a “ reconnais- 
sance in  force,”  but  such  a plea  is  too  puerile  to  deserve  consideration. 

In  view  of  these  circumstances  and  the  serious  consequences  which 
have  arisen  from  his  disobedience  I have  felt  it  my  duty  to  arrest  Gen- 
eral Benham  and  order  him  North  by  the  steamer  conveying  this  let- 
ter. This  step  has  cost  me  much  regret,  as  previous  to  this  unhappy 
act  of  rashness  he  has  been  industrious,  energetic,  and  wholly  devoted 
to  his  duties. 

We  still  hold  our  former  position,  and  shall  continue  to  hold  it  so 
long  as  any  hope  of  being  enabled  to  make  it  useful  by  the  receipt  of 
re-enforcements  shall  remain.  It  is  a most  valuable  point  d’a^pui  for 
operations  against  Charleston,  and  should  not  lightly  be  abandoned. 

From  all  the  evidence  reaching  me,  however,  I am  satisfied  that 
Charleston  has  been  heavily  re-enforced  of  late,  possibly  by  some  bri- 
gades from  the  Army  of  Corinth;  and  the  injudicious  attack  of  Gen- 
eral Benham  will  doubtless  contribute,  both  by  its  calling  attention  to 
the  place  and  by  the  eclat  of  the  Confederate  success  there,  to  still 
fur r her  swell  the  number  of  its  defenders. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Read , Port  Royal , S.  C.,  June  27,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  letters  of  Brig.  Gen.  H. 
G.  Wright  and  Brig.  Gen.  I.  I.  Stevens,  with  explanatory  copies  of  the 
letter  of  Brigadier-General  Benham,  to  which  they  refer,  and  my  letter 
of  instructions  to  Brigadier-General  Benham,  dated  June  10  ; also  copy 
of  General  Benham’s  report  of  the-  action  of  the  16th  instant  on  James 
Island. 

You  will  see  from  the  letters  of  General  Wright  and  General  Stevens 
that,  in  a council  of  war  held  on  the  evening  previous  to  the  attack, 
these  officers,  together  with  Colonel  Williams,  also  commanding  a bri- 
gade, remonstrated  strongly  and  emphatically  with  General  Benham, 
and  warned  him  that  he  was  about  to  fight  a battle  in  violation  of 
orders. 

If  consistent  with  the  interests  of  the  service,  in  your  judgment,  the 
publication,  by  transmission  to  Congress  or  otherwise,  of  this  corre- 
spondence would  greatly  aid  iu  setting  this  department  right  before  the 

country. 

I have  the  honor  also  to  transmit  herewith  copy  of  my  letter  of  in- 
structions to  Brig.  Gen.  H.  G.  Wright,  directing  the  withdrawal  of  our 
forces  from  James  Island  to  some  more  healthy  location.  The  military 
reasons  making  this  course  advisable  are  fully  set  forth  in  the  letter, 


44 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


and  the  increasing  sick  list  from  the  command  is  another  argument  not 
to  be  overlooked. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , W ashington,  D.  C. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Jaynes  Island , S.  U.,  June  22,  1862. 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

A.  A.  G.,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C. : 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a communication  from  Brig.  Gen. 
1. 1.  Stevens  in  reference  to  General  Benham’s  letter  of  the  20th  instant 
regarding  our  attack  upon  Secession ville. 

I fully  indorse  all  that  is  said  by  General  Stevens  in  his  letter,  and 
repudiate  as  emphatically  as  he  has  done  tor  himself  any  attempt  to  use 
my  name  as  favoring  the  operations  of  the  16th  instant. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- Genera  l , Commanding. 

[Sub-inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  1st  Div.,  North.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 
SmiWs  Island , S.  C.,  June  22,  1862. 

Capt.  E.  W.  Smith, 

A.  A.  A.  G.j  Dept,  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C.: 

Captain  : I have  received  a copy  of  General  Benham’jf  communica- 
tion of  the  20  th  instant  in  regard  to  the  attack  on  Secession  ville.  I 
repudiate  the  use  he  attempts  to  make  of  my  name.  On  the  evening 
before  the  battle,  at  a conference  invited  by  him,  and  at  which  were 
present  General  Wright,  Colonel  Williams,  and  myself,  General  Ben- 
ham  was  most  distinctly  warned  that  under  his  orders  we  were  going- 
out  to  fight  a battle.  General  Wright  made  the  statement  to  General 
Benham,  and  it  was  most  positively  and  unequivocally  concurred  in  by 
both  Colonel  Williams  and  myself.  I was  utterly  opposed  to  the  attack 
on  Secessionville  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  and  so  expressed  myself 
unequivocally  in  conference.  I also  understood  unequivocally  that 
General  Wright  and  Colonel  Williams  were  opposed  to  it.  Much  more 
might  be  said  on  this  subject,  but  I forbear. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Hilton  Head,  S.  0.,  June  20,  1862. 

Capt.  E.  W.  Smith, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Dept,  of  the  South  : 

Sir:  As  you  did  not  mention  the  cause  of  my  arrest  last  evening 
while  notifying  me  thereof,  yet,  as  I understood  from  my  previous  con- 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


45 


versation  with  General  Hunter  tliat  it  would  be  on  the  ground  that  I 
had  disobeyed  his  orders  against  making  an  advance  toward  Fort 
Johnson  or  Charleston,  I desire  to  lay  before  him  one  or  two  consid- 
erations in  relation  to  this  matter  which  I think  have  an  important 
bearing  on  the  case,  but  which  were  not,  I believe,  brought  to  his  notice 
in  the  conversation  I had  with  him  on  the  subject  last  evening ; and 
while  disclaiming,  as  it  is  true  and  my  duty  to  myself  to  do,  most 
fully  and  completely  any  other  intention  than  that  of  carrying  out  his 
orders  to  the  strictest  letter,  as  it  has  always  been  my  wish  and  my 
pleasure  to  do,  I cannot  avoid  stating  that  it  is  as  strongly  impressed 
on  my  mind  as  possible  that  after  the  receipt  of  the  written  orders  as 
to  the  disposition  of  the  troops  and  the  non-advance  upon  Charleston, 
upon  the  evening  prior  to  his  leaving  I showed  him  the  map  (as  I have 
it  here  now  with  a line  upon  it)  drawn  from  the  church  (where  Colonel 
Morrow’s  skirmish  was)  “to  the  north  of  the  isthmus,  where  the  Seces- 
sionville  tower  and  fort  are,”  stating  that  as  that  fort  shelled  our 
upper  camp  I considered  it  indispensable  that  we  should  have  and 
hold  those  points  for  the  security  of  our  camps  and  even  for  the  occu- 
pation of  the  Stono.  and  that  I understood  him  distinctly  as  assenting 
to  and  approving  of  my  representation.  But,  more  than  this,  and 
what  I would  respectfully  ask  his  consideration  of,  in  addition  to  the 
explanation  I offered  last  evening,  is  the  fact  that  the  battery  just  in 
front  of  General  Stevens’  advanced  position  was  projected  and  being 
built  to  attack  the  fort  at  Secession ville  before  General  Hunter  left, 
and  this  was  known  to  and  as  I understood  approved  of  by  him,  and  I 
could  not  but  suppose  that  if  I was  authorized  to  construct  such  a work 
to  disable  or  destroy  a fort  whose  fire  covered  our  camps  and  failed  in 
so  destroying  it  (a  work  which  I feared  would  be  a good  foundation  for 
driving  us  from  the  Stono  entirely)  I should  be  fully  authorized  in 
taking  it  if  possible  by  a direct  attack;  or,  in  other  words,  while  only 
holding  our  present  camps  and  without  an  advance  toward  Charleston 
I was  authorized  and  expected,  if  it  were  possible,  to  keep  the  front  of 
our  camps  clear  of  the  works  of  the  enemy  far  beyond  cannon  range, 
and  beyond  that  range  even  on  the  day  of  the  action  I would  not  allow 
our  troops  to  pass  as  was  proposed  by  going  farther  to  our  left,  because 
my  object  was  simply  to  make  secure  the  present  position  of  our  camps, 
which  1 considered  it  my  duty  to  protect  against  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 
The  orders  of  General  Hunter  I may  say  were  made  known  to  General 
Stevens  and  General  Wright,  and  neither  of  them  ever  intimated  or 
appeared  to  think  that  the  reconnaissance  upon  the  fort  upon  the  10th 
would  be  contrary  to  those  orders— orders  which  I most  heartily  ap- 
proved and  was  most  anxious  to  carry  out. 

1 may  say  in  addition  that  the  demonstration  was  made  only  after 
the  fullest  reasons  for  being  assured  of  success  and  with  the  greatest 
apparent  necessity  for  it. 

The  deserters  who  arrived  from  Secessionville  gave  information  sep- 
arately, confirmed  by  prisoners  taken  on  the  day  of  the  action  and  in 
part  by  our  own  officers  who  mounted  the  parapet,  that  the  fort  was 
only  a common  earthwork,  without  a stockade,  and  with  abatis  only  in 
part;  that  it  mounted  only  four  to  six  guns,  and  that  six  or  se,Ten  more, 
with  their  carriages,  were  at  hand  ready  for  mounting,  and  that  the 
garrison  was  not  more  than  two  battalions  there  aud  in  Secessionville. 
Add  to  this  the  active  operations  which  we  could  see  and  hear  going- 
on  for  strengthening  and  perfecting  the  work  during  the  two  days  of 
our  ineffective  artillery  fire  upon  it,  with  the  fear  that  bomb-proofs  would 
be  erected^  the  additional  guns  mounted,  and  probably  a stockade  and 


46 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

abatis  soon  completed,  it  appeared  indispensable  to  make  the  effort  at 
once  to  take  it  before  it  should  be  brought  to  its  greatest  strength,  and 
though  I did  not  doubt  that  2,000  men  would  have  amply  sufficed,  the 
large  force  was  brought  out  that  no  doubt  of  success  might  exist. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 

Brigadier-  General. 


[Incloaure  No.  3.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

On  board  U.  S.  Transport  Delaware,  Stono  Diver , S.  G.,  June  10, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham, 

Comdg.  Northern  District , Department  of  the  South : 

Sir:  In  leaving  the  Stono  Biver  to  return  to  Hilton  Head  I desire, 
in  any  arrangements  that  you  may  make  for  the  disposition  of  your 
forces  now  in  this  vicinity,  you  will  make  no  attempt  to  advance  on 
Charleston  or  to  attack  Fort  Johnson  until  largely  re-enforced  or  until 
you  receive  specific  instructions  from  these  headquarters  to  that  effect. 
You  will  however  provide  for  a secure  intrenched  encampment,  where 
your  front  can  be  covered  by  the  fire  of  our  gunboats  from  the  Stono 
on  the  left  and  the  creek  from  Folly  Biver  on  the  right.  After  making 
all  proper  arrangements  for  the  security  of  the  camp,  and  the  necessary 
provision  for  quartermaster’s,  commissary,  and  medical  stores,  if  in 
your  judgment  you  can  safely  leave  the  position  you  will  return  to  your 
usual  headquarters  at  Hilton  Head,  reporting  to  me  verbally  the  state 
of  affairs  here;  or,  if  delayed,  reporting  in  writing  by  each  boat  that 
may  leave  here  previously.  You  will  be  especially  careful  to  have  the 
free  communication  established  and  kept  up  by  the  repairs  of  the  cause- 
way between  the  old  battery  and  Cole’s  Island. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUBTEB, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Headquarters  IT.  S.  Forces, 

James  Island,  S.  C.,  June  25,  1862. 

Col.  D.  Leasure, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade,  First  Division : 

Colonel  : In  your  report  * to  General  Stevens  of  the  operations  ot 
your  brigade  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant,  in  the  attack  upon  the 
enemy’s  works  at  Secessionville,  I find  the  following:! 

After  I had  formed  my  command  behind  the  hedge,  ready  to  move  again  to  the  at- 
tack, I rode  down  to  the*  troops  lying  back  half  a mile  in  reserve  behind  a hedge,  and 
begged  them,  for  God’s  sake,  to  come  up  to  the  front  and  support  me  in  a charge,  and 
was  very  coolly  told  that  these  troops  did  not  belong  to  my  division  and  could  not 
obey  either  my  orders  or  General  Stevens’.  Of  course  this  was  a very  distant  support, 
and  I did  not  feel  at  liberty  to  take  the  responsibility  of  acting  without  orders  of  Gen- 
eral Stevens. 

I desire  to  know  to  what  troops  you  refer  as  lying  half  a mile  behind 
and  to  what  officer  you  applied  for  assistance,  and  also  whether  you 
applied  to  your  division  commander ; to  Acting  Brigadier- General  Will- 


See  Report  No.  13. 


tNot  found  in  No.  13.  Original  not  on  file. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  47 

jams,  who  was  acting  with  him,  and  who  was  seldom  150  yards  behind 
the  hedge  first  referred  to ; to  myself,  when  near  that  hedge,  where  the 
One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Regiment  was  reformed,  or  to  General 
Benham,  who  commanded  the  whole.  You  will  understand,  colonel, 
that  troops  on  a field  cannot  be  moved  without  proper  orders,  and  that 
any  appeal  of  yours,  however  correct,  must  have  been  useless  unless 
made  to  some  authority  competent  to  give  the  order;  hence  the  state- 
ment above  quoted  does  great  injustice  to  all  the  troops  not  of  your 
immediate  brigade,  and  requires  that  you  should  specify  in  the  most 
distinct  manner  the  officer  in  authority  to  whom  you  made  the  appeal 
to  which  you  refer.  An  early  reply  is  desired,  in  order  that  the  reports 
of  the  battle  may  be  submitted  without  unnecessary  delay.  There  were 
no  troops,  that  I am  aware  of,  as  far  as  a quarter  of  a mile  in  rear  of 
the  hedge  behind  which  you  reformed  your  command. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 

[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  C.,  June  27,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  G.  Wright, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces  on  James  Island , 8.  C.  : 

General:  Hearing  from  Washington  that  there  is  no  probability 
of  our  receiving  re-enforcements,  and  it  being  all-important  to  provide 
for  the  health  of  the  command  in  the  sickly  season  approaching,  I have 
determined  to  abandon  James  Island,  in  order  that  the  troops  may  be 
placed  where,  in  so  far  as  practicable  in  this  climate,  they  may  be  out 
of  the  way  of  malarious  influences,  and  where  the  picket  duty  will  not 
be  so  exhausting  on  our  men  as  at  present. 

In  making  this  retrograde  movement  you  will  be  governed  by  the 
instructions  contained  in  my  letter  of  the  19th  instant,  so  far  as  they 
are  applicable  to  this  movement.  You  will,  however,  leave  two  regi- 
ments at  North  Edisto  in  addition  to  the  one  now  there,  remaining 
there  yourself  in  command.  The  other  regiments  will  be  ordered  to 
this  place  under  Brig.  Gen.  I.  I.  Stevens,  and  will  be  here  distributed. 
All  the  stores  brought  from  the  Stono  and  needed  at  Edisto  will  be 
transferred  to  the  latter  place.  I send  you  the  Vanderbilt,  Locust 
Point,  Ben  De  Ford,  Potomac,  &c.,  all  towing  schooners.  Take  your 
time,  and  do  not  allow  the  transports  to  be  overloaded.  If  you  think 
best  you  can  march  over  John’s  Island  with  the  two  regiments  for 
North  Edisto.  After  the  sick  and  stores  and  your  first  detachment 
have  been  embarked  you  will  transfer  all  the  remaining  portion  of  your 
command  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Stono  at  Legareviile.  The  smaller 
steamers  will  of  course  be  used  in  towing  in  and  out  the  schooners,  and 
as  there  need  be  po  hurry,  a few  days’  delay  for  good  weather  will  not 
be  objectionable. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


48 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  G\,  July  10,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington: 

Sir:  1 have  the  honor  of  transmitting  to  you  herewith  duplicate  of 
a letter  addressed  to  me  by  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens,  giving  par- 
ticulars of  the  protest  made  by  the  council  of  war  against  General  Ben- 
ham’s  action  in  ordering  the  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  fortifications  on 
James  Island. 

You  will  see  from  it,  in  a full  detail  of  the  conversation  which  trans- 
pired, that  all  three  division  commanders — Generals  Wright  and  Stevens 
and  Colonel  Williams — agreed  with  me  in  the  opinion  which  had  led  me 
to  issuing  the  order  that  no  such  attack  should  be  made,  and  that  all 
represented  the  movement  as  one  almost  impossible  of  accomplishment. 
u General  Benham,  however,”  adds  General  Stevens,  u overruled  all  our 
objections,  and  peremptorily  ordered  the  attack  to  be  made.” 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Stevens’  Division, 

Hilton  Head , 8.  C.,  July  8,  1862. 

Sir:  I desire  to  state  briefly  a few  facts  in  relation  to  the  operations 
of  my  division  at  the  battle  of  Secession ville,  fought  on  the  16th  of 
June,  in  relation  to  which  there  is  some  strange  misapprehension ; to 
jiresent  some  of  my  own  views  in  relation  to  that  affair,  and  some 
particulars  of  the  conference  field  by  General  Benfiam  witfi  his  general 
officers  on  the  evening  previous  to  the  battle. 

1.  That  conference  was  held  with  Generals  W right  and  Williams  and 
myself.  All  were  unmistakably  opposed  to  the  attempt,  in  the  then 
condition  of  the  enemy’s  works,  to  take  them  by  a coup  de  main,  and  so 
unequivocally  and  unmistakably  expressed  themselves.  When  General 
Wright  was  called  on  for  his  opinion  he  answered  that  he  would  make 
his  reply  in  the  shape  of  certain  interrogatories  to  me,  to  which  he  de- 
sired answers. 

First  interrogatory.  Have  you  impaired  the  strength  of  the  enemy’s 
works  at  Secession  ville  by  the  firing  of  your  battery? 

General  Stevens’  answer.  Not  in  the  least.  I have  driven  the  enemy 
from  his  guns  by  my  fire  and  I can  do  it  again,  but  as  soon  as  the  fire 
ceases  he  returns.  I have  not  dismounted  a gun,  and  we  shall  find  him 
in  the  morning  as  strong  as  ever. 

Second  interrogatory.  Do  you  know  of  any  instance  where  volunteer 
troops  have  successfully  stormed  works  as  strong  as  those  which  defend 
the  approach  to  Seeessionville  ? 

General  Stevens’  answer.  I know  of  no  such  instance. 

Third  interrogatory.  Have  you  any  reasou  to  believe  that  the  result 
in  the  present  case  will  be  different  in  its  character  from  what  it  has 
invariably  been  heretofore? 

General  Stevens’  answer.  1 have  no  reason  to  expect  a different  result. 
It  is  simply  a bare  possibility  to  take  the  work. 

In  this  Generals  Wright,  Williams,  and  myself  concurred. 

I then  proceeded  to  state,  with  all  possible  emphasis,  my  objections 
to  his  morning  attack.  I urged  that  it  should  be  deferred  to  a much 
later  period  in  the  dayj  that  we  should  first  shake  the  morale  of  the 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  49 

garrison,  and  endeavor  to  weaken  its  defenses  by  a continuous  fire  of 
the  battery  and  of  the  gunboats;  that  in  the  mean  time  we  should  care- 
fully survey  the  ground  and  prepare  our  troops,  and  make  the  attack 
when  the  battery  and  the  boats  had  had  the  desired  effect.  I closed 
by  saying  that  under  such  circumstances  I could  do  more  with  2,000 
men  than  I could  with  3,000  men  in  the  way  he  proposed.  General 
Wright,  moreover,  warned  General  Benham  that  his  orders  were  in  fact 
orders  to  fight  a battle.  In  this  General  Williams  and  myself  in  express 
terms  concurred.  General  Benham,  however,  overruled  all  our  objec- 
tions, and  peremptorily  ordered  the  attack  to  be  made.  I assured  him, 
as  did  the  other  gentlemen,  that  he  should  rely  upon  my  promptitude 
and  activity  in  obeying  his  orders,  but  I considered  myself  as  obeying 
orders  to  which  I had  expressed  the  strongest  possible  objections,  and 
I therefore  determined  there  should  not  be  the  least  want  of  energy  or 
promptitude  on  my  part. 

2.  It  has  been  charged  that  I was  behind  time.  This  is  not  true.  I 
was  exceedingly  prompt  and  up  to  time.  The  orders  were  to  move  at 

4 o’clock.  My  division  was  formed  at  2 o’clock,  and  was  at  the  outer 
pickets  before  3.30  o’clock.  It  was  a very  dark  and  cloudy  morning. 
I moved  at  4 o’clock.  It  was  so  dark  that  one  man  could  not  follow 
another  except  at  very  short  intervals.  It  was  much  darker  than  on 
usual  starlight  nights.  My  men  were  at  the  enemy’s  works  about  4.30 
o’clock,  and  the  conflict  of  twenty-five  minutes,  so  dreadful  in  its  casu- 
alties, was  over,  and  the  men  returned  at  5 o’clock.  Porter’s  section  of 
Bock  well’s  battery  advanced  to  the  hedge  within  500  yards  of  the 
enemy’s  works  with  the  troops  of  Fenton’s  brigade;  fired  above  100 
shots  from  his  two  guns;  was  joined  in  the  midst  of  his  fire  by  one 
piece  of  Seward’s  section  (a  rifled  gun),  which  fired  26  shots,  and  the 
three  guns  were  withdrawn  to  the  second  hedge  and  actually  there 
reopened  fire  at  5 o’clock.  The  watch  was  actually  consulted  by  one 
of  Bockwell’s  sergeants  at  the  very  moment,  and  it  was  exactly  5 
o’clock. 

In  my  official  report  I have  stated  that  the  sharp  conflict  was  from 

5 to  5.30.  I am  perfectly  satisfied  that  it  occurred  between  4.30  and  5. 
The  men  moved  very  rapidly  from  the  pickets  to  the  work — much  of 
the  time  at  the  double-quick,  and  they  moved  that  distance  in  about 
half  an  hour. 

3.  It  has  been  stated  that  my  regiments  were  not  within  supporting 
distance  of  each  other.  This  is  a great  mistake.  They  followed  each 
other  closely.  There  was  not  a pause  in  the  movement.  They  entered 
successively  under  fire  without  hesitation.  They  entered  necessarily 
in  the  following  order:  Eighth  Michigan,  Seventh  Connecticut,  Twenty- 
eighth  Massachusetts,  Seventy-ninth  (Highlanders),  One  hundredth 
Pennsylvania,  and  Forty-sixth  New  York.  They  moved  at  first  by  the 
flank  on  the  road  to  avoid  ditches  and  hedges  and  the  rough  cotton- 
furrows,  and  they  necessarily  marched  one  behind  the  other.  As  they 
came  into  the  field  before  the  work  they  pushed  forward  by  regiments 
into  line  of  battle  and  entered  the  close  fire. 

I have  mentioned  how  Bockwell’s  battery  pushed  up.  Quite  a num- 
ber of  the  Eighth  Michigan  and  Seventy-ninth  (Highlanders)  gained 
the  ditch  and  parapet  of  the  work.  All  the  regiments  pushed  close  up 
to  the  work,  and  more  or  less  men  of  each  made  lodgments  at  the  marsh 
and  abatis  on  either  side.  The  Seventy-ninth  Highlanders  went  into 
fire  the  fourth  regiment.  They  passed  by  the  Seventh  Connecticut  and 
4 it  R— VOL  xiv 


50 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MLD.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 

the  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts,  and  actually  supported  at  the  par% 
pet,  as  every  one  admits,  the  Eighth  Michigan.  They  passed  those 
regiments,  too,  within  less  than  200  yards  of  the  enemy’s  work. 

The  Highlanders  have  been  in  many  battles  and  skirmishes,  are  very 
expert  in  drill,  and  are  indeed  old  soldiers.  If  they  were  in  supporting 
distance  certainly  the  Seventh  Connecticut  and  the  Twenty-eighth 
Massachusetts  were,  but  the  terrible  fire  of  grape,  canister,  and  mus- 
ketry from  the  front,  and  the  rifle-fire  of  sharpshooters  from  the  flanks, 
poured  upon  the  several  regiments  as  they  were  passing  on  in  line  to 
the  very  neck  of  land  on  which  the  enemy’s  work  is  situated,  and  which 
is  stated  by  them  to  be  only  30  yards  wide.  Large  portions  of  each 
regiment  were  thus  thrown  on  the  marsh  on  either  hand  and  were 
unable  to  go  forward.  The  succeeding  regiments  in  pushing  forward 
became  intermingled  with  them,  and  the  only  alternative  was  to  retire 
the  regiments  to  reform  them. 

The  very  thing  happened  which  is  to  be  feared  in  such  an  attempt. 
When  it  is  recollected  that  in  twenty  five  minutes  every  one  of  my  regi- 
ments passed  the  advanced  hedge,  pushed  clear  up  or  nearly  clear  up 
to  the  ditch,  made  the  best  fight  they  could,  and  were  withdrawn  by 
my  positive  orders  to  the  same  advanced  hedge  again,  losing  over  500 
men,  every  regiment  suffering  largely  and  two  regiments  terribly , there 
can  be  no  doubt  but  they  followed  each  other  closely.  The  fault  is  not 
in  my  orders  or  arrangements,  but  in  having  a fight  there  at  all  under 
such  circumstances. 

4.  So  rapid  and  prompt  were  the  operations  of  my  division  that  I 
was  hard  at  work  reforming  my  troops  before  Williams’  advance  came 
in  sight,  and  I was  afterwards  ready  with  all  my  battalions  in  line  of 
battle  to  move  to  t he  assault  of  the  works  the  second  time  whenever 
General  Benharn  should  give  the  order. 

This  I announced  to  General  Benharn  by  Captain  Elwell,  his  aide, 
and  by  officers  of  my  own  staff.  At  this  very  juncture  General  Ben- 
ham  withdrew  Williams,  and,  as  stated  in  my  official  report,  at  a sub- 
sequent period  ordered  me  to  withdraw. 

5.  All  the  above  facts  1 can  establish  by  the  most  incontrovertible 
testimony.  I have  entered  the  service  with  the  earnest  purpose  of 
doing  my  duty,  and  submit  the  above  statements  to  show  that  I was 
prompt  and  faithful  to  my  orders  on  the  day  of  the  16th. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS,  _ 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Division. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 

No.  2. 


51 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Secessionville , James 
Island , S.  6\,  June  16,  1862. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 


Killed. 

W ounded. 

Captured  or 
missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

2 

7 

1 

68 

4 

82 

3 

3 

8 

- 2 

48 

1 

8 

67 

2 

46 

10 

110 

1 

15 

184 

1 

8 

5 

88 

2 

104 

1 

2 

3 

1 

5 

2 

16 

9 

33 

1 

8 

5 

62 

34 

110 

1 

1 

2 

1 

3 

1 

8 

2 

31 

6 

48 

1 

' 7 

1 

28 

8 

45 

9I 

98 

28 

459 

2 

87 

683 

Remarks. 


7th  Connecticut 


1st  Massachusetts  Cav- 
alry (detachment). 

28th  Massachusetts 

8th  Michigan 


3d  New  Hampshire 

1st  New  York  Engineers 
(detachment). 

46th  New  York 

79th  New  York 


45th  Pennsylvania. 
97th  Pennsylvania. 
100th  Pennsylvania. 


3d  Rhode  Island  Heavy 
Artillery  (detach- 
ment). 


Capt.  Edwin  S.  Hitchcock 
and  Lieut.  Thomas  Hooton 
killed. 


Capts.  Benjamin  B.  Church 
and  Simon  C.  Guild  killed. 
Capt.  Ralph  Carlton  killed. 


Lieut.Eerdinand  Sehrt  killed. 
Lieut.  James  Kinnear  died 
of  wounds  June  18. 


Lieut.  Samuel  J.  Morrow 
killed. 

Lieut.  Erasmus  S.  Bartholo- 
mew died  of  wounds  June 
17. 


Note.— Of  the  number  reported  wounded,  3 officers  and  40  men  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Confed' 
erates. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Benham , U.  8.  Army , commanding 
Northern  District , Department  of  the  South. 

Hdqrs.  Northern  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Left  hanlc  of  the  Stono , GrimhalVs  Plantation , June  16,  1862. 

General  : You  will  recollect  that  in  our  last  intercourse  upon  the 
subject,  before  you  left  the  Stono  River,  upon  the  11th  instant,  you. 
approved  of  my  representations  for  the  security  of  our  present  camps 
here  on  James  Island  ; that  it  was  indispensable  that  we  should  destroy 
or  capture  the  fort  and  floating  battery  of  the  enemy  at  Secessionville. 
For  this  there  appeared  no  alternative,  as  these  batteries  covered  with 
their  fire  the  whole  of  the  position  and  camps  of  General  Wright  on 
our  left  and  the  advanced  post  of  General  Stevens  on  our  right,  and 
as  these  were  the  only  or  the  lower  positions  that  secured  a footing 
upon  the  main  portion  of  James  Island  and  a direct  route  on  firm  land 
to  Fort  Johnson,  which,  when  required,  gave  us  the  command  of  the 
city  and  harbor  of  Charleston. 

There  was,  therefore,  constructed  within  the  last  four  or  five  days  a 
battery  of  two  Parrott  and  one  James  gun  near  the  point  in  front  of 
General  Stevens’  command.  This  opened  fire  upon  the  fort  and  hulk 


52 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST, FLA.  [Chai*.  XXYI. 


battery  at  Secession ville  on  the  14th  instant,  continuing  it  upon  the 
15th,  when  the  guns  of  the  hulk  were  silenced,  it  having  once  been  set 
on  fire  by  our  shells.  As  the  fort  appeared  uninjured,  however,  and  it 
was  evident  that  extensive  works  were  being  constructed  in  the  interior 
for  covering  the  men  and  the  guns,  the  fort  being  apparently  made 
much  stronger  every  day,  I deemed  it  important  that  a reconnaissance 
should  be  made  in  force  at  the  earliest  practicable  period,  with  the 
object,  if  it  were  successful  and  the  fort  not  too  strong,  of  capturing 
and  holding  the  same. 

For  this  purpose  I arranged  last  evening  that  a large  part  of  the 
command  of  General  Stevens,  or  about  3,500  men,  and  four  guns  of 
Bockwell’s  battery  should  lead  the  advance  of  that  reconnaissance  this 
morning,  starting  at  4 o’clock  from  a position  previously  secured  in  our 
front  picket  line,  while  it  was  to  be  supported  on  the  left  with  large 
detachments  of  General  Wright’s  and  Colonel  Williams’  command,  or 
about  3,100  men,  with  six  guns  of  Hamilton’s  battery.  1 myself  accom- 
panied the  latter  command,  which  left  this  place  at  the  appointed  time, 
between  3 and  4 o’clock  a.  m. 

By  the  reports  made  to  me  I learn  that  the  command  of  General 
Stevens  were  well  placed  in  the  positions  assigned  them  with  great 
silence  and  secrecy  between  2 and  3 a.  m.,  and  that  at  about  the  hour 
appointed,  4 o’clock,  they  moved  forward  rapidly,  capturing  the  ad- 
vanced pickets,  a lieutenant  and  4 men,  and  by  5 o’clock  were  imme- 
diately in  front  of  the  fort,  by  a rapid  march  of  nearly  2 miles.  The 
head  companies  of  the  leading  regiment,  the  Eighth  Michigan,  closelv 
followed  by  those  of  the  next,  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York  (Highland- 
ers), and  the  balance  of  those  regiments  then  rushed  up  to  and  upon 
the  parapet  of  the  fort,  in  rear  and  in  support  of  which  were  the  Twenty- 
eighth  Massachusetts  Begiment  and  the  Seventh  Connecticut;  but  the 
destructive  fire  from  the  fort  and  from  the  large  masses  of  infantry  be- 
hind dikes  and  hedges  on  the  flanks  and  in  rear  of  the  fort  cut  down 
the  leading  men  and  officers,  and  after  the  advance  held  the  position 
close  upon  the  fort  for  some  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  the  order  to  re- 
tire and  reform  was  given,  which  was  done  in  good  order,  a portion  of 
our  dead  being  brought  off,  though  followed  by  heavy  discharges  of 
musketry  and  grape,  and  the  regiments  all  reformed  behind  a dike  some 
500  yards  from  the  fort,  and  the  firing  continued  from  this  point,  sup- 
ported here  by  Bockweli’s  Connecticut  battery,  which  was  most  admi- 
rably served. 

During  this  time  the  left  wing,  under  General  Wright,  the  advance 
of  which  was  led  by  Colonel  Williams,  of  the  First  Massachusetts  Cav- 
alry, with  Hamilton’s  and  Bansom’s  guns,  were  pushed  rapidly  and 
gallantly  forward,  and  the  enemy  on  our  left  flank  with  a battery  of 
field  guns  were  driven  forward  about  1 mile  in  advance  of  our  line  of 
pickets,  and  the  left  flank  of  General  Stevens  was  completely  covered 
and  protected,  while  a portion  of  this  force,  or  nearly  one-half,  was  sent 
forward  to  support  General  Stevens. 

After  a protracted  firing  across  the  marsh  on  our  left  and  the  open 
space  in  front  of  the  fort  until  about  9 o’clock  a.  m.,  it  was  found  that 
our  infantry,  supported  by  our  field  pieces  only,  could  not  make  any 
marked  impression  on  the  fort,  and  as  any  further  attempt  upon  it  in 
broad  daylight,  with  several  hundreds  yards  of  this  open  space  in  front, 
would  have  caused  a useless  sacrifice  of  life,  and  as  the  main  object  of 
the  reconnaissance  was  accomplished  in  ascertaining  the  nature  of  the 
fort  and  the  position  in  front  on  our  right,  as  also  the  character  of  the 
grouud  in  advance  of  our  left  as  far  as  may  be  necessary  to  secure  our 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


53 


camps  here,  I ordered  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops,  which  was  done 
with  the  greatest  regularity  and  in  most  admirable  order,  all  of  onr 
dead  and  wounded,  except,  perhaps,  a few  of  those  who  fell  upon  the 
parapet  and  in  the  ditch  of  the  fort,  having  been  previously  sent  to  the 
rear. 

Throughout  the  whole  of  this  affair  I have  great  pleasure  in  re- 
porting that  the  gallantry  and  good  conduct  of  General  Wright  and 
Colonel  Williams,  directly  under  my  eye,  as  also  that  of  the  several  regi- 
ments engaged  on  the  left  wing,  was  most  admirable;  while  the  careful 
arrangement  and  skillful  disposition  of  the  forces  of  General  Stevens, 
guided  as  they  were  by  his  own  cool  courage  in  action,  supported  as  he 
was  by  some  of  the  best  troops  in  the  service,  have  mainly  contributed 
to  the  success  of  this  reconnaissance  and  the  safe  and  orderly  return  of 
our  forces. 

The  details  of  the  action  with  the  notices  of  the  several  officers  and 
men  deserving  special  praise  I shall  submit  as  early  as  the  reports  can 
be  obtained  from  the  respective  commanders. 

The  casualties  to  the  command  I regret  to  say  are  quite  serious  as 
to  number  and  character.  From  the  reports  so  far  as  obtained  they 
are  in  General  Stevens’  command  as  follows  : Seven  officers  and  46  men 
killed,  14  officers  and  307  men  wounded,  and  2 officers  and  about  150 
men  missing  (more  than  one-half  of  which  last  number  it  is  expected 
will  return  to  camp),  the  expected  total  loss  being  about  450.  Of  Gen- 
eral Wright’s  and  Colonel  Williams’  commands  there  are  reported  so 
far  (I  have  not  been  able  to  get  the  details  as  yet)  about  150  in  all, 
killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  Of  these  many — perhaps  some  40  or 
50 — were,  I fear,  duplicated,  by  the  fact  that  many  of  the  wounded  of 
General  Stevens’  command  are  in  the  hospital  of  General  Wright,  so 
that  I doubt  not  the  entire  casualties  will  be  much  within  600  as  a total 
for  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.* 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright , U.  S.  Army , commanding  First 

Division. 

Hdqrs.  First  Division,  North.  Dist.,  Dept.  South, 
James  Island , 8.  C..  June  18,  1862. 
Major  : I have  the  honor  to  present  the  following  report  of  my  divis- 
ion in  the  action  of  the  16th  instant:  • 

Before  proceeding  to  describe  the  part  taken  by  the  troops  under  my 
immediate  command  it  is  important,  and  indeed  indispensable,  that 
the  plan  of  operations  as  determined  upon  by  General  Benham,  and 
distinctly  laid  down  by  him,  regarding  the  entire  force  brought  into 
the  field  should  be  explained.  This  is  essential  to  a complete  under- 
standing of  the  part  taken  by  and  the  disposition  made  of  the  various 
commands  in  the  action. 


See  revised  statemenr,  p.  51. 


54 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


According  to  this  plan  the  division  of  General  Stevens  was  to  form 
the  assaulting  column  against  the  enemy’s  works  at  Secessionville,  and, 
being  formed  in  the  utmost  silence  at  his  outer  pickets,  was  to  move 
forward  at  the  first  break  of  day  upon  the  enemy’s  batteries,  while  the 
remainder  of  the  troops,  comprising  Williams’  brigade  and  a part  of 
my  division,  moving  together  from  the  camp  at  Grimball’s,  were  to  act 
as  a support  to  General  Stevens,  protecting  his  left  and  rear  from  an 
attack  of  the  enemy’s  forces  from  that  direction.  So  important  was 
the  duty  assigned  to  this  covering  force  deemed,  and  so  convinced  was 
General  Benham  of  the  probability  of  an  attack  from  that  direction, 
that  he  ordered,  in  the  event  of  the  repulse  of  Stevens,  that  the  covering 
troops  should  not  renew  the  assault. 

The  parts  to  be  performed  by  the  two  columns  were  therefore  well 
defined  and  distinctly  understood;  that  of  General  Stevens  was  to  k 
assault  and  carry  the  works  at  Secessionville  ; that  composed  of  troops 
of  General  Williams’  brigade  and  my  division  was  to  cover  the  assault 
and  protect  it  from  attack  on  the  left  and  rear. 

The  organization  of  the  left  column  having  been  left  with  me,  I 
added  to  the  brigade  of  Williams  the  Ninety-seventh  Begiment  Penn- 
sylvania Volunteers  and  one  section  of  Hamilton’s  battery,  and  arranged 
the  force  aS  follows  : 

First.  Third  Rhode  Island,  five  companies ; second,  Third  New  Hamp- 
shire, ten  companies ; third,  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania,  six  compa- 
nies ; fourth,  Company  E,  Third  Artillery,  one  section.  Acting  Briga- 
dier-General Williams’  brigade. 

Fifth.  Sixth  Connecticut,  two  companies ; seventh,  Forty-seventh 
New  York,  eight  Companies.  Colonel  Chatfield’s  brigade. 

Eighth.  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania,  six  companies;  ninth,  First  New 
York  Volunteer  Engineers,  three  companies.  Colonel  Welsh’s  brigade. 

Tenth.  Artillery,  two  sections. 

Eleventh.  Cavalry,  two  squadrons. 

The  remaining  troops  were  left  in  camp  and  on  picket  duty,  from 
which  they  could  not  be  withdrawn  without  compromising  the  safety 
of  the  camp  and  depot.  Orders  were  issued  to  call  the  men  at  2 a. 
m.  and  have  them  in  line  for  marching  at  3 a.  m.  All  this  was  accom- 
plished, and  at  the  appointed  hour  the  column  was  in  motion,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  and  formed  under  cover  of  the  woods,  about  1 mile  in  advance 
of  our  camp,  to  await  information  of  the  advance  of  General  Stevens’ 
column,  as  had  been  agreed  upon.  Prior  to  receiving  such  intelligence, 
however,  a few  stray  shots  on  our  right  and  to  our  front  indicated  that 
General  Stevens’  command  was  advancing,  and  without  waiting  further 
the  column  was  at  once  pushed  forward. 

By  this  time  daylight  was  upon  us,  but  as  the  morning  was  dark  and 
cloudy  objects  could  not  be  clearly  discovered  to  any  considerable 
distance.  I should  remark  here,  that  just  after  or  about  the  time  I gave 
the  order  for  the  advance  from  camp  I was  joined  by  General  Benham, 
who  assumed  the  command  of  the  column  and  who  retained  it  during 
the  action,  leaving  me  responsible  for  a division  only.  Moving  rapidly 
to  the  front,  I formed  my  command  partly  behind  a hedgerow  parallel 
to  the  front  of  the  enemy’s  works,  partly  a little  in  rear,  and  brought 
up  two  pieces  of  artillery  to  open  upon  the  enemy,  and  then  proceeded 
to  the  front  to  ascertain  exactly  the  condition  of  affairs  there. 

I should  have  stated  that  soon  after  the  column  was  put  in  motion 
from  the  woods,  whereit  had  been  halted,  a messenger  came  from  General 
Stevens  to  say  that  lie  was  advancing,  and  before  we  had  reached  our 
position  a message  from  General  Stevens  asking  immediate  support 


CilAt*.  XXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


55 


was  answered  by  an  order  from  General  Benham  to  Acting  General 
Williams  to  report-  to  General  Stevens  with  his  command.  This  was 
a change  in  the  original  programme  by  taking  from  the  covering  column 
the  brigade  under  Williams  and  adding  it  to  the  assaulting  column. 

On  reaching  the  front  I found  that  the  command  of  General  Stevens 
was  falling  back;  that  a portion  had  been  reformed  behind  the  ad- 
vanced hedgerow;  that  the  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  was  behind 
the  same  hedge  on  the  left  of  General  Stevens,  and  that  the  Third  New 
Hampshire  and  Third  Rhode  Island,  which  had  been  pushed  well  up  to 
our  left  of  the  enemy’s  works  and  on  the  left  of  the  marsh,  were  hotly 
engaged  and  under  a cross-fire  from  the  works  and  from  a force  of  the 
enemy  (artillery  and  infantry)  on  our  left,  in  a low  growth  of  bushes, 
which  covered  them  from  view.  The  performances  of  these  regiments 
and  their  gallant  bearing  under  a most  destructive  fire  will  be  detailed 
by  their  immediate  commander,  General  Williams,  and  I refer  to  them 
at  all  only  with  a view  to  their  connection  with  the  movements  of  the 
rest. 

To  silence  the  fire  on  our  left  just  referred  to  and  to  be  able  to  resist 
more  promptly  any  attack  from  that  point  a section  of  Hamilton’s  bat- 
tery was  brought  into  the  field  to  the  left  of  the  mar^h  and  opened  on 
the  enemy,  and  the  Forty-seventh  New  York  Regiment,  of  Colonel 
Chatfield’s  brigade,  was  also  brought  forward  and  farmed  in  line  of  bat- 
tle to  the  left  in  face  of  the  low  growth  of  bushes  to  which  I have 
alluded,  a movement  which  was  executed  with  the  most  admirable  cool- 
ness and  in  perfect  order.  The  fire  of  our  battery  soon  silenced  that 
of  the  enemy,  which  was  not  resumed.  The  other  troops  ot  my  com- 
mand maintained  their  original  position  through  the  entire  engagement, 
except  the  Volunteer  Engineers,  who  by  my  direction  changed  front 
forward  to  the  left,  to  cover  the  approach  in  that  direction. 

Although  not  actually  engaged  with  the  enemy  the  troops  of  my  com- 
mand were  constantly  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  artillery,  which  was 
at  times  very  warm,  and  which  was  borne  most  unflinchingly  by  officers 
and  men,  who  were  anxious  to  be  brought  up  face  to  face  with  the  enemy. 
The  conduct  of  officers  and  men  was  deserving  of  all  praise.  To  Captain 
Hamilton,  Third  Artillery,  chief  of  artillery  of  the  left  column,  1 desire 
to  express  my  obligations  for  the  judicious  management  of  the  artillery, 
which  had  much  influence  in  subduing  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  to  the 
various  members  of  my  staff,  Col.  E.  W.  Serrell,  Volunteer  Engineers, 
chief  engineer;  Capt.  C.  W.  Foster,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Captain 
Goodrich,  assistant  quartermaster;  Lieut.  F.  A.  Sawyer,  acting  brigade 
commissary;  Lieutenants  Hayden  and  Hubbell,  aides-de-camp;  Mr. 
Darlington,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  aud  Capt.  J.  M.  Rice,  of  General 
Hunter’s  staff,  but  serving  with  me  as  a volunteer  aide,  I desire  to  ac- 
knowledge the  prompt  and  satisfactory  discharge  of  the  various  duties 
assigned  them. 

The  troops  of  the  entire  column  left  the  field  in  the  most  perfect  order, 
the  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  bringing  up  and  covering  the  rear  as  far  as 
our  front  line  of  pickets,  where  it  was  halted,  and  remained  in  position 
till  all  prospect  of  an  attack  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  had  passed  away. 
The  withdrawal  from  the  field  of  both  columns  was  ordered  by  General 
Benham. 

Accompanying  this  are  the  rex>orts  of  Colonels  Chatfield  and  Welsh, 
commanding  brigades. 

Very  respectfully,  you  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


56 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 
No.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  John  L.  Chat  field,  Sixth  Connecticut  Infantry , command- 
ing First  Brigade , First  Division. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  First  Div.,  U.  S.  Forces, 

GrimbalVs  Plantation , S.  C.,  June  16,1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding,  that,  in  accordance  with  previous  instructions  from 
the  division  headquarters,  my  brigade,  composed  of  two  companies  of 
the  Sixth  Connecticut  Regiment  and  the  Forty-seventh  New  York  Regi- 
ment (the  remaining  eight  companies  of  the  Sixth  Connecticut  being 
left  behind  on  picket  duty  and  the  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  Regi- 
ment being  assigned  to  the  command  of  General  Williams),  was  formed 
in  line  at  3 a.  m.  this  day,  and  took  up  the  line  of  march,  as  assigned, 
in  rear  of  General  Williams’  command.  I moved  forward  about  a fourth 
of  a mile  beyond  our  line  of  pickets,  when  I formed  in  line  of  battle,  and 
in  that  order  moved  forward  in  support  of  our  artillery  until  within 
about  800  yards  of  the  enemy’s  position,  where  we  lay  under  a galling 
fire  from  their  battery  for  over  an  hour,  after  which  I was  ordered  to 
move  the  Forty-seventh  New  York  Regiment  forward  in  support  of  Gen- 
eral Williams’  column,  which  I did,  accompanying  it  myself,  forming 
line  of  battle  to  the  left  and  about  500  yards  in  rear  of  the  enemy’s  main 
work,  where  we  remained  for  half  an  hour,  throwing  skirmishers  for- 
ward into  the  woods.  We  were  then  again  ordered  to  the  rear  of  our 
artillery.  We  remained  here  but  a few  moments,  when  we  were  once 
more  ordered  forward  to  the  former  position,  which  having  taken  and 
again  thrown  out  skirmishers  we  were  immediately  ordered  to  the  rear 
of  our  artillery,  and  soon  after  to  retire  and  take  up  a position  in  front 
of  our  line  of  pickets.  This  being  accomplished,  we  were  soon  ordered 
back  to  our  old  position  in  camp  in  rear  of  our  intrenckments. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command 
conducted  themselves  with  the  greatest  coolness. 

I had  occasion  several  times  to  execute  different  movements  with  the 
Forty-seventh  New  York  Regiment,  and  although  done  under  a galling 
fire  from  the  enemy,  all  the  movements  were  accomplished  with  the 
greatest  facility,  the  men  acting  calmly  and  without  any  excitement. 

I have  also  the  pleasure  to  report  that  there  were  no  casualties  what- 
ever in  my  command. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  L.  OHATFIELD, 

Colonel  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut  Vols .,  Comdg.  Brigade. 

Capt.  G.  W.  Foster,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Col.  Henry  R.  Guss , Ninety -seventh  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Ninety-seventh  Regt.  Pa.  Vols., 
James  Island , S.  6’.,  June  18,  1862. 
Lieutenant:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  the  consideration  of 
Brigadier-General  Williams  the  following  report  of  the  part  sustained 
by  my  regiment  in  the  reconnaissance  of  June  16: 

On  the  evening  of  the  15th  an  order  was  received  to  prepare  one 
day’s  cooked  rations,  which  was  accordingly  done. 

At  3 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  the  regiment  was  formed  on 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESStONVILLE,  S.  C.  5? 

its  color  line  and  in  a few  minutes  thereafter  moved  forward,  followed 
by  two  pieces  of  Captain  Ransom’s  battery,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery. 

About  4 a.  m.  the  line  was  formed  in  the  corn  field  on  the  east  of 
your  headquarters,  awaiting  orders.  Shortly  after  a heavy  artillery 
fire  opened  on  the  right  and  in  the  advance,  upon  which  the  column 
of  which  we  formed  a part  was  ordered  forward.  After  filing  through 
the  woods  I deployed  the  Ninety-seventh  into  line  of  battle,  and  ad- 
vanced steadily  across  an  open  field  to  a hedge,  in  front  of  which  was 
a deep  swamp.  This  was  crossed  without  delay,  not,  however,  without 
being  exposed  to  a severe  fire  of  grape  and  shell  from  the  enemy’s  bat- 
teries and  fort.  Taking  a position  behind  another  hedge  I awaited 
further  orders.  We  were  next  ordered  to  advance  and  support  a small 
force  of  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Avhich  was  hold- 
ing a ditch  about  500  yards  from  the  enemy’s  large  fort.  This  position 
we  occupied  for  about  one-half  hour.  We  were  then* ordered  to  file 
through  an  open  country  across  a very  deep  and  difficult  morass  and 
take  up  a position  that  would  cover  the  retirement  of  the  infantry  that 
had  been  engaging  the  enemy’s  right.  This  was  accomplished  in  good 
order.  Skirmishers  were  thrown  out  into  the  woods  on  the  left  and 
around  and  beyond  the  houses  on  the  right.  This  advanced  position 
was  maintained  by  the  Ninety-seventh  until  the  final  order  to  retire, 
which  was  done  in  perfect  order  and  in  a deliberate  manner,  bringing 
up  at  the  same  time  the  rear  of  the  whole  division. 

My  regiment  consisted  of  but  six  companies,  two  companies  being 
on  detached  service  and  two  others  on  picket  and  not  drawn  in. 

The  regiment,  although  exposed  to  showers  of  grape  and  canister 
and  at  one  time  to  a converging  fire  from  a battery  on  the  left  and  the 
fort  on  the  right,  with  a gunboat  dropping  shell  around  us,  lost,  1 am 
happy  to  say,  but  one  man,  Gabriel  Spence.*  He  was  a member  of  the 
band,  and  was  engaged  in  collecting  the  wounded,  and  is  supposed  to 
have  been  killed. 

The  officers  and  men  of  my  command  alike  exhibited  a praiseworthy 
coolness  and  courage.  To  mention  the  name  of  one  would  be  doing 
injustice  to  the  rest;  each  mau  did  his  duty. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  R.  GUSS, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Ninety-seventh  Regt.  Pennsylvania  Vols. 

Channing  Clapp,  First  Lieut.  Mass.  Cav.  and  A.  A.  A.  G. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  Welsh , Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry , com- 
manding Second  Brigade , First  Division. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brig,  First  Div.,  U.  S.  Forces, 

James  Island , S.  (7.,  June  16,  1862. 
Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  instruc- 
tions from  Brigadier-General  Wright’s  headquarters,  received  last  even- 
ing, the  troops  composing  my  command — consisting  of  six  companies 
of  the  Forty-fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  under  command 
of  Maj.  J.  M.  Kilbourne;  five  companies  of  Colonel  Serrell’s  Volunteer 
Engineers,  under  the  command  of  Major  Butts,  and  eight  companies  of 
the  Seventy-sixth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  commanded  by 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


58 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Colonel  Power— were  in  readiness  to  move  at  2 a.  m.  tliis  morning. 
Colonel  Power’s  battalion  was  then  detached,  by  instructions  of  the 
brigadier-general  commanding,  and  ordered  to  the  left,  for  the  purpose 
of  guarding  the  camp  near  headquarters.  I proceeded  with  the  rest  of 
my  command  to  the  field  beyond  the  woods  in  front  of  our  camp,  when, 
receiving  orders  to  hold  my  command  as  a reserve  to  the  forces  engaged 
with  the  enemy,  I immediately  directed  Major  Kilbonrne  to  form  line 
of  battle  facing  to  the  enemy’s  works,  directly  in  front  and  to  the  left  j 
of  the  road,  the  battalion  of  Volunteer  Engineers  under  Major  Butts 
forming  line  facing  in  the  same  direction  and  about  50  yards  to  the 
rear  of  the  Fortv-fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers.  The  posi- 
tion of  the  battalion  was  soon  after  changed,  facing  to  the  woods  on 
our  left,  and,  with  the  battalion  of  the  Forty-fifth  Regiment  Pennsyl- 
vania Volunteers,  forming  an  angle  facing  to  the  front  and  to  the  left. 
We  remained  in  this  position  until  our  forces  returned  to  camp,  Major 
Kilbourne’s  battalion  marching  in  rear  to  the  wood,  in  rear  of  which 
it  took  position  and  remained  under  my  immediate  command  to  check 
any  advance  they  might  be  disposed  to  make.  No  enemy  appearing, 
at  1 p.  m.  I returned  with  the  battalion  to  camp. 

I commend  the  officers  and  men  of  the  entire  command  for  their  cool- 
ness and  good  conduct  during  the  affair. 

The  only  casualties  in  the  command  were  Private — , of  Company 

, Volunteer  Engineers,  killed,  and  Private , of  same  company 

and  regiment,  severely  wounded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J THOS.  WELSH, 

Colonel  Forty-fifth  Regt.  Pennsylvania  Vols .,  Comdgr  2d  Brig. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens , JJ.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 

Division. 

Hdqrs.  2d  Div.,  North.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

James  Island , S.  C .,  June  19,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  my  division 
in  the  action  of  the  16th  instant:* 

The  instructions  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham,  who  commanded  the 
forces,  were  to  form  my  entire  division  before  the  break  of  day,  in  secrecy 
and  silence,  at  the  outer  pickets,  and  at  break  of  day,  say  about  4 
o’clock,  to  move  rapidly  upon  the  enemy’s  works  at  and  about  Seces- 
sionville,  with  the  view  of  carrying  them  by  coup  de  main.  In  this  attack 
it  was  arranged  that  all  the  available  forces  of  General  Wright’s  division 
and  Williams’  brigade  were  to  move  to  its  support  as  soon  as  the  fire 
from  my  attack  was  heard.  In  the  event  that  the  attack  proved  suc- 
cessful the  other  operations  of  the  day  were  to  be  determined  by  the 
circumstances  of  the  occasion. 

My  command  was  all  in  order  of  battle  at  3.30  o’clock  at  the  outer 
pickets,  the  head  of  my  column  being  within  rifle-range  of  the  advance 
position  of  the  enemy.  The  First  Brigade,  Colonel  Fenton  command- 
ing, consisting  of  the  Eighth  Michigan,  Lieut.  Col.  Frank  Graves  com- 
manding; the  Seventh  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  R.  Hawley  command- 
ing, and  the  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  M.  Moore  com- 
manding, being  in  front,  and  the  brigade  of  Colonel  Leasure,  consisting 
of  the  Seventy-ninth  Highlanders,  Lieut.  Col.  David  Morrison  com- 


See  also  inclosure  to  Hunter’s  report,  July  10,  p.  48. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  5S 

manding;  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania,  Maj.  David  A.  Leckey 
commanding,  and  the  Forty-sixth  Nei  York,  Ool.  Eudolph  Eosa  com- 
manding, being  in  support,  A storming  party,  consisting  of  Companies 
C and  F,  commanded  by  Capts.  Ealph  Ely  and  Eichard  N.  Doyle,  of 
the  Eighth  Michigan  Eegiment,  was  in  the  advance,  followed  by  Com- 
pany E,  Serrell’s  Engineers,  Capt.  Alfred  F.  Sears  commanding.  Four 
guns  of  the  Connecticut  Light  Battery,  Capt.  A.  P.  Eockwell  command- 
ing, followed  the  First  Brigade,  and  Company  H,  First  Massachusetts 
Cavalry,  Capt.  L.  M.  Sargent  commanding,  followed  in  rear. 

The  strictest  orders  were  given  to  maintain  the  most  perfect  silence; 
for  each  regiment  to  follow  the  preceding  regiment  within  supporting 
distance,  and  to  rely  exclusively  upon  the  bayonet  in  encountering  the 
enemy,  resorting  to  firing  only  in  case  of  manifest  necessity. 

At  the  break  of  day,  or  about  4 o’clock,  it  being  a dark  and  cloudy 
morning,  the  entire  command  was  in  motion.  My  aide-de-camp,  Lieut. 
Benjamin  E.  Lyons,  with  a negro  guide,  was  at  the  head  of  the  storm- 
ing column.  My  aide-de-camp,  Capt,  W.  T.  Lusk,  guided  the  Twenty- 
eighth  Massachusetts.  The  command  pushed  forward,  surprised  and 
captured  the  pickets  at  the  house  occupied  by  them,  entered  the  fields 
beyond,  and  as  they  came  within  the  effective  range  of  grape  and  mus- 
ketry pushed  forward  into  line  of  battle,  and  the  entire  Eighth  Michigan 
Eegiment,  at  about  100  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works,  the  main  body 
being  preceded  only  about  40  feet  by  the  two  storming  companies,  re- 
ceived his  fire  of  grape,  musketry,  and  canister. 

At  this  period  of  time  the  entire  three  regiments  of  Fenton  had 
passed  the  hedge  some  500  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works,  and  I was 
engaged  in  directing  the  attacking  and  supporting  force  of  Colonel 
Leasure.  They  were  ordered  to  keep  to  the  left  and  push  up  to  the 
work,  regiment  following  regiment,  as  in  the  case  of  Colonel  Fenton. 
Up  to  this  period  not  a shot  had  been  fired,  although  5 men  of  the 
Eighth  Michigan  had  been  wounded  by  the  pickets,  who  were  surprised 
and  captured. 

The  firing  now  became  general  and  continuous  in  front.  The  advance 
of  the  Eighth  Michigan  was  on  the  parapet.  The  light  battery  of  Eock- 
well’s  was  immediately  pushed  to  the  front,  and  took  its  position  at  the 
second  hedge,  and  the  Highlanders,  led  by  Morrison,  seeing  the  hot 
fire  to  which  the  Eighth  Michigan  was  exposed,  pushed  forward  at  the 
double-quick,  and  moving  from  the  left  to  the  right  of  the  field  entered 
a narrow  opening,  gained  the  parapet  to  the  right  of  the  point  reached 
by  the  Eighth  Michigan,  and  shot  down  the  enemy  whilst  serving  the 
guns. 

The  front  on  which  the  attack  was  made  was  narrow,  not  over  200 
yards  in  extent,  stretching  from  the  marsh  on  the  one  side  to  the  marsh 
on  the  other.  It  was  at  the  saddle  of  the  peninsula,  the  ground  nar- 
rowing very  suddenly  at  this  point  from  our  advance.  On  either  hand 
were  bushes  on  the  edge  of  the  marsh  for  sorqe  little  distance.  The 
whole  space  at  the  saddle  was  occupied  by  the  enemy’s  work,  imprac- 
ticable abatis  on  either  hand,  with  carefully  prepared  trous  de-loup  on 
our  left  and  in  front  a ditch  7 feet  deep,  with  a parapet  of  hard-packed 
earth,  having  a relief  of  some  9 feet  above  the  general  surface  of  the 
ground.  On  the  fort  were  mounted  six  guns,  covering  the  field  of  our 
approach.  The  whole  interior  of  the  work  was  swept  by  fire  from  the 
rifle  pits  and  defenses  in  the  rear,  and  the  flanks  of  the  work  itself 
and  the  bushes  lining  the  marsh  on  either  hand  were  under  the  fire  of 
riflemen  and  sharpshooters  stationed  in  the  woods  and  defenses  lying 
between  the  work  and  the  village  of  Secessionville. 


60 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  whole  front  was  scarcely  enough  to 
deploy  a single  regiment.  Colonel  Fenton,  in  command  of  the  First 
Brigade,  used  every  exertion  to  throw  the  Eighth  Michigan  as  far  to 
the  right  as  possible  and  to  bring  on  in  support  the  Seventh  Connecti- 
cut and  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts,  but  the  terrible  fire  of  grape 
and  musketry  cut  the  two  former  regiments  in  two,  the  right  going  to 
the  right  and  the  left  to  the  left,  whither  finally  the  whole  of  the  Twenty- 
eighth  Massachusetts  took  position,  and  where  they  were  joined  with 
scarcelv  an  interval  of  time  by  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  and 
Forty-sixth  New  York,  of  Leasure’s  brigade.  These  regiments  had 
been  brought  up  with  great  promptness  and  energy  by  Colonel  Leasure, 
and  the  right  of  the  One  hundredth  had  pushed  up  to  and  joined  the 
Seventy-ninth  in  their  charge. 

Jt  was  during  this  brief  period  of  less  than  one  half  hour,  from  5 to 
5.30  o’clock,  that  the  greater  portion  of  the  casualties  occurred.  The 
Eighth  Michigan  made  the  most  heroic  exertion  and  suffered  the  most 
terrible  losses.  Captains  Pratt,  Church,  Guild,  and  Lieutenant  Cot- 
trell, commanding  companies,  were  killed,  and  Captains  Doyle  and 
Lewis  and  Lieutenant  Bates,  commanding  companies,  were  wounded 
on  or  near  the  parapet  of  the  work.  My  aide-de-camp,  Lieutenant 
Lyons,  who  led  the  storming  party  and  the  first  man  to  cross  the  ditch, 
was  severely  wounded  on  the  berme  of  the  work,  and  was  obliged  to 
retire.  Of  22  officers  of  that  regiment  who  went  into  action  13  were 
killed  or  wounded. 

Seeing  that  without  supports  and  reforming  the  line  it  was  useless  to 
continue  the  contest,  I ordered  the  troops  to  be  reformed  on  the  hedge 
nearest  the  works,  and  the  regiments  which  had  suffered  most,  viz, 
The  Eighth  Michigan,  the  Seventy -ninth  Highlanders,  and  the  Seventh 
Connecticut,  to  be  withdrawn  to  the  second  hedge  to  be  reformed. 

It  was  not  till,  in  the  execution  of  this  order,  the  line  at  the  advanced 
hedge  had  been  formed  and  the  regiments  at  the  second  hedge  were 
forming,  that  Colonel  Williams’  advance  was  to  be  seen  to  our  left, 
and  soon  afterward  his  aide-de-camp,  Lieutenant  Adams,  reported  to 
me  for  orders.  My  orders  to  Colonel  Williams  were  to  maintain  the 
position  he  had  taken  on  that  flank,  and  to  do  the  best,  in  concert  with 
our  attack,  the  circumstances  of  the  ground  permitted.  The  move- 
ment of  Colonel  Williams  was  in  my  judgment  the  best  thing  that 
could  be  done,  and  he  executed  it  in  a manner  worthy  of  all  admira- 
tion. 

Sometime  was  occupied  in  establishing  the  whole  line  at  the  advanced 
hedge.  The  remains  of  two  or  three  companies  of  the  Eighth  Michigan 
and  of  several  companies  of  the  Highlanders  never  once  abandoned 
the  advance  positions  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  enemy’s  works  till 
ordered  so  to  do  at  a subsequent  period  of  the  action,  and  the  remainder 
of  the  regiments  were  gallantly  led,  that  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  by 
Captain  Ely,  twice  wounded,  and  the  only  officer  of  the  storming  party 
not  killed  or  disabled,  and  that  of  the  Highlanders  by  their  gallant 
lieutenant-colonel,  Morrison,  who,  wounded  in  the  head  on  the  parapet, 
seemed  only  the  more  eager  and  determined  to  lead  on  to  the  assault. 
The  Seventh  Connecticut  also  moved  up  in  a beautiful  and  sustained 
line  of  battle;  for  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  there  had  not  been  the 
least  panic  or  running  from  the  field  on  the  part  of  a single  regiment. 
Commands — in  consequence  of  the  roughness  of  the  ground,  the  unex- 
pected abrupt  narrowing  of  the  front  at  the  neck  of  the  peninsula, 
the  destructive  fire  of  grape  and  musketry  from  the  enemy,  and  the 
rapidity  with  which  regiment  followed  regiment — were  divided,  became 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


61 


somewhat  intermingled,  and  it  was  simply  a necessity  to  disentangle 
and  reform  them.  Not  a fugitive  did  I observe  passing  from  the  bat- 
tle-field. The  battery  which  had  been  temporarily  withdrawn  to  the 
road  was  again  advanced  to  the  hedge  and  opened  a destructive  fire 
upon  the  enemy.  Of  my  entire  command  all  were  thus  advanced  except 
the  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts,  which  had  withdrawn,  and  now  occu- 
pied a position  on  the  left  of  the  road.  The  command  was  in  excellent 
spirits  and  in  a position  enabling  them  clearly  to  discern  the  effect  of 
our  fire,  and  were  prepared  and  eager  to  be  led  to  the  assault.  The 
flank  movement  of  Williams  was  having  a very  marked  effect.  I sent 
word  to  Brigadier-General  Benham,  commanding  the  forces,  through 
his  staff  officer,  Captain  El  well,  that  my  troops  were  in  line  of  battle,  my 
'guns  in  position  at  the  hedge,  and  that  I was  preparing  to  move  upon 
the  enemy’s  works. 

At  this  stage  of  the  action  Williams’  troops  were  withdrawn,  and 
I learned  from  staff  officers  who  reported  to  General  Benham  in  person 
that  they  were  withdrawn  by  bis  orders.  I still  maintained  my  advanced 
position,  nor  did  I withdraw  a regiment  till,  by  the  orders  of  General 
Benham,  Williams  had  been  entirely  withdrawn,  and  every  regiment  of 
Wright’s  except  the  Ninety  seventh  had  passed  to  the  rear  of  the  road, 
and  until  I received  his  positive  orders  to  that  effect.  My  troops  were 
then  withdrawn  in  good  order  and  were  returned  to  their  several  en- 
campments. 

I must  express  my  profound  seuse  of  the  intrepid  bearing  and  sol- 
dierly conduct  of  my  brigade  commanders,  Colonels  Leasure  and  Fen- 
ton, who  did  everything  that  commanders  could  do  to  lead  their 
respective  brigades  to  the  attack,  and  it  is  mainly  due  to  their  exertions 
that  their  line  of  battle  was  maintained  throughout  the  action.  Colonel 
Fenton  left  a sick  bed  to  commaud  his  brigade,  and  the  bold,  well-sus- 
tained charge  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  Regiment  was  made  under  his 
direction,  as  was  that  of  the  Seventy-ninth  Highlanders,  led  by  Morri- 
son, under  the  direction  of  Colonel  Leasure.  All  which  these  officers 
have  to  say  in  commendation  of  their  staff  I know  from  personal  obser- 
vation to  be  their  simple  due. 

To  my  own  staff  I am  under  the  greatest  obligations,  and  it  is  owing 
to  the  great  harmony  and  concert  of  action  between  myself  and  brigade 
and  regimental  commanders  and  their  respective  staffs  that  exact  in- 
formation was  had  in  regard  to  the  field,  and  that  the  command  was 
not  longer  exposed,  without  purpose,  to  a destructive  fire.  My  assist- 
ant adjutant-general,  Capt.  Hazard  Stevens,  was  in  all  parts  of  the 
field,  carrying  my  orders  and  bringing  me  information  to  the  great  ex- 
posure of  his  life,  as  was  my  aide,  Capt.  William  T.  Lusk,  Seventy- 
ninth  Highlanders,  and  my  acting  aide,  Lieut.  O.  M.  Dearborn,  Third 
New  Hampshire  Volunteers.  Lieutenant  Lyons,  my  junior  aide,  led 
the  storming  column,  was  the  first  man  to  cross  the  ditch  and  make  the 
ascent  of  the  parapet.  My  division  quartermaster,  Lieut.  Jefferson  Jus- 
tice, One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  volunteered  his  most 
acceptable  services  at  tbe  outer  pickets  and  served  on  my  staff  through- 
out the  action.  He  communicated  with  me  and  Leasure’s  brigade,  and 
1 call  attention  to  his  services,  so  conspicuous  for  their  gallantry,  and 
to  the  mention  made  of  him  in  Colonel  Leasure’s  report.  My  signal  offi- 
cers, Lieutenants  Tafft  and  Howard,  are  worthy  of  honorable  mention. 
Lieutenant  Tafft  took  his  station  in  an  advanced  and  exposed  part  of 
the  field,  kept  constantly  in  communication  with  Lieutenant  Howard  at 
the  gunboats  and  Lieut.  F,  H.  Ilickok,  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania,  at 
the  battery,  and  was  perfectly  efficient  and  self-possessed  under  the 


62 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


heavy  discharges  of  grape  from  the  enemy.  In  the  latter  part  of  the 
action  he  carried  my  orders  and  aided  in  the  formations  and  move- 
ments. 

The  staff  officers  of  Colonel  Leasure  were  Lieut.  S.  G.  Leasure,  One 
hundredth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  acting  assistant  adju- 
tant-general. 

The  staff  officers  of  Colonel  Fenton  were  Lieut.  L.  C.  Brackett, 
Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  acting  assistant  adjutant- 
general ; Lieut.  H.  G.  Belcher,  Eighth  Michigan  Volunteers,  aide-de- 
camp;  Lieut.  Joseph  B.  Fenton,  Eighth  Michigan  Volunteers,  aide-de- 
camp. 

Lieutenant  Belcher-,  though  early  and  severely  wounded,  continued 
actively  on  duty  throughout  the  action,  and  was  the  last  man  to  leave 
the  field. 

Capt.  A.  P.  Rockwell,  of  the  Connecticut  battery,  deserves  particular 
mention  for  his  gallant  bearing  and  skillful  handling  of  his  guns  on  that 
field.  His  senior  lieutenant,  S.  E.  Sorter,  was  remarkable  for  his  energy, 
daring,  and  persistency  throughout. 

Captain  Sears,  following  with  his  engineer  company  the  storming 
party,  did  most  excellent  service ; first  at  the  advanced  hedge,  under 
circumstances  of  great  exposure,  preparing  embrasures  for  Rockwell’s 
battery,  and  afterwards  at  the  road,  removing  obstructions  therefrom, 
and  arranging  the  openings  in  the  hedge  both  for  infantry  and  artil- 
lery. There  was  no  opportunity  for  cavalry  movements  proper,  but  the 
orderlies  furnished  from  Captain  Sargent’s  company  did  most  gallant 
service,  and  the  remainder  of  his  company  served  effectively  as  vedettes 
and  pickets.  Two  men  of  his  company  were  severely  wounded  and 
two  horses  were  killed.  The  firing  from  the  batteries  at  the  point  by 
Company  I,  Third  Rhode  Island  Volunteers,  Capt.  Charles  G.  Stra- 
han  commanding,  was  commenced  immediately  after  the  unsuccessful 
charge  of  our  troops  had  been  made  upon  the  works  of  the  enemy. 
Although  having  every  gun  but  one  disabled  very  soon  after  the  com- 
mencement of  the  action  the  firing  was  conducted  with  great  precision 
and  regularity,  nearly  every  shot  taking  effect  in  the  fort  or  the  woods 
in  the  rear  of  the  work  where  the  large  force  of  the  enemy  were  lying. 
The  single  gun  was  worked  with  as  m-uch  rapidity  as  possible  during 
the  entire  engagement,  in  the  course  of  which  1 sergeant  was  killed. 
Tbe  gunboats  Ellen  and  Hale  came  into  action  at  a later  hour,  but  by 
their  excellent  range,  obtained  by  the  assistance  of  Signal  Officer 
Howard,  who  had  been  upon  the  Ellen  for  several  successive  days,  did 
very  great  execution  among  the  ranks  of  the  enemy.  Although  the 
gunboats  did  not  advance  up  the  river  as  far  as  could  have  been  de- 
sired in  order  to  give  a more  effective  flanking  fire  upon  the  fort,  still 
much  credit  is  due  them  for  the  precision  with  which  their  fire  was 
directed  at  such  long  range. 

The  whole  force  which  went  into  action  was  as  follows : 

First  Brigade,  Colonel  Fenton  commanding:  Eighth  Michigan,  4 
field  officers,  21  officers,  500  men ; total,  534.  Seventh  Connecticut,  7 
field  officers,  18  officers,  573  men ; total,  598.  Twenty-eighth  Massa- 
chusetts, 6 field  officers,  18  officers,  520  men ; total,  544.  Two  compa- 
nies of  the  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts  were  on  fatigue  duty  and  did 
not  join  their  regiment. 

Second  Brigade,  Colonel  Leasure  commanding  : Seventy-ninth  High- 
landers, 3 field  officers,  21  officers,  400  men ; total,  474.  One  hundredth 
Pennsylvania,  3 field  officers,  18  officers,  400  men  (including  130  out  of 
300,  who  were  on  picket  duty,  which  130  joined  the  advance  under  the 


Chap.  XXYI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  63 

fire  of  grape  and  musketry) ; total,  421.  Forty-sixth  New  York,  3 field 
officers,  19  officers,  452  men ; total,  474. 

Bockwell’s  artillery,  4 officers,  73  men ; total,  77.  Strahan’s  artil- 
lery, 3 officers,  80  men $ total,  83.  Sears’  Corps  of  Engineers,  2 officers, 
59  men ; total,  61.  Sargent’s  company  of  cavalry,  2 officers,  28  men ; 
total,  30.  Total  of  special  arms,  11  officers,  240  men ; total,  251.  Gen- 
eral staff,  9 officers,  6 men ; total,  15. 

Total  force  in  action,  3,562. 

Moreover,  the  Seventh  Connecticut  had  been  on  very  severe  fatigue 
duty  the  three  previous  nights.  I desire  in  this  official  report  to  place 
on  record  my  objections  to  these  early  morning  attacks.  They  are 
justifiable,  in  my  humble  judgment,  only  under  extraordinary  circum- 
stances. The  troops  get  necessarily  but  little  rest  the  night  before, 
and  they  go  to  the  work  fatigued  and  excited.  An  attack  at  a more  ad- 
vanced period  of  the  day  I consider  vastly  preferable.  These  views  I 
presented  with  all  possible  cogency  and  earnestness  to  General  Ben- 
ham  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  in  stating  my  objections  to  his  pro- 
posed attack  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  16th. 

I must  confess  that  the  coolness  and  mobility  of  all  the  troops  en- 
gaged on  the  16th  instant  surprised  me,  and  I cannot  but  believe,  had 
proper  use  been  made  of  the  artillery  guns  from  the  Navy,  and  our 
own  batteries,  fixed  and  field ; had  the  position  been  gradually  ap- 
proached and  carefully  examined  and  the  attack  made  much  later  in 
the  day,  when  our  batteries  had  had  their  full  effect — all  which  you 
will  recollect  were  strongly  urged  by  me  upon  General  Benham  the 
evening  of  the  conference — the  result  might  have  been  very  different. 

From  the  best  information  I can  get  I am  satisfied  the  forcje  of  the 
enemy  on  the  peninsula  at  Secession ville  and  in  immediate  defense  of 
his  works  was  five  regiments,  or  about  3,000  effective  men.  It  was  the 
headquarters  of  his  advance  forces  on  James  Island,  and  was  in  com- 
mand of  a general  officer. 

The  casualties  in  the  action  of  the  16  th  are  as  follows  : 


Command. 

/ 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Prisoners. 

Missing. 

Total. 

Aggregate.  . | 

Wounded. 

Unwounded. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

First  Brigade : 

7th  Connecticut 

2 

7 

2 

64 

3 

1 

3 

4 

no 

82 

28th  Massachusetts  . . . 

8 

2 

40 

1 

4 

6 

g 

3 

I O 
(*A 

8th  Michigan  

1 

11 

8 

93 

2 

20 

1 

13 

.... 

35 

13 

172 

67 

185 

Total 

3 

26 

12 

197 

3 

27 

1 

20 

1 

44 

20 

314 

334 

Second  Brigade : 

1 

— 

46th  New  York 

1 

5 

2 

15 

9 

3 

QQ 

79th  New  York 

1 

8 

5 

51 

17 

g 

IQ 

a 

OV 

1 1 A 

100th  Pennsylvania  . . . 

1 

8 

2 

30 

1 

6 

o 

3 

45 

IIU 

48 

Total 

3 

21 

9 

'96 

18 

10 

34 

12 

179 

191 

Special  arms : 

Company  1st.  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Capt.  L.  M.  Sargent,  2 wounded. 
Company  I,  3d  Khode  Island  Volunteers,  Capt.  C.  G-.  Straban,  1 killed. 
Company  Volunteer  Engineers,  Capt.  A.  F,  Sears,  1 wounded. 


64  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


The  missing  are  unquestionably  killed,  and  the  total  loss  is  as  follows: 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Prisoners. 

Total. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

1st  Brigade 

4 

70 

15 

224 

1 

20 

20 

314 

334 

2d  Brigade. 

3 

55 

9 

114 

10 

12 

179 

391 

Spftp.inl  arms 

1 

3 

4 

4 

1 

Total* 

7 

126 

24 

341 

1 

30 

32 

497 

529 

The  medical  officers  of  the  division  were  and  have  been  unwearied 
in  their  exertions  and  attendance  upon  the  wounded  both  in  the  battle- 
field and  in  the  hospital.  The  medical  director  of  my  division,  Dr. 
George  S.  Kemble,  is  especially  entitled  to  commendation  for  his  good 
arrangements  and  activity. 

I herewith  submit  the  reports  of  brigade  and  regimental  commanders 
and  of  commanders  of  special  arms.  I call  special  attention  to  the 
mention  made  therein  of  gallant  conduct  on  the  part  of  officers  and  men. 
Where  so  much  intrepidity  and  devotion  were  exhibited  I cannot  do 
more  than  to  refer  to  the  sub-reports,  with  the  expression  of  my  judg- 
ment that  every  case  noted  is  well  deserved. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  G.  Wright, 

Commanding  TJ.  S.  Forces , James  Island , S.  C. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  William  M.  Fenton,  Eighth  Michigan  Infantry , commanding 
First  Brigade , Second  Division. 

Hdqrs.  1st  Brig.,  2d  Div.,  North.  Dist.,  Dept.  South, 

James  Island , S.  (7.,  June  17,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  brigadier-general 
commanding  Second  Division,  the  part  taken  by  this  brigade  in  the 
attack  of  yesterday  on  the  enemy’s  batteries.  Agreeably  to  orders 
this  brigade  was  in  readiness  to  move  at  1 o’clock  a.  m.,  10th,  and  at  2 
o’clock  in  line,  and  moved  to  the  second  houses.  After  specific  orders 
were  received  from  Brigadier-General  Stevens,  who  advanced  with  us 
and  at  the  head  of  the  line,  the  brigade  was  put  in  march  by  the  right 
fiank  in  perfect  quiet  arid  stillness;  Lieutenant  Lyons,  aide  to  General 
Stevens,  in  advance  with  guide. 

1.  Two  companies — C,  Captain  Ely,  and  H,  Captain  Doyle — of  Eighth 
Michigan  Volunteers,  for  the  advance  skirmishers  and  attacking  party. 

2.  The  remaining  eight  companies  of  the  Eighth  Michigan,  under 
command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Graves. 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


Chap.  XXVJ.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


65 


3.  The  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hawley, 
followed  by  a section  of  Connecticut  battery. 

4.  The  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel 

Moore. 

On  passing  the  house  beyond  the  marsh  the  advance  was  fired  on  by 
the  enemy’s  pickets  and  2,  at  least,  of  Company  H,  Eighth  Michigan, 
wounded.  Silence  was  still  preserved,  no  shots  returned,  but  the  4 
men  of  the  enemy’s  pickets  captured  and  sent  to  the  rear.  The  two 
advanced  companies  were  deployed  into  line  beyond  the  main  hedge 
and  marched  toward  the  enemy’s  works,  followed  by  the  Eighth  Mich- 
igan, which  came  up  into  line  on  the  march.  Advancing  with  this 
regiment  as  they  formed  into  line  in  the  open  field,  in  view  of  the 
enemy’s  works,  and  observing  as  well  as  practicable  his  position,  I 
deemed  it  desirable  to  gain  ground  to  the  right  for  the  purpose  of 
flanking  his  left  in  the  assault,  and  advancing  the  other  regiments  into 
position  for  effective  fire  on  his  infantry  supporting  the  works,  and 
ordered  an  oblique  march,  which  was  executed  promptly  and  in  good 
order.  I then  dispatched  Lieutenant  Belcher,  acting  aide,  to  bring  up 
the  Seventh  Connecticut  to  form  on  the  left  of  the  Eighth  Michigan, 
and  Lieutenant  Brackett,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  to  bring 
up  the  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts  to  the  support  of  the  two  former, 
taking  my  position  on  the  front  and  center,  to  receive  and  direct  the 
other  regiments  as  they  advanced. 

The  order  not  to  fire,  but  to  use  the  bayonet,  was  obeyed,  and  the 
advanced  companies  reached  the  parapet  of  the  works  at  the  angle  on 
our  right  and  in  front,  engaging  the  enemy  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet. 
They  were  closely  followed  by  the  remaining  companies  of  the  regi- 
ment. During  this  advance  the  enemy  opened  upon  our  lines  an 
exceedingly  destructive  fire  of  grape,  canister,  and  musketry,  and  yet 
the  regiment  pushed  on  as  veterans,  divided  only  to  the  right  and  left 
by  a sweeping  torrent  from  the  enemy’s  main  gun  in  front.  This 
brought  a portion  of  the  regiment  to  the  left  near  the  tower  or  lookout, 
and  a brisk  fire  of  musketry  was  soon  opened  on  both  sides.  The 
enemy’s  fire  proved  so  galling  and  destructive  that  our  troops  on  the 
parapet  were  compelled  to  retire  under  its  cover,  and  that  of  the  ditch 
and  slope  on  our  right  at  the  marsh,  slope  and  trees  on  our  left.  They 
maintained  their  position,  partially  covered,  doing  good  execution  as 
sharpshooters.  Further  details  and  honorable  mention  of  gallant  officers 
will  be  found  in  Lieutenant-Colonel  Graves’  report. 

The  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hawley, 
formed  into  line  as  they  advanced,  reaching  a point  in  the  open  field  in 
front  of  the  tower,  with  their  left  resting  on  the  bushes  skirting  the 
marsh,  when  I ordered  their  march  by  the  right  flank  across  the  field 
and  up  to  the  support  of  the  troops  on  the  right.  I personally  directed 
the  movement,  which  was  executed  in  good  order  under  a continual 
shower  of  grape  and  canister  as  well  as  musketry  on  nearing  the  work. 
In  the  mean  time  one  section  of  the  Connecticut  battery  had  opened  on 
the  enemy  from  our  left,  and  the  march  of  this  regiment  at  first  was 
between  two  fires.  I refer  for  further  particulars  of  the  action  of  this 
regiment  and  honorable  mention  of  names  to  the  report  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Hawley,  commanding. 

The  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers  filed  through  the  first 
hedge  and  came  rapidly  up  after  the  advance  of  artillery  which  pre- 
ceded them,  forming  column  of  companies  and  then  coming  into  line, 

5 R R — VOL  XIV 


6G  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

and  arriving  near  the  Seventh  Connecticut  filed  up  to  the  left  by  the 
flank.  For  a short  time  the  left  of  the  two  regiments  were  clustered 
together  in  the  bushes,  but  the  march  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut 
cleared  them.  The  Twenty -eighth  then  filed  up  to  the  obstructions  a 
short  distance  from  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  near  the  tower,  opening 
fire  upon  them.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore’s  report  embraces  further 
particulars  of  the  action,  to  which  I respectfully  refer. 

All  the  regiments  behaved  well,  subjected  as  they  were  to  a most 
galling  and  raking  fire  until  they  retired.  The  storm  of  grape  and 
canister,  as  well  as  musketry,  continuing,  and  many  of  our  officers  and 
men  being  disabled,  orders  were  received  to  withdraw  the  troops.  My 
command  was  then  withdrawn,  and  reformed  behind  the  main  hedge,, 
from  which  an  advance  was  again  made  to  the  cover  of  the  ditch  or 
second  hedge  in  support  of  a field  battery  which  was  pushed  forward. 

In  the  woods  on  our  right,  near  the  angle  of  the  fort,  were  posted 
some  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters.  They  were  also  in  rifle  pits,  and 
under  cover  in  the  rear  as  well  as  in  the  house,  which  was  filled  with 
them.  From  these  and  other  covers  in  and  about  the  fort  and  on  its 
right  a constant  fire  of  musketry  was  kept  up  by  the  enemy,  who  were 
in  considerable  force.  The  Second  Brigade  of  this  Second  Division  was 
promptly  pushed  forward  to  our  support,  and  from  all  accessible  points 
the  enemy  was  vigorously  replied  to. 

I have  no  doubt  they  suffered  a severe  loss  in  killed  and  wounded. 
From  the  enemy’s  floating  battery  or  hulk  to  our  right  and  front  at 
least  four  shots  were  fired.  When  the  order  to  withdraw  was  given  I 
sent  Lieutenant  Fenton,  acting  aide,  to  our  extreme  right  and  front  to 
recall  the  men  there.  At  this  time  he  found  them  near  the  angle  of 
the  fort  and  directed  them  to  fall  back,  which  was  done  by  most  of  the 
troops  ; but  after  the  regiments  were  reforming  behind  the  hedge  100 
or  more  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  still  remained  at  the  angle  and  were 
recalled  by  Lieutenant  Belcher,  who  rode  over  the  field  to  bring  in  all 
who  remained  able  to  move.  The  field  of  battle  was  furrowed  across 
with  cotton  ridges,  and  many  of  the  men  lay  there  loading  and  firing 
as  deliberately  as  though  on  their  hunting  grounds  at  home. 

All  the  horses  connected  with  my  command  were  either  killed  or 
wounded,  and  all  my  aides  and  orderlies  hit  in  some  way.  During  the 
engagement  the  Eighth  Michigan  colors  were  carried  on  the  parapet, 
and  after  the  men  first  withdrew  were  unfurled  to  protect  from  shots  of 
friends  in  rear. 

While  the  firing  was  hottest  and  during  the  day’s  action,  through 
the  efficient  attention  of  Surg.  Francis  Bacon  and  Asst.  Surg.  Horace 
Porter,  of  Seventh  Connecticut,  Surgeon  Wilson,  of  Eighth  Michigan, 
and  Surgeon  O’Connell  and  Assistant  Surgeon  Snow,  of  Twenty-eigbth 
Massachusetts,  with  their  respective  corps,  speedy  relief  was  afforded 
the  wounded  who  were  accessible. 

Orders  having  been  given  to  that  effect,  about  9 a.  m.  this  command 
was  withdrawn,  and  returned  to  camp  in  good  order.  The  conduct  of 
all  the  officers  of  this  command  who  came  under  my  notice  was  gallant 
without  exception.  The  men  behaved  with  admirable  bravery  and 
coolness.  I regret  to  report  the  heavy  loss  in  the  command,  which  is 
not  yet  precisely  ascertained,  but  as  last  reported  amounts  to  341 
killed,  wounded,  aud  missing,  of  which  182  are  in  the  Eighth  Michigan 
Volunteers,  85  in  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  74  in  the 
Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers.*  I will  transmit  at  the 


See  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  67 

earliest  practicable  moment  a correct  list  of  names,  &c.,  which  is  in 
preparation. 

Lieutenant  Brackett,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieu- 
tenants Belcber  and  Fenton,  acting  aides,  were  efficient  and  active. 
Lieutenant  Belcber  was  wounded  slightly,  as  be  supposed  at  tbe  time,- 
and  continued  through  the  entire  affair  on  duty,  although  on  his  return 
to  quarters  he  had  a ball  extracted  from  his  shoulder.  His  wound,  * 
however,  is  not  dangerous. 

The  forces  engaged  were  as  follows  : Eighth  Michigan — 4 field  and 
staff,  21  line  officers,  509  rank  and  file  ; Seventh  Connecticut — 7 field 
and  staff,  18  line  officers,  573  rank  and  file  ; Twenty-eighth  Massachu- 
setts (two  companies  on  fatigue  duty) — 6 field  and  staff,  18  line  officers, 
520  rank  and  file. 

Accompanying  this  are  copies  of  reports  of  regimental  commanders, 
and  a rough  sketch  of  the  scene  of  action  not  claimed  to  be  entirely 
correct,  but  as  near  as  can  be  made  from  the  view  had  under  fire  on  the 
field  of  battle. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  M.  FENTON, 

Colonel  Eighth  Michigan  Volunteer s,  Comdg.  First  Brigade . 

Capt.  Hazard  Stevens, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Second  Division. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley , Seventh  Connecticut  Infantry . 

Headquarters  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers, 

James  Island , S.  0.,  June  16,  1862. 

Colonel  : I submit  a brief  report  of  the  part  taken  by  this  regiment 
in  the  assault  upon  the  enemy’s  earthworks  this  morning. 

Our  line  was  formed  promptly  at  1 o’clock,  as  ordered.  There  were 
2 field,  5 staff,  2 non-commissioned  staff,  and  18  line  officers,  76  non- 
commissioned officers,  and  497  privates  ; total,  600.  In  addition  10  or 
12  musicians,  and  more  accompanied  the  surgeons. 

We  were  assigned  to  the  center  of  your  brigade,  the  First  Brigade, 
Second  Division,  and  as  we  approached  the  enemy  were  ordered  to 
move  forward  into  line  on  the  left  of  the  leading  regiment,  the  Eighth 
Michigan.  As  our  right  passed  the  building  afterwards  used  as  a hos- 
pital, and  through  the  heavy  hedge  entered  the  first  of  the  two  fields 
between  us  and  the  earthworks,  it  formed  into  line  and  continued  to 
march  on  at  a rapid  step.  It  was  impossible  for  all  of  the  left  to  get 
forward  into  line  on  the  run  across  the  high  ridges  of  the  cotton  fields, 
encumbered  as  they  were  and  worn  down  by  night  fatigues.  I halted 
the  right  tor  one  single  minute,  the  left  still  running,  and  the  completed 
line  moved  on  in  excellent  order  over  the  hedge  between  the  two  fields 
and  steadily  advanced  upon  the  enemy,  whose  grape  and  rifle  shots 
came  in  showers.  When  within  200  or  300  yards  of  the  earthwork  the 
left  wing  came  obliquely  upon  an  unforeseen  ditch  and  morass,  so  that 
in  advancing  it  must  crowd  by  its  right  flank  toward  the  center.  At 
this  moment  a terrible  fire  of  grape  and  musketry  opened  on  us.  The 
line  was  inevitably  broken.  The  colors  stood  fast,  protected  by  Captain 
Palmer’s  company  (E).  Captain  Hitchcock,  with  part  of  Company  G, 


68 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai*.  XXVI. 


and  Lieutenant  Atwell,  with  part  of  Company  C,  advanced  within  130 
yards  of  the  parapet.  These  and  a portion  of  the  right  wing,  conceiv- 
ing that  the  time  had  come  when  the  order  not  to  fire  might  be  waived, 
opened  a lively  discharge  upon  the  parapet.  The  men  stood  bravely, 
but  the  line  could  not  be  formed  until  the  colors  were  brought  into  the 
. open  field.  As  soon  as  this  was  done  the  regiment  moved  by  the  right 
flank  under  the  heaviest  fire,  the  left  wing  rapidly  closing  up,  and  under 
your  orders,  when  well  across  the  field  toward  the  marsh,  filed  to  the 
left  and  advanced  upon  the  enemy. 

After  moving  a short  distance  Captain  Stevens  brought  me  an  order 
from  General  Stevens  to  call  the  men  off.  They  could  not  resist  the 
temptation  offered  by  the  enemy’s  men  at  the  guns,  and  a portion  of 
the  right  was  slow  to  get  the  order  and  fall  back,  preferring  to  pick 
off  gunners  and  riflemen.  Faced  by  the  rear  rank  the  battalion  marched 
to  the  hedge  and  lay  behind  it  until  an  order  from  General  Stevens 
brought  it  back  to  the  hedge  in  front  of  the  hospital.  In  a few  moments 
the  general  again  sent  us  forward  to  the  hedge  across  the  fields,  where 
we  lay,  while  three  pieces  (two  howitzers  and  a rifle)  of  the  Connecticut 
light  battery  came  up  and  carried  on  a rapid  and  for  the  most  part  a 
very  well  directed  fire.  Several  times  my  men  assisted  with  the  utmost 
eagerness  in  moving  the  guns  and  giving  other  aid.  A portion  of  the 
best  marksmen  were  permitted  to  fire  at  the  enemy’s  parapets.  When 
the  pieces  had  retired  beyond  danger,  by  order  from  General  Stevens 
we  were  again  moved  in  regular  line  to  the  rear,  the  enemy’s  rifled 
■cannon  and  howitzers  playing  upon  us. 

After  standing  behind  the  hospital  hedge  a short  time  General  Stevens 
ordered  us  to  camp,  whither  we  returned  in  good  order.  An  immedi- 
ate inquiry  showed  very  few  missing  men,  and  the  number  absent  not 
positively  known  to  have  been  left  on  the  field  dead  or  severely 
wounded  does  not  exceed  3 or  4. 

I find  it  impossible  to  select  individuals  for  praise.  Captain  Edwin 
S.  Hitchcock,  of  Company  G,  among  the  foremost,  and  enthusiastically 
cheering  on  liis  men,  was  severely  wounded  in  the  thigh.  He  continued 
to  call  out  cheerfully  and  to  fire  rifles  handed  him  by  his  men  until  he 
received  a rifle-ball  straight  from  the  front  through  his  upper  lip.  Four 
of  his  men  then  undertook  to  carry  him  to  the  rear.  While  they  were 
doing  this  two  of  them,  Sergeant  Haynes  and  Private  J.  N.  Dexter, 
were  wounded  by  rifle-balls,  and  they  were  obliged  to  leave  the  gallant 
captain  dying  there.  Lieutenant  Hooton,  of  Company  D,  was  doing  his 
whole  duty  nobly,  rallying  and  regulating  his  company,  when  a heavy 
grape-shot  passed  entirely  through  his  right  thigh  nearly  up  to  the 
body.  He  was  carried  to  the  rear,  praising  his  men  and  urging  them 
on,  and  he  lived  but  a short  time.  Lieutenant  Dempsey,  of  Company 
E,  while  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty,  was  disabled  by  a ball  through 
his  left  shoulder,  inflicting  a painful  but  not  dangerous  wound.  Ser- 
geant (Acting  Second  Lieutenant)  Upson,  of  Company  F,  was  heroically 
at  work  when  a grape-shot  took  off  three  fingers  and  dashed  through 
his  right  shoulder.  There  are  but  very  slight  hopes  of  his  recovery. 
Major  (Acting  Lieutenant-Colonel)  Gardiner,  Captain  (Acting  Major) 
Rodman,  Adjutant  Mills,  and  Quartermaster  Terry  and  Sergeant-Major 
Sawyer,  of  the  field  and  staff,  did  all  that  could  be  asked  of  the  bravest 
soldiers.  They  were  entirely  fearless  and  constantly  active  and  near 
me  every  moment.  The  same  I may  say,  from  personal  observation,  of 
nearly  every  line  officer,  and  for  aught  I know  it  is  true  of  all.  At  a 
most  critical  moment,  when  we  were  rearranging  the  line  for  the  second 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


69 


advance,  nothing  could  have  been  better  than  the  conduct  of  Captains 
Grav,  Palmer,  and  Skinner,  and  Lieutenants  Chamberlain,  Atwell, 
Thompson,  Townsend,  and  Greene.  Formidable  as  were  the  obstacles,. 
1 cannot  help  believing  that  had  we  possessed  a better  knowledge  of 
the  ground  the  highest  success  would  have  crowned  our  efforts. 

This  regiment  was  most  actively  engaged  in  the  reduction  of  Fort 
Pulaski,  but  this  was  the  first  time  it  had  encountered  a heavy  direct 
infantry  fire.  To  meet  that  discharge  of  grape  and  musketry  was  a 
severe  test.  When  the  ditch  broke  up  our  line  the  men  did  not  leave 
the  ground ; they  stood  patiently  until  the  line  was  formed,  and  our 
advances  and  retreats  were  in  regular  line  and  time.  Surgeon  Bacon 
and  Assistant  Surgeon  Porter  and  their  assistants  were  very  indus- 
trious in  bringing  off  the  wounded,  to  which  I attribute  our  small 
number  of  missing. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  B.  HAWLEY, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Seventh  Regt.  Conn . Volt* 

Col.  William  M.  Fenton, 

Commanding  First  Brigade , Second  Division. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  MacLelland  Moore , Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts 

Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-eighth  Begt.  Massachusetts  Vols., 

James  Island , June  17,  1862. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  your  orders  of  this  date  I have  the  honor 
to  transmit  the  following  report  of  this  regiment  in  the  action  of  yes- 
terday : 

The  line  was  formed  with  eight  companies  (two,  A and  F,  having 
been  detailed  previously  for  fatigue  at  batteries)  at  1 o’clock  on  morn- 
ing of  the  16th  instant,  with  60  rounds  of  ammunition,  canteens  filled 
with  water,  and  twenty-four  hours’  rations  in  haversacks  to  each  man, 
as  per  order.  When  we  arrived  we  found  two  regiments  engaged; 
marched  the  regiment  by  the  flank  through  a gap  in  the  hedge  into  a 
large  field  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  work ; forward  in  column  by  com- 
pany, and  formed  into  line  of  battle  on  first  company  as  soon  as  clear 
of  hedge.  While  this  latter  movement  was  being  executed  one  regi- 
ment that  was  in  front  fell  back  and  broke  through  our  regiment, 
throwing  it  into  confusion.  Forward  again;  marched  by  the  flank 
through  a dense  bush  on  our  left,  and  followed  the  edge  of  the  bushes, 
which  formed  one  side  of  a marsh  to  within  40  yards  of  the  enemy’s 
work.  Here  our  progress  was  interrupted  by  a large  fallen  tree,  be- 
tween which  and  the  enemy’s  work  was  an  impassable  marsh.  On  our 
right  was  an  abatis  of  dense  brush  and  on  our  left  and  front  marsh. 
Here  we  lost  many  of  the  men  who  were  killed  and  wounded  in  the 
regiment.  Seeing  that  we  could  be  of  no  possible  use  in  this  place 
with  less  than  a platoon  front  to  retaliate  by  fire  on  the  enemy,  and  this 
position  being  raked  by  the  fire  of  the  gun  on  the  corner  of  the  enemy’s 
work  nearest  the  observatory,  I ordered  the  regiment  to  retire.  After 
getting  back  into  the  field  I again  formed  line,  and  soon  alter  was 


70 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXVI. 


ordered  to  retire,  which  we  did  in  good  order.  The  officers  and  men 
behaved  very  well. 

Herewith  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  an  account  of  loss — killed, 
wounded,  and  missing.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  MOOEE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Twenty -eighth  Regt.  Mass.  Vols. 

Col.  William  M.  Fenton, 

Commanding  First  Brigade. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Frank  Graves , Eighth  Michigan  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Eighth  Michigan  Volunteers, 
James  Island , 8.  C .,  June  16,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  present  the  following  report  of  the  action 
of  the  Eighth  Eegiment  of  Michigan  Volunteers  in  the  attack  upon  the 
Tower  battery  of  the  enemy  near  Secession ville,  S.  0.,  to-day : 

The  regiment  marched  from  camp  at  2 a.  m.  In  accordance  with 
orders  from  Brig.  Gen.  I.  I.  Stevens,  commanding  Second  Division, 
Companies  C and  H (Company  H in  front)  were  advanced  within  sup- 
porting distance  of  the  regiment,  with  positive  orders  from  General 
Stevens  to  push  rapidly  forward,  using  only  the  bayonet,  and  not  to 
fire  a shot  unless  compelled  to  do  so  by  an  attack  of  a much  superior 
force.  Upon  arriving  at  the  first  negro  houses  in  advance  of  our  camp 
a halt  was  ordered,  when  Major  Watson,  of  this  regiment,  who  was 
there  on  duty  as  field  officer  of  the  day,  was  ordered  to  report  to  me, 
which  he  did  promptly,  and  joined  the  regiment,  acting  as  lieutenant- 
colonel.  I moved  my  command  rapidly  forward  without  opposition  to 
the  first  houses  beyond  our  lines,  where  we  found  a picket  of  the  enemy, 
consisting  of  a lieutenant  and  3 men,  who,  after  firing  two  shots  at  us, 
wounding  5 men  of  Company  H,  ran  away.  Two  of  them  were  soon 
captured  by  some  of  Company  H.  The  others  having  gained  consid- 
erable distance,  the  men  were  unable  to  catch  them,  when  I dashed 
after  them,  soon  overtook,  captured,  and  sent  them  to  the  rear. 

The  regiment  soon  arrived  at  the  open  field  in  front  of  the  enemy’s 
works,  when  T formed  my  advance  and  battalion  companies  forward 
into  line,  and  moved  forward  at  a charge  bayonet  at  the  battery.  By 
this  time  we  could  see  the  enemy  formed  in  his  intrenchments  ready 
to  receive  us.  The  lines  advanced  steadily  and  in  good  order  to  within 
good  musket-range,  when  the  enemy  delivered  a close  and  deadly  fire 
of  musketry  along  his  whole  front,  accompanied  with  rapid  and  heavy 
discharges  of  grape  and  canister  and  the  fire  of  sharpshooters  from 
cover.  Still  the  regiment  moved  rapidly  on,  preserving  their  order  and 
leaving  the  ground  in  their  rear  strewn  with  their  dead  and  wounded, 
and  did  not  stop  until  they  gained  the  parapet  and  delivered  their  fire 
upon  the  enemy  in  his  works.  But  they  were  unable  to  contend  against 
such  great  odds,  and  being  entirely  unsupported  for  a considerable 
time  they  fell  back  slowly , contesting  every  inch  of  ground  a short  dis- 
tance, where  they  maintained  ground  until  ordered  to  retreat,  which 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


71 


they  did  in  good  order,  although  under  fire.  The  regiment,  however, 
had  become  much  scattered,  owing  to  the  great  number  of  officers  who 
had  fallen.  A portion  of  the  regiment  was  again  formed  upon  the 
colors,  and  took  up  position  in  support  of  a section  of  the  First  Con- 
necticut Battery. 

The  veteran  coolness  with  which  the  Eighth  Michigan  Volunteers 
moved  forward  upon  that  battery  and  the  literal  execution  of  their  in- 
structions under  such  trying  circumstances  were  most  admirable.  The 
conduct  of  the  men  speaks  much  more  for  the  bravery  of  their  officers 
than  anything  that  I can  say,  yet  I cannot  refrain  from  mentioning 
Major  Watson,  who  so  gallantly  conducted  the  right  wing;  Captain 
Doyle,  who  led  the  van  to  the  very  parapet,  and  stood  upon  it  amidst  a 
storm  of  bullets,  coolly  “spotting”  his  man  with  each  discharge  of  his 
revolver,  and  not  quitting  it  until  his  arm  fell  powerless  by  his  side, 
shattered  by  a shot;  Captain  Church,  who  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  enemy, 
sword  in  hand,  cheering  on  his  men;  Captain  Guild,  who  fell  in  the 
hottest  of  the  fight  bravely  fighting,  musket  in  hand;  Captain  Pratt, 
who,  though  wounded,  still  led  on  his  men  until  he  fell  from  sheer  ex- 
haustion; Captain  Lewis,  who  was  severely  wounded  in  the  first  fire; 
the  gallant  conduct  of  Lieutenants  Donohue  and  Cottrell,  who  fell 
severely  wounded  at  the  head  of  their  commands;  also  of  Lieutenant 
Bates,  commanding  Company  F,  and  Lieutenants  Hutchison  and  Smith. 
I take  great  pleasure  in  mentioning  the  coolness,  patient  attention,  and 
skill  of  our  surgeon,  J.  C.  Wilson,  and  notwithstanding  the  great  dis- 
advantage of  having  no  assistants  no  one  was  neglected,  but  all  made 
as  comfortable  as  possible.  And  before  closing  this  report  I wish  to 
testify  my  gratitude  for  and  admiration  of  the  valuable  services  and 
daring  bravery  of  Lieutenant  Lyons,  of  the  commanding  general’s 
staff,  who  was  chosen  as  the  guide  of  the  Second  Division  owing  to  his 
superior  knowledge  of  the  route,  gained  by  his  daring  personal  recon- 
naissances, and  when  we  arrived  in  front  of  the  enemy’s’  works  he  dashed 
to  the  front,  and  with  a “ Come  on,  boys',”  he  displayed  his  willingness 
and  ability  to  guide  us  into  as  well  as  up  to  the  fort. 

Upon  the  withdrawal  of  the  forces  the  regiment  was  ordered  ro  bring 
up  the  rear  of  the  division,  so  that  the  Eighth  Michigan  were  the  first 
in  and  last  out.  I much  desire,  if  space  were  allowed,  to  make  mention 
of  some  of  the  cool  and  daring  acts  of  bravery  on  the  part  of  some  of 
the  privates  and  non-commissioned  officers  of  this  regiment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FBANK  GBAVES, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Levi  C.  Brackett, 

A.  A.  A.  G.j  1st  Brig.,  2d  Div.)  North.  Dist.)  Dept.  South. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Col.  Daniel  Leasure)  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Infantry , 
commanding  Second  Brigade , Second  Division. 

Hdqrs.  2d  Brig.,  2d  Div.,  North.  Dist.,  Dept.  South, 

James  Island , S.  C .,  June  17,  1862. 
Captain  : The  undersigned  respectfully  reports  that  pursuant  to 
orders  from  division  headquarters  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York  Volun- 
teers and  that  portion  of  the  One  hundredth  .Regiment  Pennsylvania 


72 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XXVL 

Volunteers  not  on  advanced  picket  duty  were  formed  into  line,  and  at 
1.20  o’clock  a.  m.  started  for  the  rendezvous  of  the  brigade,  at  the  head- 
quarters of  the  First  Brigade,  where  the  remaining  regiment,  the  Forty  - 
sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  joined,  and  the  troops  moved  toward  the 
enemv’s  work  in  good  order  and  the  most  profound  silence. 

About  4.30  o’clock  the  head  of  the  column,  marching  by  the  flank  on 
a double-quick  for  at  least  half  a mile,  arrived  opposite  the  work  of 
the  enemy,  about  a mile  in  front  of  them,  with  an  open  field,  traversed 
by  two  hedges,  formed  by  cutting  deep  ditches,  one  on  either  side  of 
an  embarkment  6 feet  in  height,  extending  up  to  the  breastworks. 
The  First  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Fenton,  had  meanwhile  advanced 
upon  the  work,  and  the  fort  had  opened  fire. 

I now  received  the  order  from  the  brigadier-general  commanding  the 
division  to  form  the  columu  to  support  the  attack  of  Colonel  Fenton.  I 
immediately  ordered  the  regiment  on  the  right,  the  Seventy-ninth  New 
York  Volunteers,  into  line  of  battle,  and  when  about  two  companies 
on  its  right  had  got  into  line  an  urgent  message  came  from  Colonel 
Fenton  to  hasten  to  his  support,  and  General  Stevens  gave  me  the 
order  to  advance  at  a double-quick,  and  the  companies  then  in  line 
started  off  at  that  step,  which  made  it  extremely  difficult  for  the  left 
to  get  into  line,  which  indeed  it  never  did  until  it  reached  the  tort, 
where  the  right,  or  about  two  companies  of  the  right,  under  charge  of 
Lieutenant- Colon  el  Morrison,  in  command,  gained  a position  alongside 
of  and  upon  the  embankment.  The  left,  having  encountered  a perfect 
storm  of  grape. and  canister,  was  obliged, to  seek  shelter  either  by 
obliquing  to  the  left  under  cover  of  a small  ravine,  or  by  dropping 
amongst  the  cotton  ridges  in  front  of  the  fort,  where  they  kept  up  a 
steady  fire  on  the  enemy’s  gunners. 

Immediately  following  the  advance  of  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York 
Regiment  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Regiment,  under  command 
of  Major  Leckey,  formed,  while  marchiug  at  a double-quick,  to  support 
the  advance  of  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York  Regiment.  The  line  of 
battle  of  the  One  hundredth  was  so  formed  as  to  cover  with  its  right 
that  portion  of  the  left  of  the  Seventy-ninth  which  I saw  was  not  likely 
to  perfect  its  formation  before  reaching  the  breastworks.  The  Forty- 
sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  Colonel  Rosa  commanding,  were  formed  in 
a like  manner  to  cover  the  left  of  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Vol- 
unteers, thus  forming  three  lines  of  battle  in  echelon. 

Pending  these  movements  of  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  and 
Forty-sixth  New  York  Regiments  I advanced  to  hasten  up  the  left  of 
the  Seventy-ninth  New  York  and  lead  the  assault  in  person.  On  arriv- 
ing at  the  intrenchment  or  hedge,  300  yards  in  front  of  the  fort,  I found 
I could  not  get  my  horse  over,  and  dismounting,  as  did  also  my  assist- 
ant adjutant-general,  Lieutenant  Leasure,  we  proceeded  on  foot.  At 
this  point,  together  with  the  left  wing  of  the  Seventy- ninth  New  York 
Volunteers,  we  entered  the  range  of  a perfect  storm  of  grape,  canister, 
nails,  broken  glass,  and  pieces  of  chains  fired  from  three  very  large 
pieces  on  the  fort,  which  completely  swept  every  foot  of  ground  within 
the  range,  and  either  cut  the  men  down  or  drove  them  to  the  shelter  ot 
the  ravine  on  the  left.  I now  turned  to  look  after  and  lead  up  the  One 
hundredth  Pennsylvania  Regiment,  and  found  its  center  just  entering 
the  fatal  line  of  fire,  which  completely  cut  it  in  two,  and  the  right, 
under  Major  Leckey,  obliqued  to  the  right  and  advanced  to  support  the 
right  of  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York,  and  many  of  the  men  reached  the 
foot  of  the  embankment,  and  some  succeeded  in  mounting  it,  with  a 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSION VILLE,  S.  C.  73 

few  brave  men  of  the  Seventy -ninth,  who  were  there  with  a portion  of 
the  Eighth  Michigan. 

It  was  here  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Morrison  was  wounded,  and  many 
of  the  Seventy-ninth  either  killed  or  wounded,  as  were  also  some  of  the 
One  hundredth  Pennsylvania.  The  principal  casualties  to  the  Seventy- 
ninth  New  York  occurred  at  this  point  from  the  enemy’s  musketry,, 
while  the  principal  casualties  to  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  oc- 
curred during  the  few  minutes  that  the  center  of  the  regiment  was  under 
fire  of  the  guns  of  the  fort,  throwing  every  conceivable  kind  of  missile, 
and  that  portion  of  the  left  which  remained  with  a portion  of  the 
Seventy-ninth  New  York  under  partial  cover  of  the  ravine  before 
spoken  of. 

The  One  hundredth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  went  into 
the  battle  a fragmentary  command.  Three  hundred  and  odd  privates, 
with  the  necessary  officers,  were  on  the  advanced  picket  posts,  not  more 
than  130  of  whom  could  rejoin  before  we  went  into  battle.  The  previ- 
ous morning  report,  as  shown  by  Major  Leckey’s  report,  verified  by  the 
official  report,  shows  583  privates  present  for  duty.  This  would  leave 
283  privates  to  go  to  battle,  added  to  which  the  fragmentary  portions 
of  companies  that  were  able  to  join  from  the  pickets,  amounting  to  not 
more  than  130  men,  would  make  the  whole  number  of  that  command 
in  battle  not  more  than  400  men,  with  the  necessary  complement  of  offi- 
cers, and  of  these  130  men  who  joined  from  pickets  three  companies  did 
not  arrive  in  time  to  join  the  regiment  till  it  was  under  the  thickest  of 
the  fire,  when  they  joined  on  the  left,  and  suffered  severely.  It  was  of 
these  that  Lieutenant  Morrow  was  mortally  and  Lieutenants  Blair  and 
Galliland  seriously  wounded.  During  the  formation  of  the  column  of 
attack  1 mile  from  the  fort  the  Porty-sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  by 
orders  of  General  Stevens,  had  proceeded  to  the  left  along  the  road 
toward  Secessionville,  to  form,  if  possible,  a junction  with  General 
Wright’s  troops  on  that  side,  but  on  my  plan  of  advance  being  repre- 
sented by  my  assistant  adjutant-general  the  general  directed  that  the 
regiment  should  be  recalled  and  support  the  One  hundredth  Pennsyl- 
vania Regiment.  This  caused  some  delay,  which  was  no  disadvantage 
under  the  circumstances,  as  it  enabled  that  corps  to  form  in  good  line 
of  battle,  which  it  did,  and  marched  steadily  to  the  front  until  ordered 
to  halt  and  remain  in  reserve.  This  regiment  afterward  advanced  and 
took  its  position  in  the  brigade,  when  it  was  rallied  at  the  hedge  300 
yards  in  front  of  the  fort. 

As  soon  as  the  advance  had  been  checked,  and  it  was  found  impracti- 
cable for  the  few  troops  on  the  embankment  to  take  the  fort,  Captain 
Stevens,  as  I am  informed,  ordered  them  to  fall  back  to  let  the  artillery 
play  upon  the  works,  which  was  accordingly  done  in  very  good  order. 
Meantime  about  two  companies  of  the  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania 
Regiment  Volunteers  had  rallied  to  their  colors  at  the  hedge  300  yards 
in  front  of  the  fort,  and  on  these,  with  the  assistance  of  Lieutenant 
Leasure,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieutenant  Justice,  acting 
post  and  division  quartermaster,  I soon  succeeded  in  rallying  the 
whole  of  my  command,  and  formed  it  in  regular  order  for  attack  where 
we  lay,  until  orders  came  for  us  to  fall  back  to  the  hedge  iu  the  rear, 
which  we  did  in  good  order,  bringing  off  our  wounded  and  leaving  our 
dead.  During  the  battle  two  of  my  mounted  orderlies  were  wounded 
and  one  had  his  horse  shot  under  him. 

I may  be  permitted  to  report  further  that  at  the  time  I arrived  in 
front  of  the  hedge  near  the  fort  I saw  nothing  of  any  part  of  the  sup- 
porting regiments  of  the  First  Brigade  between  the  advancing  High- 


74 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


landers  and  the  fort,  and  only  a portion  of  the  Eighth  Michigan,  who 
led  the  attack  in  front  of  the  fort,  that  regiment  having  already  been 
decimated  by  the  murderous  fire  through  which  we  all  had  to  pass. 
The  troops  under  my  command  behaved  with  much  intrepidity  and 
coolness,  and  did  not  shrink  from  exposing  themselves,  as  the  list  of 
casualties  will  show,  and  did  not  at  any  time  evince  any  tendency  to 
panic,  though  to  maintain  a position  for  two  and  a half  hours  under  a 
constant  stream  of  fire  was  an  affair  calculated  to  try  the  disposition  of 
soldiers  pretty  thoroughly. 

Accompanying  this  report  please  find  the  reports  of  the  several  regi- 
mental commanders,  together  with  their  lists  of  casualties.  I must 
return  to  the  officers  of  the  several  regiments  my  thanks  for  their 
steadiness  and  coolness  and  for  their  ready  and  prompt  obedience  to 
my  orders.  Lieut.  S.  George  Leasure,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and 
Lieut.  Jefferson  Justice,  quartermaster  of  the  One  hundredth  Eegiment 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  acting  post  and  division  quartermaster,  de- 
serve my  marked  approbation  for  most  effective  assistance  and  for  set- 
ting an  example  of  coolness  and  disregard  of  personal  danger  that  aided 
materially  in  preserving  coolness  and  intrepidity  throughout  the  com- 
mand. 

All  of  which  is  very  respectfully  reported. 

DANIEL  LEASURE, 
Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Hazard  Stevens, 

Capt.7  A.  A.  A . G .,  Second  Div.  North.  Dist .,  Dept.  South . 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Col.  Rudolph  Rosa , Forty -sixth  New  Yorh  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-sixth  Regiment  New  York  Vols., 
James  Island , S.  C.,  June  17,  1862. 

Colonel:  In  obedience  to  your  orders  I have  the  honor  to  report 
that  the  Forty-sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers  left  the  camp  on 
the  morning  of  June  16,  numbering  452  enlisted  men  and  22  commis- 
sioned officers.  It  was  the  last  regiment  in  the  brigade  under  your 
command.  About  three-fourths  of  a mile  from  the  place  of  action  the 
order  was  given  to  advance  in  double-quick  time.  The  regiment  was 
conducted  to  the  right  of  the  road,  over  a very  uneven  field,  and  over 
a deep  ditch  with  hedge,  which  runs  in  front  of  the  fort  at  a distance 
of  about  one  thousand  paces.  The  regiment  was  then  formed  in  line 
on  the  left  wing  of  the  brigade  under  your  command,  and  then  advanced 
to  about  400  paces  of  the  fort,  where  a very  marshy  ravine  covered  with 
bushes  to  the  left  seemingly  offered  the  means  of  approaching  the  fort 
under  cover.  At  this  moment  parts  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Massachu- 
setts Regiment  and  Seventh  Connecticut  Regiment  in  retreating  from 
this  ravine  threw  themselves  on  our  left  wing,  taking  with  them  about 
50  of  our  men.  At  the  same  time  the  fort,  which  till  then  had  fired 
with  solid  shot,  began  to  fire  at  us  with  heavy  grape.  The  line  of  the 
brigade  fell  back  in  general  and  the  order  for  retreating  was  given. 
Nearly  all  our  losses  occurred  in  these  movements  from  the  heavy 
grape  of  the  fort.  The  regiment  retreated  behind  the  ditch  with  hedge 
before  mentioned,  formed  behind,  and  stood  there  for  about  fifteen 


75 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SE'CESSIONVILLE,  S.  G. 

minutes,  when  a general  retreat  took  place,  and  the  regiment  went 
hack  about  400  paces  from  this  ditch,  where  it  halted.  Colonel  Leasure 
then  ordered  the  regiment  to  again  take  position  at  this  ditch  to  the 
right  of  the  Seventy  ninth  Regiment,  which  was  done.  At  a later 
period  the  whole  brigade  was  again  formed  at  this  ditch,  and  our  regi- 
ment took  position  at  its  left  wing,  covered  by  the  ditch.  During  all 
this  time  our  own  artillery  fired  over  our  heads  from  enormous  dis- 
tances and  burst  several  shells  right  over  our  heads.  The  fire  of  our 
gunboats  was  also  very  disagreeable  until  they  finally  succeeded  in 
getting  a better  range.  At  about  9.30  o’clock  the  order  was  given  to 
fall  back  on  the  road,  which  was  executed  in  good  order,  and  the  troops 
were  afterwards  marched  back  to  their  quarters. 

I have  the  honor  to  annex  a correct  list  of  casualties.* 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

RUDOLPH  ROSA, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Forty -sixth  Regiment  A.  Y.  State  Vols. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  David  Morrison , Seventy-ninth  New  Yorlc  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Seventy-ninth  Regtment  New  York  Vols., 

James  Island , S.  0.,  June  17,  1862. 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  orders  I have  the  honor  to  report 
the  part  which  the  Seventy-ninth  (Highlanders)  took  in  the  action  of 
yesterday. 

Between  the  hours  of  9 and  10  o’clock  p.  m.  (Sabbath),  June  15,  I 
received  your  orders  for  twenty-four  hours’  cooked  rations  and  to  be 
readyYor  the  march  at  1 o’clock  a.  m.  Having  made  the  necessary 
preparations  we  moved  at  the  time  appointed.  On  arriving  at  the 
camp  of  the  Eighth  Michigan  I halted  my  command  for  half  an  hour. 
I then  received  orders  to  move  forward,  preceded  by  a section  of  light 
artillery,  and  in  this  order  we  advanced  until  within  range  of  the 
enemy’s  guns,  where  I received  orders  from  General  Stevens  to  tile 
past  the  battery  and  advance  on  the  double-quick.  Having  proceeded 
about  half  a mile  we  entered  a large  cotton  field,  where  I was  ordered 
to  form  line  of  battle  and  charge  upon  the  enemy’s  works,  and  notwith- 
standing the  ground  was  very  unfavorable,  good  order  was  preserved. 
When  at  a distance  of  about  1,000  yards  the  guns  of  the  fort  opened 
upon  us  with  canister,  grape,  and  shell  with  fearful  effect,  and  although 
many  of  my  men  fell,  yet  the  regiment  never  faltered  or  wavered,  but 
kept  steadily  on.  Their  bearing  was  worthy  of  veterans.  Gallantly 
did  they  withstand  the  shock  of  musketry,  and  onward  they  pushed 
until  they  reached  the  ramparts. 

As  I mounted  the  parapet  I received  a wound  in  the  head,  which, 
though  slight,  stunned  me  for  the  time  being,  but  still  I was  able  to 
retain  command.  With  me  many  mounted  the  works,  but  ouly  to  fall 
or  receive  their  wounds  from  the  enemy  posted  in  the  rifle  pits  in  rear 
of  the  fort.  1 ordered  the  right  wing  of  the  regiment  to  post  itself 
behind  the  intrenchments  at  the  left  of  the  fort,  which  drove  them  back 
and  held  them  in  check. 

From  the  ramparts  I had  a full  view  of  their  works.  They  were 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


76  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai>.  XXVI. 

intrenched  in  a position  well  selected  for  defensive  purposes,  and  upon 
which  our  artillery  seemed  to  have  little  effect,  save  driving  them  into 
their  retreats,  and  in  attempting  to  dislodge  them  we  were  met  with  a 
fierce  and  determined  opposition ; but  with  equal,  if  not  superior,  de- 
termination and  courage  were  they  met  by  our  forces,  and  had  1 been 
supported,  could  have  carried  their  works.  One  man  came  out  from 
the  fort  and  surrendered  himself,  and  at  that  time  had  the  reserve  force 
come  up  could  have  held  the  fort,  for  we  virtually  had  it  in  our  pos- 

86  After  remaining  in  this  position  for  some  considerable  time  and  not 
being  supported  by  the  other  regiments  I received  orders  to  fall  back 
which  I did  in  good  order,  leaving  behind  about  40  killed  or  badly 
wounded,  many  of  whom  fell  upon  the  ramparts,  and  brought  back 

with  me  6 killed  and  about  60  wounded.  , 

I was  again  ordered  to  form  the  regiment  and  advance  the  second 
time,  supported  by  the  Seventh  Connecticut  on  the  right  and  the  One 
hundredth  Pennsylvania  on  the  left.  We  advanced  m perfect  order 
within  the  distance  of  about  600  yards,  when  we  were  ordered  to  halt, 
and  the  Connecticut  battery  on  the  right  opened  a galling  fire  with 
shot  and  shell,  which  told  with  wonderful  effect  on  the  enemy’s  works. 

At  this  time  I selected  a number  of  my  best  riflemen,  some  of  whom 
volunteered  to  advance  in  front  of  my  line  for  the  purpose  of  annoying 
the  gunners  inside  the  fort,  many  of  whom  were  picked  off  by  our  men. 
The  battery  having  expended  their  ammunition  we  were  again  ordered 
to  fall  back,  which  we  did  slowly  and  in  good  order.  Nobly  did  the 
regiment  sustain  its  former  reputation  and  character.  Many  of  our 
brave  are  fallen,  and  fallen  too  upon  the  parapets  of  the  fort;  others 
wounded  severely,  among  whom  are  Lieutenants  Kinnear  and  Kobert- 
son.  Their  example  in  encouraging  their  men  is  worthy  of  all  praise. 

I inclose  also  a report  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing* 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  y 

Lieut.  Col .,  Gomdg.  Seventy-ninth  Eegt.  (. Highlanders ) N.  Y.  Vols. 

Col.  D.  Leasure,  ^ - 

Actg.  Brig.  Gen.,  2d  Brig.,  2d  Div.,  North.  Dist.,  Dept.  South. 


No.  16. 

Report  ofMaj.  David  A.  Leckey , One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  One  hundredth  Regiment  Pa.  Vols., 

James  Island , S.  G .,  June  17,  1862. 

Colonel  : Pursuant  to  your  order  I have  the  honor  to  report  that 
on  yesterday  morning,  the  16th  instant,  a portion  of  the  One  hundredth 
Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  participated  in  the  battle  at  the 
Tower  Fort,  near  Secessionville.  It  is  proper  that  you  should  know 
the  exact  force  which  we  took  into  the  field.  The  morning  report  of 
the  15th  instant  showed  583  privates  present  for  duty.  Of  these  300 
and  some  odd,  with  the  necessary  officers,  went  on  advance  picket  duty 
at  4 o’clock  on  the  evening  of  the  15th,  which  left  me  about  280  men, 
with  the  necessary  officers,  to  go  into  the  field. 

On  arriving  at  the  picket  headquarters,  about  3 o’clock  on  the  morn- 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  77 

mg  of  the  16th,  I found  that  two  companies  of  the  picket  reserve  had 
been  sent  by  somebody  to  drag  a heavy  piece  of  ordnance  to  the  new 
battery  and  bring  a correspondingly  heavy  piece  that  was  damaged 
back  again,  and  ordering  them  to  follow  as  rapidly  as  possible,  together 
with  all  the  other  pickets  that  could  be  collected  on  the  march,  and 
proceed  with  the  column  to  the  attack  of  the  enemy’s  works  with  the 
brigade.  About  130  men  of  the  picket,  including  the  two  companies 
of  the  reserve  alluded  to  as  being  on  fatigue  duty,  joined  me  on  the 
march  or  after  we  had  got  under  fire.  Some  three-quarters  of  a mile 
before  reaching  the  point  opposite  the  fort  from  which  the  charge  was 
made  we  marched  at  a double-quick,  and  immediately  on  entering  the 
field,  about  a mile  in  front  of  the  fort,  we  were  ordered  into  line  and 
also  to  advance  to  support  the  Seventy-ninth  hiew  York,  already  mov- 
ing at  a double-quick  upon  the  enemy’s  works.  Of  couyse  to  prove  of 
any  service  as  a support  we  must  also  move  at  that  pace,  and  it  was 
extremely  difficult  to  maintain  even  the  semblance  of  a line  when  the 
men  on  the  left  were  falling  breathless  from  the  great  exertions  they 
were  obliged  to  make  to  get  forward  iuto  line. 

On  passing  the  hedge  about  300  yards  in  front  of  the  fort  our  center 
at  once  entered  the  line  of  a discharge  of  grape  a nd  canister  which  com- 
pletely cut  the  command  in  two,  the  part  on  the  right  obliquing  over 
to  the  right  to  support  the  Highlanders,  who  were  up  to  and  some 
of  them  upon  the  breastworks  of  the  fort.  The  other  part  advanced 
steadily  till,  when  within  about  30  or  40  yards  of  the  fort,  an  order 
came  from  one  of  General  Stevens’  aides  to  fall  back,  which  they  did 
in  good  order,  to  the  hedge,  and  there  halted  till  ordered  by  Captain 
Stevens  to  fall  back  still  farther  to  permit  the  artillery  to  fire  over 
our  heads.  Afterward  Lieutenant  Leasure,  acting  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  brought  me  your  cheering  order  to  advance  and  rally  on  our 
colors,  which  we  did  with  alacrity.  Here  we  soon  found  the  whole 
brigade  in  good  order,  good  spirits,  and  ready  to  advance,  and  after 
remaining  till  7.30  o’clock  Captain  Stevens  brought  up  the  order  to  fall 
back  to  the  road,  which,  as  you  are  aware,  was  done  slowly  and  in  good 
order. 

Of  the  earlier  operations  of  the  left  wing  of  my  command,  after  we 
were  separated  by  the  fearful  storm  of  grape  and  canister  that  we 
encountered  in  front  of  the  fort,  I cannot  speak  from  personal  observa- 
tion, but  as  that  part  of  the  regiment  was  on  the  extreme  left,  under 
your  own  eye,  and  where  our  chief  losses  occurred,  you  will  be  able  to 
judge  of  the  conduct  of  that  portion  of  my  command  for  yourself.  I 
may  say,  however,  that  so  far  as  I could  observe  the  conduct  of  the 
men  was  cool  and  brave,  and  the  officers  discharged  their  duties  regard- 
less of  personal  danger. 

Accompanying  this  report  I send  a report  of  our  casualties.* 

I cannot  permit  this  opportunity  to  pass  without  bearing  testimony 
to  the  great  personal  worth,  coolness,  and  bravery  of  the  lamented 
Lieutenant  Morrow,  of  Company  I,  mortally  wounded,  and  since 

dead. 

D.  A.  LECKEY, 

Major , Commanding. 


* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


78 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 
No.  17. 

Report  of  Col.  Robert  Williams,  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry , command- 
ing Third  Brigade. 

Headquarters, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C .,  July  13,  1862. 

Governor  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  the  official  copy  of 
Maj.  Edwin  Metcalf’s  report  of  the  part  taken  by  his  battalion,  Third 
Rhode  Island  Artillery,  in  the  battle  of  Secessionville,  James  Island, 
S.  0.,  June  16. 

Major  Metcalf’s  command  was  thrown  forward  into  the  position  of 
which  he  first  speaks  with  the  Third  New  Hampshire  Regiment,  and 
supported  by  the  Ninety- seventh  Pennsylvania  and  Forty-seventh 
New  York  Regiments,  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  down  the  fire  of  the 
enemy’s  main  works  while  General  Stevens  made  his  second  advance* 
This  was  so  well  done  by  the  Third  New  Hampshire  Regiment  and 
by  Major  Metcalf’s  battalion  while  with  the  New  Hampshire  Regi- 
ment, that  the  enemy  were  wholly  unable  to  man  their  guns,  and 
General  Stevens  succeeded  in  bringing  forward  his  command  to  a small 
embankment  about  400  yards  from  the  wdrk  without  the  loss,  I believe, 
of  a man  while  crossing  a large  open  space  before  reaching  the  embank- 
ment. 

I desire  to  express  to  Your  Excellency  my  extreme  admiration  of  the 
courage  and  soldierly  conduct  of  Major  Metcalf’s  battalion,  and  partic- 
ularly of  the  major  himself.  It  is  my  belief  that  no  officers  or  men 
could  have  behaved  better  under  fire  than  they  did,  and  certainly  no 
officer  could  have  led  his  command  with  more  skill  and  bravery  than 
did  Major  Metcalf. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBT.  WILLIAMS, 

Colonel  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry , Commanding  Post 

To  His  Excellency  Governor  Sprague, 

Providence , R.  I. 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  H.  Jaclcson,  Third  Hew  Hampshire  Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers, 

James  Island , S.  <7.,  June  19,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  present  the  following  report: 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant  I received  orders  to  form  the  six 
companies  of  my  regiment  remaining  in  camp  (four  companies  being 
on  picket)  and  fall  in  the  rear  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island,  which  I did 
at  3 o’clock.  After  the  line  had  been  formed  a short  time  I received 
orders  to  march  forward.  When  I came  up  with  our  pickets  I was 
joined  by  the  remaining  four  companies  of  my  regiment.  I soon  re- 
ceived orders  to  again  advance,  which  I did  until  I reached  some  wooden 
buildings  near  the  enemy’s  earthworks,  aud  as  I had  then  got  in  ad- 
vance of  those  I was  ordered  to  support  I halted  my  command  and 
waited  for  further  orders.  Orders  soon  came  for  me  to  move  on  and 
support  the  advance.  Thinking  I had  made  some  mistake,  and  that 
there  was  some  of  our  forces  in  advance,  I threw  forward  my  two  flank 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S C.  79- 

companies  as  skirmishers  under  cover  of  some  shanties  that  were  very- 
near  the  earthworks,  and  gave  them  a fine  opportunity  to  operate  against 
the  enemy.  Company  A was  commanded  by  Captain  Clark,  and  Com- 
pany E by  First  Lieutenant  Maxwell.  I then  moved  the  remainder  of 
the  regiment  to  within  40  yards  of  the  side  of  the  earthworks  and  opened 
fire,  driving  therefrom  three  guns,  which  appeared  to  me  to  be  facing 
the  southwest.  I found  there  was  no  artillery  facing  the  side  I was  on. 
and  it  would  have  been  very  easy  for  me  to  have  gone  into  the  fort,  pro- 
vided I could  have  crossed  a stream  between  me  and  the  earthworks 
about  20  yards  in  width,  with  apparently  4 or  5 feet  of  water  and  the 
mud  very  soft;  the  men  therefore  could  not  cross.  After  getting  into 
this  position  the  enemy  soon  opened  on  me  from  a battery  that  was 
about  200  yards  in  our  rear,  throwing  grape  into  the  ranks,  from  which 
we  suffered  severely.  In  a short  time  they  opened  fire  with  rifles  and 
infantry.  At  the  same  time  a battery  about  a mile  north  of  us  opened  on 
us  with  round  shot  and  shell,  one  shot  from  which  killed  a captain  and 
non-commissioned  officer,  yet  the  men  stood  all  these  fires  and  obeyed 
orders  promptly.  There  soon  appeared  on  our  left  a body  of  the  enemy, 
forming  in  three  battalions,  in  which  form  they  marched  to  re-enforce 
the  earthwork  in  front  of  us.  During  this  time  I had  informed  the  gen- 
eral  of  our  position  and  of  the  above-mentioned  re  enforcements.  At 
this  time  the  Third  Khode  Island  made  an  attack  on  the  force  in  my 
rear,  materially  assisting  me  in  my  position. 

Meanwhile  the  re-enforcements  of  the  enemy  had  come  in  range  of 
our  fire,  and  I opened  fire  on  them  with  good  effect,  but  they  were  so 
well  covered  that  they  succeeded  in  throwing  a portion  of  the  force  into 
the  fort,  and  there,  being  well  covered,  their  fire  on  us  was  very  severe, 
and  detracted  our  fire  from  the  re-enforcements  and  gave  them  an  op- 
portunity to  throw  them  all  into  the  fort.  Their  number  was  so  large 
we  could  not  cope  with  them  to  any  advantage,  and  by  this  time  the 
other  batteries,  both  in  our  rear  and  the  one  at  the  north  of  us,  opened 
a fresh  fire  on  us  with  more  effect  than  ever.  Some  of  my  men  by  this 
time  had  fired  over  50  rounds  and  many  of  the  guns  were  very  foul 
some  even  having  to  shoot  away  their  rammers,  being  unable  to  draw 
them. 

Finding  at  this  time  that  I was  far  in  advance  of  all  our  forces  and 
seeing  some  of  the  forces  retiring*  from  the  field,  and  as  it  appeared  of 
no  advantage  to  hold  my  position  any  longer,  I gave  the  order  to 
retire,  which  the  regiment  did  in  good  order,  to  the  old  buildings  from 
which  we  started.  I soon  received  orders  to  fall  back  in  the  rear  of 
some  of  our  forces,  and  in  a short  time  after  reaching  that  position 
orders  to  return  to  camp. 

All  my  command,  with  one  exception,  behaved  so  well  that  it  is  hard 
to  discriminate  in  favor  of  any  few,  but  a number  of  cases  coming 
under  my  personal  observation,  I will  take  this  opportunity  to  mention 

LUtJlii  • 

The  field  officers— Major  Bedel,  acting  lieutenant-colonel:  Captain 
Flitnpton,  acting  major— rendered  me  great  assistance,  coolly  per- 
forming all  their  duties,  and  encouraging  officers  and  men  by  their 

example.  J 

Adjutant  Libby  and  Sergeant-Major  Copp  rendered  me  great  assist- 
ance.  The  adjutant  was  several  times  much  exposed  in  carrying 
orders,  but  came  out  of  the  fight  unscarred. 

Of  the  captains  I would  particularly  mention  for  meritorious  con- 
duct Captains  Donohoe,  of  Company  C ; Wilbur,  of  Company  B,  and 
Kandlett,  of  Company  F.  His  (Captain  Donohoe’s)  company  was  sta- 


80  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

tioned  on  the  left  and  received  the  first  fire  of  the  enemy’s  re-enforce- 
ments, which  wounded  his  lieutenant  and  orderly -sergeant  and  many 
of  his  men.  Captain  Wilbur,  with  his  company,  was  next  in  line  and 
much  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire.  He  was  cool  and  continually  en-  i 
couraging  his  men.  Captain  Eandlett’s  company  was  under  a severe 
fire,  during  which  the  captain  kept  his  men  in  order  and  set  them  a 

good  example.  „ 

First  Lieutenant  [H.  C.J  Handerson,  commanding  Company  G,  was 
in  position  near  Company  C,  and  handled  his  company  finely,  with  the 
assistance  of  Second  Lieutenant  Cody,  detailed  from  Company  C to 
assist  him.  Lieutenant  Cody  was  shot  through  the  thigh  and  Lieu- 
tenant Handerson  was  shot  in  the  arm. 

Captain  Dow,  of  Company  H,  although  he  carried  his  company  on 
the  field  in  good  shape,  behaved  very  imprudently  while  there,  making 
remarks  about  the  impossibility  of  our  sustaining  our  position  and  the 
impropriety  of  our  remaining  in  that  position  ; all  this  in  the  hearing 
of  his  men  discouraging  the  men,  taking  their  attention  from  the  enemy 
in  front  of  us. 

Among  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  who  are  worthy 
of  special  mention  are  Orderly- Sergeants  [Jonah]  Libby,  of  Company 
B;  [Joseph  J.]  Donohoe,  of  Company  C;  [M.  P.]  Hawkins,  of  Company 
I,  and  [W.  H.l  Trickey,  of  Company  G,  who  came  under  my  personal 
observation;  also  Second  Sergeant  [N.  J.]  Campbell,  of  Company  K. 
Captain  Clark,  of  Company  A,  reports  that  First  Sergeant  [R.  W.J 
Houghton  deserves  mention  for  the  faithful  manner  in  which  he  per- 
formed his  duty  on  that  day,  but  my  space  will  not  allow  me  to  men- 
tion all  who  are  worthy  of  mention  for  their  good  conduct. 

We  went  into  the  fight  with  26  officers  and  597  enlisted  men,  and 
104  were  killed  and  wounded. 

Surgeon  Moulton  was  absent  from  the  regiment  from  Sunday  morn- 
ing, the  15th  instant,  until  Wednesday  morning,  the  18th,  without  my 
consent,  and  therefore  the  whole  duty  of  the  hospital  department  de- 
volved upon  Asst.  Surg.  B.  F.  Eaton,  who  faithfully  performed  his 
duties  to  the  sick  and  wounded  soldiers. 

With  great  respect,  this  report  is  respectfully  submitted. 

6 F ’ JOHN  H.  JACKSON, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Third  New  Hampshire  Vole. 

Actg.  Brig.  Gen.  Robert  Williams. 


No.  19. 

Report  of  Capt.  Alfred  F.  Sears , First  New  York  Engineers. 

Camp  of  Company  E,  New  York  Yol.  Engineers, 

Second  Hiv.,  Northern  Hist. , Department  of  the  South , 

James  Island , S.  C.,  June  17,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit,  in  accordance  with  to-day’s 
circular,  the  following  report  of  our  part  in  the  action  of  yesterday : 

By  order  of  General  Stevens  my  company  was  constituted  the  pioneer 
corps  of  the  attacking  column,  and  moved  forward  in  the  rear  of  the 
forlorn  hope,  provided  with  engineering  implements  to  remove  obstruc- 
tions, the  men  having  their  muskets  slung  upon  their  backs. 

When  the  line  charged  upon  the  enemy’s  battery  we  withdrew  to  the 
rear  of  the  right,  as  directed,  to  await  orders,  and  before  reaching  the 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


81 


fort  were  ordered  to  render  the  artillery  such  assistance  as  they  needed 
in  crossing  the  field.  Accordingly  I marched  to  the  left  and  proceeded 
to  open  a road  through  the  dike  to  the  left  and  front  of  our  field  bat- 
tery then  nearest  the  fort.  The  enemy  discovered  the  proceeding,  and, 
determined  to  prevent  the  passage,  distributed  his  favors  between  the 
battery  and  my  little  company.  The  fire  was  dreadful  for  a time,  but 
by  keeping  the  unemployed  under  cover  of  the  dike,  and  carefully 
watching  the  enemy  to  protect  those  at  work,  we  succeeded  in  filling 
both  ditches  and  making  a good  road. 

While  engaged  in  the  operation  at  this  point  the  half-completed  open- 
ing was  adopted  as  an  embrasure  for  one  field  piece,  and  the  enemy 
became  more  severe  in  his  fire,  holding  the  two  corps  in  range. 

Having  remained  with  the  artillery  to  assist  them  to  the  rear  I was 
ordered  to  clear  the  causeway  on  the  right  in  rear.  We  found  large 
timber  of  pine  and  live  oak  thrown  across  the  road  at  various  points, 
which  were  cleared  away,  and  we  returned  to  near  the  position  occu- 
pied by  the  artillery  to  await  orders,  our  labor  ending  with  widening 
the  road  by  which  the  battle-field  was  entered  and  left. 

Some  of  my  men  having  received  the  order  to  unsling  muskets  and 
fix  bayonets  just  before  the  charge,  and  supposing  they  were  to  have 
part  in  that  movement,  dropped  axes  and  shovels  and  rushed  forward 
to  charge  with  the  advancing  column.  I thus  lost  the  use  of  some  im- 
plements. 

I respectfully  submit  that  our  efficiency  would  have  been  increased 
if  we  had  entered  the  field  unencumbered  with  arms  and  accouter- 
ments— unless  indeed  we  could  have  been  provided  with  pistols  and 
sabers  for  our  defense  in  case  of  need.  The  sabers  would  form  a useful 
implement  also  in  clearing  entanglements,  abatis,  and  hedges.  As  it 
was,  we  found  it  impossible  to  move  with  the  horses  of  the  artillery 
without  great  exhaustion.  Notwithstanding  their  fatigue  the  men 
worked  with  zeal  and  energy. 

I find  it  difficult  to  name  separately  any  man  of  my  company  when 
so  many  of  them  did  their  whole  duty ; but  a striking  instance  of 
bravery  occurred  in  the  conduct  of  (Jorpl.  George  D.  Hughes,  who  on 
two  occasions,  when  the  men  for  a moment  shrank  under  the  galling 
fire  of  grape,  sprang  upon  the  dike  nearest  the  enemy  and  worked  till 
exhausted,  thus  inciting  the  men  by  his  example  and  securing  the  rapid 
completion  of  the  work  in  hand.  Corporals  Mandeville  and  Duggan 
were  also  examples  of  bravery  to  the  men.  I have  especial  pleasure  in 
mentioning  the  conduct  of  my  first  lieutenant,  Hiram  Farrand,  whose 
singular  coolness  and  efficiency  in  the  midst  of  the  worst  fire  have 
increased  my  appreciation  of  his  character  and  made  him  the  pride  of 
his  company.  I have  already  reported  1 wounded.  The  casualty 
occurred  on  the  dike  above  mentioned,  where  Cartright  was  earnestly 
at  work  in  discharge  of  his  duty.  Mr.  Farrand  and  myself  had  occa- 
sion to  notice  that  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  were  not  confined  to  the 
fort  and  that  our  standing  together  drew  their  favors. 

On  our  return  from  the  field  with  the  artillery  my  men  found  and  cap- 
tured a rebel  outlier  hidden  in  a ditch.  He  was  sent  to  the  rear  and 
given  in  proper  charge. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFKED  F.  SEAES, 

Captain  Company  E,  New  Yorlc  Volunteer  Engineers, 

Capt.  Hazard  Stevens, 

A.  A.  (r.,  Second  Biv .,  North.  Bist .,  Bept.  South , U.  S.  A. 

6 R R— VOL  XIV 


82  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

No.  20. 

Report  of  Capt.  Alfred  P.  Rockwell , First  Connecticut  Battery. 

James  Island,  June  17,  1862. 

Sro:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  command- 
ing general,  the  part  taken  by  the  First  Light  Battery,  Connecticut  Vol- 
unteers, in  the  attack  yesterday  upon  the  enemy  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.  , 

In  compliance  with  orders  received  from  Brigadier-General  Stevens, 
commanding  Second  Division,  the  two  sections  of  the  First  Connecticut 
Battery  were  ready  to  move  at  2.30  o’clock  in  the  morning.  The  section 
of  12-pounder  howitzers,  under  command  of  Lieut.  S.  E.  Porter,  took  its 
place  in  the  First  Brigade  immediately  in  rear  of  the  Seventh  Con- 
necticut Regiment;  the  remaining  section,  under  command  of  Lieut. 
William  T.  Seward,  immediately  in  rear  of  the  First  Brigade,  and  all 
moved  forward  with  the  column.  On  reaching  the  causeway  the  rifled 
section  was  halted  by  order  to  allow  the  Second  Brigade  to  pass  by.  It 
then  moved  forward  in  the  rear  of  this  brigade.  The  howitzer  section 
on  reaching  the  field  moved  obliquely  across  the  field  in  rear  of  the 
two  advancing  regiments  as  rapidly  as  the  extremely  uneven  surface  of 
the  ground  would  admit,  and  took  up  a position  on  the  left  of  the  Eighth 
Michigan  Regiment  at  a point  about  500  yards  from  the  Tower,  and 
opened  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  earthwork  very  soon  after  the  enemy  had 
commenced  firing.  In  the  mean  time  the  rifled  section  had  arrived  upon 
the  field  and  was  advancing  to  the  support  of  the  pieces  already  in  posi- 
tion, when  orders  were  received  to  send  forward  one  piece  only,  and 
that  I should  plant  the  other  piece  in  the  road  to  protect  the  left  flank. 

I accordingly  sent  the  one  piece,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Seward, 
to  support  Lieutenant  Porter.  He  joined  him,  and  the  three  pieces  kept 
up  a constant  fire  until  after  the  infantry  had  fallen  back  to.  the  hedge. 
The  pieces  were  then  withdrawn  in  good  order  to  the  road.  Here  the 
two  sections  took  position  and  opened  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  works  at  a 
distance  of  about  1,500  yards,  firing  constantly  and  regularly  until  after 
the  enemy’s  guns  had  ceased  to  answer. 

When  the  infantry  were  again  moved  forward  on  our  right  the  how- 
itzer section,  in  obedience  to  orders,  advanced  to  support  them,  with  in- 
structions to  fire  canister.  They  took  up  a position  and  maintained  it 
under  a heavy  fire  of  grape,  canister,  and  solid  shot  from  the  enemy’s 
earthworks,  at  a distance  of  from  400  to  500  yards,  until  the  retreat  was 
ordered.  The  rifled  section  was  soon  ordered  up  to  support  the  how- 
itzers, and  accordingly  moved  rapidly  forward. 

Finding  upon  examination  that  I had  fired  away  nearly  all  my  ammu- 
nition I sent  Lieutenant  Seward  back  to  camp  for  a fresh  supply,  which 
arrived  on  the  ground  just  after  the  retreat  to  the  wood  had  been 
effected. 

The  four  pieces  continued  firing  from  the  advanced  positions  which 
they  held  until  the  retreat  was  ordered.  It  was  here  that  I had  4 horses 
killed.  The  retreat  was  effected  in  good  order,  one  piece  at  a time,  so 
as  not  to  give  the  enemy  a point  to  concentrate  his  fire,  to  the  corn  field 
in  the  rear  of  the  wood,  where  the  battery  was  ready  to  move  in  any 
direction  ordered. 

While  preparation  was  being  made  to  plant  the  pieces  on  the  line  of 
the  road  a further  retreat  was  ordered,  and  the  battery  moved  off  and 
took  up  a position  near  the  causeway,  supported  by  cavalry,  to  cover  the 
retreat  should  the  enemy  advauce.  Subsequently  we  moved  back  to 
camp,  leaving  one  section  at  the  headquarters  of  the  reserve  pickets. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


83 


It  remained  there  all  day  until  10  o’clock  at  night,  when  in  compliance 
with  orders  it  moved  back  to  camp. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  notice  the  cool  courage  and  good  judgment 
of  Lieutenant  Porter  and  Lieutenant  Seward,  the  former  of  whom  had 
command  during  the  action  of  the  howitzers,  and  was  more  particularly 
exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire;  and  I would  also  call  attention  to  the  ad- 
mirable behavior  and  unflinching  courage  shown  by  the  non-commis- 
sioned officers  and  privates  of  my  command  as  well  as  to  their  ready 
and  prompt  obedience  of  orders. 

After  leaving  the  field  I found  that  there  were  still  remaining  31 
rounds  to  each  one  of  the  four  pieces,  of  which,  however,  ten  only  were 
shell  and  spherical  case,  the  balance  being  canister.  During  the  action., 
therefore,  more  than  500  rounds,  almost  entirely  of  shell  and  spherical 
case  shot,  were  fired.  I have  to  add  that  I suffered  no  loss  in  killed, 
wounded,  or  missing. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  P.  ROCKWELL, 

Captain , Commanding  First  Light  Battery , Connecticut  Vols. 

Capt.  Hazard  Stevens, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  2 d Biv .,  North.  Bist .,  Bept.  of  the  South. 

P.  S. — Having  no  wounded  of  the  battery  to  attend  to,  Assistant  Sur- 
geon Hurlbut  rendered  most  efficient  service  in  bringing  in  the  wounded 
from  the  field  and  assisting  in  the  care  of  the  wounded  of  other  regi- 
ments. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Maj.  Edwin  Metcalf  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery. 

James  Island,  S.  C.,  June  18,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with 
the  instructions  received  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  instant  from  the 
acting  brigadier-general  commanding  the  First  Division,  headquarters 
brigade,  my  battalion  was  held  in  readiness  to  move  at  3 o’clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  16th.  Company  I,  Captain  Strahan,  being  detailed  for 
duty  at  the  battery  in  advance  of  the  First  Brigade,  and  a detachment 
under  Lieutenant  Metcalf,  of  Company  K,  remaining  in  charge  of  the 
battery  at  this  point,  my  command  comprised  but  five  companies — B, 
E,  F,  H,  and  K — numbering  360  enlisted  men,  with  2 field,  3 staff,  and 
14  company  officers. 

Leading  the  brigade,  three  companies — B,  F,  and  K — of  my  battalion 
were  deployed  as  skirmishers,  under  the  direction  of  Major  Sisson,  at 
the  entrance  of  the  wood  covering  the  approach  to  the  rebel  battery. 
The  other  companies  marched  steadily  to  the  front,  halting  in  a posi- 
tion to  support  the  troops  of  the  First  Brigade,  who  had  fallen  back, 
and  being  joined  at  this  point  by  the  parties  thrown  out  as  skirmishers. 
After  again  advancing  in  line,  under  orders  to  support  the  Ninety- 
seventh  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  the  battalion  for  this  purpose  crossed 
the  marshy  ground  flanking  the  enemy’s  battery.  We  had  hardly 
formed  in  line  of  battle  and  commenced  firing  when  an  order  came  to 
capture  a field  battery  in  their  rear,  which  was  firing  with  a fatal  effect 
on  the  Third  New  Hampshire  Regiment.  The  battalion  was  immediately 


84  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

ordered  to  about-face,  and  advanced  upon  tlie  thicket  behind  which 
the  enemy’s  field  guns  were  concealed.  In  effecting  this  object  we 
encountered  a galling  fire  from  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  in  the  thicket 
at  our  front  and  left,  and  many  were  wounded  in  our  ranks ; but  all 
pressed  forward,  the  men  cheering  and  firing  with  spirit.  I urged  them 
to  the  cover  of  the  wood  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  with  great  diffi- 
culty they  forced  their  way  in,  encountering  small  parties  of  rebels, 
many  of  whom  were  shot  and  bayoneted,  1 prisoner  being  secured. 
A few  of  my  men  succeeded  in  reaching  the  inner  edge  of  the  thicket 
and  gaining  sight  of  the  field  guns,  3 in  number,  without  horses,  and 
supported  apparently  by  only  two  or  three  companies  of  infantry.  I 
•felt  confident  of  securing  them,  but  the  Third  New  Hampshire  Begi- 
ment  having  fallen  back,  I deemed  it  my  duty  to  order  my  men  to 
retire,  which  they  did  in  good  order,  but  slowly  and  reluctantly,  bring- 
ing off  such  of  our  dead  and  wounded  as  could  be  seen  on  our  way. 

Feeling  my  utter  want  of  experience,  I have  great  hesitation  in  speak- 
ing of  the  conduct  of  those  under  my  command,  some  of  whom  were, 
not  like  myself,  for  the  first  time  under  fire.  I keenly  appreciate  the 
honor  of  leading  such  men  into  battle,  and  cannot  too  highly  praise 
their  coolness,  steadiness,  and  courage.  If  any  faltered,  I was  spared 
the  shame  of  seeing  it. 

Where  all  did  their  duty  so  well  I mention  a few  whose  bearing 
was  conspicuous,  without  detracting  from  the  merits  of  others:  Maj. 
H.  T.  Sisson  deserves  much  credit  for  his  successful  management 
in  the  skirmishes  during  the  advance  and  for  his  constant  efforts  to 
aid  me  in  carrying  out  the  various  orders  received  in  the  course  of  the 
morning. 

I take  great  pleasure  in  speaking  of  the  adjutant  of  the  battalion, 
First  Lieut.  J.  Lanahan,  of  Company  I,  always  prompt  <and  cool,  and 
sustaining  me  in  every  difficulty  by  his  good  judgment  and  long  expe- 
rience as  a soldier.  First  Lieut.  A.  E.  Greene,  commanding  Company  B, 
was  especially  energetic  and  active.  Second  Lieut.  E.  S.  Bartholomew, 
of  Company  E,  nobly  proved  himself  deserving  the  commission  he  had 
received  since  our  departure  from  Hilton  Head,  falling  mortally  wounded 
while  cheering  on  his  men  into  the  thicket  from  which  the  enemy  so 
severely  annoyed  us.  Capt.  H.  Bogers,  jr.,  and  First  Lieut.  C.  B.  Bray- 
ton,  of  Company  H,  were  untiring  in  their  exertions  and  zealously  sup- 
ported me.  First  Lieut.  A.  W.  Colwell,  of  Company  F,  and  Second 
Lieut.  D.  B.  Churchill,  of  Company  K,  particularly  attracted  my  notice 
by  their  coolness  and  energy. 

I am  pleased  to  name  First  Sergt.  G.  W.  Greene  and  Sergt.  J.  B. 
Batchelder,  of  Company  B ; First  Sergt.  O.  A.  Thompson,  of  Company 
E,  and  First  Sergt.  W.  Wheeler,  jr.,  of  Company  K,  as  distinguished 
for  gallant  conduct.  I shall  feel  justified  in  recommending  them  to  the 
Governor  of  Bhode  Island  for  promotion. 

It  is  with  a bitter  feeling  of  regret,  though  with  no  sense  of  shame, 
that  I have  to  report  the  serious  loss  sustained  by  my  battalion  : One 
sergeant  and  6 privates  killed ; 2 officers,  4 corporals,  and  24  privates 
wounded ; 1 corporal  and  7 privates  missing.  Total,  45. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

EDWIN  METCALF, 

Mayor,  Comdg.  Second  Battalion , Third  R.  I.  Artillery. 

Lieut.  Channing  Clapp, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  85 

No.  22. 

Report  of  Capt.  Lucius  M.  Sargent , Jr.,  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry. 

James  Island,  S.  C.,  June  17,  1862. 

At  10  o’clock  p.  m.,  June  15,  1862,  ordered  by  General  Stevens  to 
have  my  command  ready  to  march  at  1 o’clock  a.  m.  with  60  rounds 
cartridges  and  twenty-four  hours’  rations.  Heady  at  1 o’clock,  with  1 
lieutenant  and  27  men,  including  non-commissioned  officers  and  1 
bugler.  Immediately  ordered  by  Captain  Stevens,  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  to  get  my  men  into  line,  leave  them  in  camp,  and  report  myself, 
to  the  general.  Did  so.  Ordered  by  the  general  to  detail  4 orderlies 
for  Colonel  Fenton,  of  the  Michigan  Eighth,  to  return  to  camp,  to  follow 
the  main  body  at  dawn  and  then  act  according  to  circumstances.  Let 
the  men  sleep  until  nearly  dawn,  and  then  took  them  across  the  cause- 
way, and  placed  them  in  a tolerably  safe  position  behind  a wooded  ridge 
by  the  road-side.  Told  orderlies  as  they  passed  to  report  my  position 
to  the  general.  Kemained  there  about  two  hours.  The  rebels  then  got 
the  range  of  the  causeway.  I led  the  men  across  it  again  at  a walk 
and  drew  up  behind  the  woods.  Immediately  I received  orders  from 
General  Stevens  to  resume,  as  I understood,  my  former  position  and 
await  orders.  Did  so,  crossing  the  causeway  at  a trot.  Leaving  the 
troop  with  the  lieutenant,  rode  forward  to  the  general,  who  ordered  me 
to  bring  my  men  on  at  once  and  form  them  in  the  corn  field  in  the  most 
protected  situation  and  to  charge  if  the  retreat  became  disordered  by 
the  enemy’s  advance.  After  placing  the  men  in  the  corn  field,  ordered 
by  the  general  to  reconnoiter  toward  the  left  with  6 men.  Did  so 
pretty  thoroughly,  and  discovered  no  signs  of  the  enemy’s  advance. 
Ordered  to  return  and  follow  up  the  retreat  by  Captain  Stevens,  assist- 
ant adjutant- general.  Did  so  at  a walk.  Presently  informed  by  Cap- 
tain Stevens  that  the  rebel  sharpshooters  were  close  upon  us  and 
advised  to  move  more  rapidly.  Closed  up  with  the  column  at  a trot. 
Ordered  by  the  general  to  post  vedettes  and  reconnoiter  generally  till 
fresh  infantry  pickets  should  arrive.  We  were  utterly  unable  to  dis- 
cover any  trace  of  the  enemy’s  advance.  Soon  received  orders  from 
Captain  Stevens  to  withdraw  the  vedettes.  Did  so,  the  infantry  pickets 
being  posted. 

* During  the  action  2 of  my  horses  were  killed — 1 being  shot  in  the 
head,  the  other  in  the  body;  and  2 of  my  men  were  wounded  severely — 
1 in  the  hand,  groin,  and  thigh,  the  other  in  the  leg.  Another,  whose 
horse’s  head  was  blown  to  pieces,  was  stunned  and  considerably  bruised 
by  his  fall.  The  men’s  conduct  excellent. 

LUCIUS  M.  SAKGENT,  Jr., 
Captain , Company  H , First  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Cavalry. 


No.  23. 

Reports  of  Map  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton , G.  S.  Army , commanding  De- 
partment of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862. 
The  loss  of  the  enemy  this  morning  in  killed  left  on  the  field  is  not 
less  than  150.  We  have  taken  wounded  prisoners  not  less  than  65; 


86 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.j  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


prisoners  not  wounded,  42.  The  number  of  dead  is  probably  greater. 
They  removed  some  dead  and  wounded.  Our  killed  about  20  ; wounded, 


1,erhaps  30-  J.  O.  PEMBERTON, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

George  W.  Randolph,  Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqes.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  June  — , 1862. 

General  : I trust  it  will  not  be  considered  irrelevant,  in  officially 
reporting  the  action  of  June  16  between  our  forces  and  those  of  the 
United  States  on  James  Island,  to  refer  briefly  to  the  connection  which 
this  affair  had  with  certain  alterations  I had  adopted  in  the  plan  of 
defense  established  prior  to  my  assignment  to  the  command  of  this 
department. 

After  a thorough  personal  examination  of  Cole’s  Island,  its  defenses 
and  approaches,  I was  convinced  that,  however  desirable  in  many 
respects  it  might  be  to  continue  its  occupation,  there  were  disadvan- 
tages not  to  be  overcome  with  the  means  at  my  disposal.  I deemed  it 
therefore  essential  to  the  safety  of  Charleston  that  the  batteries  on 
Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands  should  be  transferred  to  a more  defensible 
position  on  the  James  Island  side  of  the  Stono  River.  This  change 
would  draw  in  our  lines  to  the  best  supporting  distance,  and  compel  a 
land  attack  upon  our  intrenched  position  across  James  Island,  flanked 
on  the  right  by  the  proposed  fort  on  the  Stono  and  on  the  lett  by  the 
advanced  work  at  Secession ville.  This  design  was  carried  into  execu- 
tion. A strong  and  commanding  work  was  erected  on  the  Stono,  com- 
pletely controlling  that  river  in  the  direction  of  the  inlet  of  the  same 
name,  as  well  as  the  approach  through  North  Edisto  Inlet  and  the 
mouth  of  Wappoo  Cut.  The  intrenched  lines  to  the  east  of  James 
Island  Creek  were  also  greatly  strengthened  by  a system  of  interior 
redoubts  and  redans.  Early  in  May  the  guns  were  removed  from 
Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands.  On  the  13th  of  the  same  month  the  abduc- 
tion of  the  steamer  Planter  by  her  negro  crew  gave  the  enemy  infor- 
mation of  the  abandonment  of  Cole’s  Island.  The  services  of  skillful 
pilots  among  these  negroes  were  immediately  availed  of,  and  the  en-  ^ 
emy’s  gunboats  entered  the  river  about  the  17th.  Under  cover  of  their  ' 
fire  he  commenced  landing  his  troops  on  James  Island  on  June  2.  His 
force  was  gradually  increased  until  it  was  believed  to  have  amounted 
to  from  10,000  to  12,Q00  of  all  arms.  Between  June  2 and  15  several 
skirmishes  occurred,  the  results  of  which  were  duly  reported  by  the 
immediate  commander  and  the  reports  forwarded  to  the  War  Depart- 
ment. The  enemy  kept  up  at  intervals  a heavy  fire  from  his  gunboats, 
varying  from  five  to  eight  in  number,  against  Secessionville,  from  posi- 
tions on  the  Stono  aud  a branch  of  Folly  River,  as  also  from  a land 
battery,  established  under  cover  of  his  boats,  on  a point  distant  about 
a mile  from  our  own  battery  at  Secessionville.  No  injury  was,  how- 
ever, done  to  our  works;  1 man  was  killed  in  his  tent  and  several 
wounded.  A few  shell  were  thrown  in  the  direction  of  the  new  fort 
on  the  Stono  at  long  range,  but  no  attempt  was  made  to  engage  the 
fort  at  a less  distance  than  2J  miles. 

About  4 a.  m.  on  the  16th  the  enemy  drove  in  or  captured  our 
pickets  some  800  yards  in  front  of  the  battery  at  Secessionville,  and 
advancing  rapidly  upon  this  work  in  line  of  battle  arrived  within  a 
few  hundred  yards  of  it  before  our  guns  could  open  upon  him. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


87 


To  the  culpable  negligence  of  the  pickets  is  to  be  attributed  the  near 
approach  of  the  enemy  before  he  was  discovered.  The  men,  however, 
were  at  their  guns,  which  were  at  once  well  and  rapidly  served.  Lieu- 
tenant Colonels  Gaillard’s  and  Smith’s  battalions  (Charleston  and  Pee 
Dee)  were  moved  promptly  into  position,  under  the  orders  of  Col.  T. 
G.  Lamar,  the  heroic  commander  of  the  post.  The  enemy  was  driven 
back  in  confusion  and  with  great  loss.  A second  attempt  after  he  had 
received  re-enforcements  met  with  a similar  result,  and  a third  was 
equally  unsuccessful.  A flank  movement  was  then  attempted  against 
the  right  of  the  battery,  but  was  repulsed  by  the  Charleston  Bat- 
talion, aided  by  the  Louisiana  Battalion,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
McEnery,  which  had  been  promptly  dispatched  by  Col.  Johnson  Ha- 
good,  the  immediate  commander,  to  the  support  of  Secessionville  on 
the  first  intimation  of  the  enemy’s  advance  upon  that  position,  and 
which  arrived  in  time  to  participate  fully  in  the  dangers  and  glory  of 
this  admirable  repulse. 

On  the  evening  of  the  15th  I directed  Brigadier-General  Evans  to  send 
sufficient  re-enforcements  to  Secessionville  to  relieve  the  Louisiana  [Bat- 
talion] of  the  arduous  duties  in  which  it  had  been  engaged  for  a number 
of  days  previous.  A detachment  of  4 officers  (Capt.  J.  Jamison  com- 
manding) and  100  men  of  Colonel  Goodlett’s  Twenty-second  South  Caro- 
linaVolunteers  came  up  just  in  time  to  meet  the  first  onset  of  the  enemy, 
performing  most  excellent  service  and  sustaining  a loss  of  10  killed 
and  7 wounded.  For  further  details  of  the  action  immediately  in  front 
of  Secessionville  1 respectfully  refer  to  the  reports  herewith,  of  Brig- 
adier-General Evans,  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar,  and  his  subordinate  command- 
ers; and  for  those  details  resulting  from  the  enemy’s  flank  movement  upon 
Secessionville  to  Brigadier-General  Evans’  report,  to  that  of  Col.  John- 
son Hagood,  First  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  who  had  been  assigned 
to  the  command  of  an  advanced  corps,  composed  of  his  own  regiment, 
the  Twenty -fourth  South  Carolina,  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens,  the  Eutaw  Bat- 
talion, Lieutenant-Colonel  Simonton,  and  Jhe  Louisiana  Battalion,  Lieu- 
tenant Colonel  McEnery — the  latter,  as  before  stated,  was  early  dis- 
patched to  the  support’  of  Secessionville,  the  remaining  corps  greatly 
aiding  in  the  first  and  complete  defeat  of  the  enemy.  The  report  of 
each  of  the  above-named  subordinate  commanders  is  respectfully  for- 
warded herewith. 

Not  having  been  an  eye-witness  of  this  well-fought  combat,  it  is  im- 
possible for  me  perhaps  to  commend  where  commendation  is  most  due. 
Many  of  the  best  and  bravest  have  fallen,  among  them  Capt.  S.  J.  Reed, 
Louisiana  Regiment ; Capt.  Henry  King,  Charleston  Battalion  ; First 
Lieut.  John  Edwards,  of  the  same  command,  and  Second  Lieut.  R.  W. 
Greer,  Eutaw  Battalion,  and  First  Sergt.  James  M.  Baggott,  who  fell 
while  serving  his  piece  as  No.  1,  and  was  immediately  succeeded  by  his 
company  commander,  the  gallant  and  lamented  Reed. 

My  estimation  of  the  conduct  of  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar  is  fully  expressed 
in  my  General  Orders,  No.  30,  of  June  17.  His  undaunted  courage  was 
an  example  well  followed  by  those  who  surrounded  him.  Lieutenant- 
Colonels  P.  C.  Gaillard,  A.  D.  Smith,  and  J.  McEnery,  Maj.  D.  Ramsay, 
Capt.  J.  Jamison,  were  each  in  command  of  their  respective  corps  dur- 
ing the  whole  or  a part  of  the  action,  and  are  highly  commended  in  the 
report  of  Colonel  Lamar.  I refer  to  his  and  to  the  reports  of  the  offi- 
cers above  named  for  records  of  further  instances  of  individual  gal- 
lantry. In  like  manner  I refer  to  the  reports  of  Brigadier-General 
Evans,  to  Colonel  Hagood,  and  to  his  subordinate  commanders,  Col.  C. 
H.  Stevens  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Simonton  and  to  Colonel  Goodlett, 


88 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


who,  all  deserving  high  praise  themselves,  have  doubtless  bestowed  it 
where  it  is  best  deserved. 

I inclose  herewith  a list  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  amounting 
in  the  aggregate  to  204*  Many  of  those  reported  as  wounded  were  but 
slightly  so.  1 also  inclose  a list  of  those  most  highly  commended  by 
commanders. 

From  the  best  information  I have  received  I estimate  the  loss  of  the 
enemy  to  have  been  between  700  and  800. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  O.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


[In  closure.] 

In  the  report  of  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans. 

Col.  T.  G.  Lamar,  Lamar’s  regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery,  for 
gallant  and  meritorious  conduct.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard,  Charles- 
ton Battalion  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (mentioned  particularly  in  re- 
port of  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar),  gallant  conduct.  Lieut.  Col.  A.  D.  Smith, 
Smith’s  battalion  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (mentioned  particularly 
in  report  of  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar),  gallant  conduct.  Capt.  Samuel  J.  Reed, 
Company  B,  Lamar’s  regiment  artillery,  fell  gallantly  fighting  one  of 
his  guns  (again  mentioned  in  report  of  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar). 

Personal  staff. — First  Lieut.  W.  II.  Rogers,  special  aide-de-camp, 
rendered  valuable  service  in  transmitting  orders  under  fire.  Capts. 
R.  E.  Elliott,  Samuel  J.  Corrie,  and  H.  W.  Carr,  volunteer  aides-de-camp, 
rendered  valuable  services  in  transmitting  orders  under  fire.  Assist. 
Surg.  James  Evans  rendered  material  aid  to  the  wounded. 

In  the  report  of  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar. 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  D.  Smith,  Smith’s  battalion  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  (mentioned  in  report  of  Brig. 
Gen.  N.  G.  Evans).  Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard,  Charleston  Battalion, 
gallant  conduct  (mentioned  in  report  of  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans),  sta- 
tioned in  the  center  and  on  the  right  of  the  battery  at  Secessionville 
and  subsequently  in  command  of  the  battery.  Maj.  David  Ramsay, 
Charleston  Battalion,  meritorious  conduct,  on  the  right  of  the  battery 
at  Secessionville.  Major  Hudson,  Smith’s  battalion,  meritorious  con- 
duct, on  the  left  of  the  battery  at  Secessionville.  Capt.  Samuel  J. 
Reed,  Company  B,  Lamar’s  regiment  artillery,  fell  fighting  one  of  his 
guns  in  the  battery  at  Secessionville  (mentioned  in  Brigadier-General 
Evans’  report).  Capt.  F.  T.  Miles,  Calhoun  Guard,  Charleston  Battal- 
ion, gallant  conduct,  stationed  in  battery  at  Secessionville.  Capt.  G. 
D.  Keitt,  Lamar’s  regiment  artillery,  great  bravery.  Lieutenants  Bar- 
ton, Oliver,  and  Moseley,  same  regiment,  great  bravery.  Senior  First 
Lieut.  J.  B.  Humbert,  Company  I,  Lamar’s  regiment  artillery,  spe- 
cially mentioned  for  great  bravery  and  valuable  services,  stationed  in 
battery  at  Secessionville,  8-inch*  columbiad.  Lieutenants  Lancaster 
and  Johnson,  Company  B,  Lamar’s  regiment,  and  Lieutenant  Bellinger, 
of  same  company,  gallant  conduct,  in  battery  at  Secessionville.  Lieut. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


89 


J.  B.  Hitching,  Company  H,  Lamar’s  regiment,  gallant  conduct, 
Reed’s  battery,  Clarke’s  house.  Adjt.  E.  J.  Frederick,  Lamar’s  regi- 
ment, gallant  conduct,  battery  at  Secessionville  and  Feed’s  battery 
at  Clarke’s  house.  Capt.  W.  W.  McCreery,  Ordnance  Department, 
C.  S.  Army,  rendered  valuable  service  at  the  8-inch  columbiad  in  the 
battery  at  Secessionville.  Captain  Bonneau,  Lieutenants  Matthews 
and  Hall,  C.  S.  Navy,  rendered  valuable  service  at  the  8-inch  columbiad 
in  the  battery  at  Secessionville. 

In  the  report  of  Col.  S.  D.  Goodlett , Twenty-second  Regiment  South  Carolina 

Volunteers. 

Capt.  Joshua  Jamison,  Lieuts.  L.  S.  Hill,  H.  H.  Sally,  and  J.  B. 
Cobb,  valuable  service  and  gallant  conduct  in  sustaining  the  battery  at 
Clarke’s  house. 

In  the  report  of  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens , Twenty-fourth  Regiment  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Capers,  Twenty -fourth  Regiment  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  gallant  conduct  in  defending  advanced  battery  of  24-pounder 
guns.  Captain  Tompkins,  Company  K,  and  Lieutenant  Beckham,  Com- 
pany G,  gallant  conduct  in  holding  advanced  position  until  ordered  to 
withdraw. 

In  the  report  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  I).  Smith , Smith’s  battalion  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers. 

Lieutenant  Campbell,  Company  F,  gallant  conduct  in  personally  re- 
pulsing an  assaulting  party  on  the  left  of  the  battery  at  Secessionville. 
Capt.  W.  H.  Ryan,  valuable  service  in  battery  at  Secessionville.  Lieut. 
George  Brown,  Company  F,  and  Lieut.  Alexander  A.  Allemong,  Irish 
Volunteers,  valuable  service  in  carrying  ammunition  through  lire  of 
artillery  and  infantry.  Sergeant  Hendricks,  valuable  service  in  carry- 
ing ammunition  under  heavy  fire  in  battery  at  Secessionville.  Private 
Joseph  Tennent,  of  the  Calhoun  Guard,  gallant  conduct  on  the  left  of 
the  battery  at  Secessionville. 

In  report  of  Lieut.  Col.  C.  R.  Simonton , Eutaw  Battalion. 

Lieutenant  Blum,  Washington  Light  Infantry,  Company  B,  gallant 
conduct ; advanced  position  on  right  flank.  Privates  J.  Campbell  Alar- 
tin  and  T.  Grange  Simons,  jr.,  gallant  conduct ; both  severely  wounded, 
but  still  fought  until  exhausted  and  carried  off  (mentioned  in  report  of 
Lieutenant  Blum). 

In  the  report  of  Lieut.  R.  A.  Blum , commanding  detachment  of  Eutaw 

Battalion. 

Private  J.  Campbell  Martin  and  T.  Grange  Simons,  jr.,  gallant  con- 
duct (mentioned  in  report  of  Colonel  Simonton). 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  30.  f Charleston , S.  G\,  June  17,  1862. 

The  major-general  commanding  the  department  tenders  his  heartfelt 


90 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

thanks  to  every  officer  and  soldier  of  this  command  whose  happy  for- 
tune it  was  to  participate  in  the  glorious  work  of  Monday,  the  16th 

instant.  , , _ , 

To  the  gallant  and  indefatigable  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar  and  to  the  brave 
men  who  so  steadfastly  supported  him  special  thanks  are  due,  and  to 
the  noble  dead  a debt  of  deep  and  lasting  gratitude. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

J.  Ka  WAI)DYj 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  24. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  in  the  engagement  at  Seces- 
sionville,  James  Island , 8.  (7.,  June  16,  1862. 

[Compiled  from  the  reports.] 


Command. 


47th  Georgia 

51st  Georgia 

4th  Louisiana  Battalion 
1st  South  Carolina  Ar- 
tillery. * 

1st  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers. 

1st  South  Carolina  Bat- 
talion.! 


9th  South  Carolina  Bat 
talion.J 

22d  South  Carolina 

24th  South  Carolina 
25th  South  Carolina .... 


Killed. 


Total. 


Wounded. 


14 


47 


12 


132 


Captured 
or  missing. 


55 


42 


204 


Remarks. 


Lieut.  B.  A.  Graham  killed. 
(No  report.) 

Captain  Walker  wounded. 
Capt.  Samuel  J.  Reed  killed. 


Capt.  Henry  C.  King  and  Lieut. 
J ohu  J.  Edwards  killed ; 
Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard  aDd 
Capts.  Julius  A.  Blake,  F.  T. 
Miles,  and  R.  P.  Smith,  and 
Lieuts.  J.  W.  Axson,  George 
Brown,  John  Burke,  and  F. 
R.  Lynch  wounded. 

Lieut.  J.  G.  Beaty  wounded. 


Lieut.  F.W.Andrewswonnded. 
Lieut.  Richard  W.  Greer  killed, 
and  Lieut.  Samuel  J.  Burger 
wounded. 


* Afterward  known  as  2d  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
t Called  the  Charleston  Battalion. 

X Smith’s  Pee  Dee  Battalion. 


No.  25. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Evans , C.  8.  Army,  commanding  Second 
Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Run , June  19,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
action  of  the  troops  under  my  command  on  James  Island  on  the  16th 
instant : 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


91 


On  th6  afternoon  of  the  15th  instant  I was  informed  by  Col.  T.  G. 
Lamar,  First  Artillery,  that  from  his  observation  of  the  movements 
of  the  enemy  he  was  convinced  that  Secessionville  would  doubtless 
be  attacked  either  on  that  night  or  on  the  morning  of  the  16th.  I 
directed  him,  to  hold  his  position ; that  he  would  be  re-enforced  if  neces- 
sary. At  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant  I received  a 
note  from  him  informing  me  that  the  enemy  were  advancing.  I re- 
paired to  Clarke’s  house  as  soon  as  possible,  where  I arrived  at  4.15 
a.  m.,  when  I found  Col.  Johnson  Hagood,  First  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, had,  in  his  untiring  vigilance,  ordered  three  regiments  to  be  in 
readiness  for  an  immediate  attack,  and  had  already  sent  a detachment 
of  Colonel  Goodlett’s  regiment  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Lamar,  watch- 
ing closely  the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  front  of  Secessionville.  I 
determined  to  re-enforce  the  place  to  2,000  strong,  and  immediately 
ordered  the  Fourth  Louisiana  Battalion  and  Colonel  Goodlett’s  regi- 
ment to  repair  at  double-quick  and  report  to  Colonel  Lamar  at  Seces- 
sionville. Lieutenant-Colonel  McEnery  with  his  battalion  arrived  just 
in  time  to  receive  the  second  assault  of  the  enemy  and  to  materially 
aid  in  repulsing  him.  At  this  time  I received  a message  from  Colonel 
Hagood  that  the  enemy  were  approaching  on  our  right,  and  asking  re- 
enforcements.  I directed  him  to  attack  the  enemy,  and  immediately 
ordered  the  Fifty-first  Georgia  and  Colonel  Williams’  regiment  to  re- 
pair to  his  assistance. 

The  engagment  now  became  general  on  both  wings.  Col.  C.  H. 
Stevens,  who  was  with  Colonel  Hagood,  seeing  that  the  24-pounder 
battery  near  Clarke’s  house  was  not  being  fired,  directed  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Capers,  of  his  regiment,  to  take  command  of  his  battery  and 
to  fire  on  the  enemy,  with  which,  though  one  piece  was  dismounted,  he 
did  gallant  and  effective  service,  firing  constantly  into  the  flank  of  the 
enemy.  On  the  third  assault  of  the  enemy  Lieutenant- Colonel  Capers 
was  very  successful  with  his  piece,  piercing  the  columns  of  the  enemy 
eleven  times. 

For  the  details  of  the  gallant  defense  of  the  works  at  Secessionville 
I would  respectfully  refer  the  major-general  commanding  to  the  official 
reports  of  the  immediate  commanders,  herewith  submitted.  Three 
times  did  that  heroic  band  repulse  (often  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet) 
a force  thrice  their  strength,  under  the  fire  of  their  gunboats  and  four 
stationary  or  land  batteries. 

About  10  o’clock  the  enemy  retreated  in  great  confusion,  leaving 
their  dead  and  wounded  on  the  field,  a number  lying  in  our  trenches. 
The  loss  of  the  enemy  I have  been  unable  to  ascertain,  but  from  what 
I saw  was  at  least  400  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners.  The  dead  of 
the  enemy  immediately  in  front  of  the  Secessionville  works  numbered 
168,  while  42  wounded  had  been  brought  within  the  work.  The  dead 
I directed  to  be  immediately  buried  and  the  wounded  to  be  removed  to 
the  hospital.  A considerable  number  of  arms  and  accouterments  were 
captured,  a partial  return  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  paper  marked 
G.*  A full  report  of  these  arms  I directed  Captain  McCreery,  ordnance 
officer,  to  make  to  the  chief  of  ordnance  in  Charleston. 

At  12  m.  I received  a note  from  the  major-general  commanding  that 
he  was  at  Brigadier-General  Gist’s  headquarters,  asking  if  I wished 
re-enforcements $ that  they  were  ready.  I replied  through  my  aide-de- 
camp  that  I thought  the  enemy  was  leaving  his  position,  as  he  was 
burning  the  houses  he  had  first  occupied.  I then  joined  the  major- 


See  Keport  No.  34,  p.  104. 


92  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

general  commanding  and  accompanied  him  to  Secession ville  to  insprct 
the  works,  as  well  as  to  ascertain  our  loss  and  the  situation  and  condi- 
tion of  our  troops.  After  giving  instructions  relative  to  the  wounded 
and  dead,  also  as  to  the  arms  captured,  I returned  to  my  headquarters, 
and  in  accordance  with  instructions  from  the  major-general  command- 
ing ordered  Col.  P.  H.  Colquitt  to  repair  with  his  regiment  of  Georgia 
Volunteers  as  soon  as  possible  and  relieve  Colonel  Goodlett,  in  com- 
mand of  Secessionville.  Colonel  Goodlett  and  his  command  were  com- 
pletely worn  down  and  exhausted.  I would  here  state  that  I had  be- 
fore directed  Colonel  Lamar  to  send  all  his  exhausted  men  to  the  rear 
on  the  arrival  of  Colonel  Goodlett’s  command,  which  order  left  him  but 
150  men  for  duty.  The  troops  at  Secessionville  on  the  morning  of  the 
16th  were  much  fatigued,  as  they  had  been  engaged  at  work  in  the  in- 
trenchments  during  the  entire  night,  and  many  were  entirely  worn-out 
when  the  action  commenced  in  the  morning. 

In  reference  to  the  action  on  our  right  I would  respectfully  refer  for 
particulars  to  the  reports  of  Colonels  Hagood  and  C.  II.  Stevens,  here- 
with inclosed. 

To  my  personal  staff — First  Lieut.  W.  H.  Rogers,  special  aide-de- 
camp  ; Capts.  R.  E.  Elliott,  Samuel  J.  Corrie,  and  H.  W.  Carr — I am 
much  indebted  for  their  untiring  exertions  in  transmitting  my  orders 
under  tire.  Asst.  Surg.  James  Evans,  of  my  staff,  rendered  material 
aid  to  the  wounded  who  were  brought  to  the  rear. 

In  conclusion,  I would  add  that  at  8 a.  in.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith 
joined  me  at  Clarke’s  house,  where  I directed  him  to  take  command  of 
the  right  wing  and  attack  the  enemy  vigorously.  I have  received  no 
report  from  him,  but  take  it  for  granted  the  reports  of  Colonels  Hagood 
and  Stevens  cover  the  action  of  the  troops  on  the  right. 

To  the  dauntless  Lamar  and  the  troops  under  his  command  at  the 
commencement  of  the  assault,  the  Charleston  Battalion,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Gaillard ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith’s  battalion,  and  companies 
of  Lamar’s  regiment  engaged,  the  country,  and  South  Carolina  in  par- 
ticular, owe  a debt  of  gratitude  and  thanks  which  I know  a grateful 
people  will  acknowledge.  For  the  gallant  dead  the  country  will  ever 
mourn.  The  intrepid  Reed  fell  while  cheering  his  men  to  victory,  just 
as  the  enemy  were  repulsed. 

The  reports  herewith  inclosed  will  give  casualties  on  our  side:  39 
killed,  03  wounded,  and  2 missing;  total,  134.* 

No  report  has  been  received  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith’s  battal- 
ion. Col.  T.  G.  Lamar’s  report  will  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  received. 

Herewith  I also  inclose  you  a copy  of  a letter  from  Brigadier-General 
Stevens,  commanding  the  Federal  forces,  and  also  of  my  reply. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

[Inclosure  Xo.  1.] 

Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

James  Island,  S.  C.,  June  18,  1862. 

To  the  Commanding  General 

Of  the  Confederate  Forces  on  James  Island,  S.  C.  : 

Sir  : In  the  action  of  the  16th  it  is  known  that  some  of  our  dead, 
* But  see  Report  No.  24.  Tlie  discrepancy  is  not  explained  by  the  records. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSION  VILLE,  S.  C.  93 

and  it  io  probable  that  a few  of  our  wounded,  were  left  at  or  in  rear 
of  your  works.  In  compliance  with  the  urgent  wishes  of  friends  and 
in  accordance  with  my  own  convictions  of  propriety  and  of  duty  I 
have  determined  to  send  a flag  of  truce  to  ascertain  the  names  of  the 
killed  and  of  the  wounded,  and  if  practicable  to  recover  the  bodies  of 
the  dead.  It  will  ever  be  my  determination  to  conform  In  the  most 
ample  manner  to  the  usages  of  civilized  and  Christian  warfare,  and  I 
have  seen  to  it  that  all  of  your  men  who  are  now  prisoners  in  our 
hands  have  been  treated  with  courtesy  and  respect.  I am  glad  to  learn 
that  on  your  part  the  same  course  has  been  taken  toward  the  prisoners 
recently  taken  by  you.  The  bearers  of  the  flag  I now  send  to  you  are 
ray  division  surgeon,  Dr.  George  S.  Kemble,  and  my  aide-de-camp,  Capt. 
William  T.  Lusk,  and  I trust  you  will  find  it  consistent  with  your  duty 
to  extend  to  them  every  proper  facility  to  procure  information  in  regard 
to  their  missing  comrades,  and  if  possible  to  recover  the  remains  of  the 
dead.  We  shall  be  glad  to  send  money  and  clothing  to  our  prisoners 
in  your  hands,  and  in  return  will  see  that  all  articles  of  necessity  and 
comfort  which  their  friends  desire  to  send  safely  reach  your  men  pris- 
oners with  us. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

ISAAC  I.  STEYEKS, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters, 

James  Island , S.  C.,  June  18,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Stevens, 

Commanding  Federal  Forces , &c. : 

General  : Your  communication,  through  a flag  of  truce  borne  by 
Dr.  George  S.  Kemble  and  Capt.  William  T.  Lusk,  has  just  been  re- 
ceived, and  in  reply  thereto  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  the  infor- 
mation desired  as  to  the  names  and  condition  of  your  wounded  in  the 
engagement  of  the  16th  instant  will  be  cheerfully  furnished  you  at  an 
early  hour.  The  wounded  having  been  sent  to  the  city  of  Charleston 
it  is  necessary  to  communicate  with  that  place  first.  I have  also  to 
state  that  your  dead  as  far  as  found  have  been  decently  interred. 

It  has  ever  been  the  custom  of  our  armies  to  conform  to  the  “ usages 
of  civilized  and  Christian  warfare,”  and  our  [your]  wounded  and  pris- 
oners have  been  and  are  being  well  cared  for  in  all  respects. 

I send  this  by  my  aide-de-camp,  Capt.  W.  H.  Kogers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  G.  EYAKS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Confederate  Forces. 


Ko.  26. 

Report  of  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery* 

General  : Through  the  interposition  of  Providence  it  becomes  my 
duty  to  report  to  you  that  the  forces  under  my  command  gained  a com- 
pete victory  over  the  enemy  on  the  16th  instant  at  Secessionville 
I Keck. 

* It  appears  that  up  to  August  31, 18G2,  there  were  two  First  Regiments  South  Car- 
I olina  Artillery.  Lamar’s  regiment  became  the  Second. 


94  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

On  the  morning  of  June  16  about  4 o’clock  my  pickets  were  driven 
in,  and  reported  to  me  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  in  force  and 
had  already  passed  Rivers’  house,  distant  from  my  batteries  about  three- 
fourths  of  a mile.  I immediately  dispached  a courier  to  Lieutenant- 
Colonels  Gaillard  and  Smith,  ordering  them  to  move  up  their  battalions 
at  once  and  to  General  Evans  to  inform  him  of  the  advance  of  the  foe, 
and  I then  proceeded  to  my  batteries,  where  I found  a detachment  at 
each  gun  (having  ordered  such  to  be  the  case  day  and  night).  When  I 
arrived  at  the  batteries  I found  that  the  enemy  were  within  700  yards, 
in  line  of  battle,  and  advancing  on  me  at  the  double-quick.  I ordered 
the  8-inch  columbiad  to  be  loaded  with  grape,  which  order  was  promptly 
obeyed  by  Lieut.  J.  W.  Moseley,  of  Company  I,  whom  I found  at  the 
battery  on  my  arrival.  I mounted  the  chassis  and  pointed  the  gun 
myself.  In  the  mean  time  Sergt.  James  M.  Baggott,  of  Captain  Reed’s 
company  (B),  fired  upon  the  advancing  line  from  the  rifled  24-pounder 
gun  to  the  left  of  the  columbiad,  and  of  which  he  was  the  gunner. 
My  reason  for  pointing  the  columbiad  myself  was  to  fire  at  the  center 
of  the  line  and  thereby  break  it,  in  order  to  cause  confusion  and  delay, 
so  that  I might  get  my  infantry  into  position  previous  to  their  reaching 
my  lines.  The  shot  had  the  desired  effect ; they  immediately  flanked 
to  the  right  and  left.  I then  ordered  the  columbiad  to  be  loaded  with 
canister,  which  was  promptly  done,  and  I again  pointed  it.  I then  left 
the  battery  to  get  my  infantry  into  position.  On  leaving  the  battery  I 
met  Lieut.  J.  B.  Humbert,  of  Company  I (under  whose  command  the 
columbiad  was),  within  two  or  three  paces  of  the  battery,  and  directed 
him  to  give  them  canister  freely,  which  he  did.  1 then  ordered  Capt. 
T.  Y.  Simons  to  go  to  Lieutenant-Colonels  Gaillard  and  Smith  and  tell 
them  to  hurry  up  their  battalions. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  of  the  Pee  Dee  Battalion,  first  attracted 
my  attention,  whereupon  I ordered  him  to  take  position  on  the  left. 
Although  the  enemy  had  then  reached  the  left  flank  and  were  pouring 
in  a murderous  fire  on  my  men  at  the  guns,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith 
obeyed  with  promptness  and  soon  drove  them  from  their  position.  I 
then  ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard  to  take  position  on  my  right 
and  center,  which  was  promptly  done. 

It  was  not  long  after  getting  my  infantry  into  position  that  the  enemy 
were  driven  back  in  confusion.  They  were  soon,  however,  re-enforced 
and  made  another  desperate  charge,  when  I again  drove  them  back; 
a third  time  they  came,  but  only  to  meet  with  a most  determined  re- 
pulse. They  then  made  a flank  movement  on  my  right,  on  the  west 
of  Secessionville,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  creek,  where  they  were 
gallantly  met  by  the  Charleston  Battalion,  which  was  soon  re-enforced 
by  the  Louisiana  Battalion,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mc- 
Enery,  who  also  gallantly  met  them  with  a cheer. 

At  this  time  I was  so  much  exhausted  from  loss  of  blood,  from  hav- 
ing been  wounded  in  the  head  by  a Minie  ball  on  the  second  charge, 
that  the  command  was  turned  over  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard,  and 
afterward  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wagner,  although  I never  ceased  to 
give  orders  to  my  batteries. 

We  achieved  a great  victory,  yet  it  was  at  a considerable  loss  both 
in  numbers  and  personal  worth.  Capt.  Samuel  J.  Reed,  of  Barnwell 
District,  and  commanding  Company  B,  fell  while  gallantly  fighting 
at  his  gun.  I may  safely  say  that  his  place  cannot  be  filled.  He  was 
everything  that  could  be  desired  in  an  officer,  and  as  brave,  true,  and 
gallant  a man  as  ever  sacrificed  his  life  on  a field  of  battle.  Peace  to 
his  ashes. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSTONVILLE,  S.  C.  95 

Lieuts.  J.  W.  Lancaster  and  William  Johnson,  of  Company  B,  who 
were  in  command  of  the  two  rifled  24-pounders,  did  great  execution, 
although  not  having  grape  or  canister.  Lieut.  J.  A.  Bellinger,  of  the 
same  company,  who  commanded  the  18-pounders,  poured  a murderous 
fire  into  the  approaching  line,  and  in  connection  with  the  columbiad 
did  more  than  anything  else  for  the  fortunes  of  the  day.  These  gal- 
lant officers  deserve  the  thanks  of  the  country  and  I commend  them  to 
your  notice.  Capt.  G.  I).  Keitt  and  Lieutenants  Humbert,  W.  S.  Bar- 
ton, T.  P.  Oliver,  and  Moseley  all  acted  with  great  bravery  and  determi- 
nation. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  bringing  to  further  notice  Senior 
First  Lieut.  J.  B.  Humbert,  of  Company  1,  who  acted  with  so  much 
gallantry  and  determination  in  managing  his  gun,  to  which  may  be 
mainly  attributed  the  fortunes  of  the  day,  not  only  on  account  of  its 
caliber  and  weight  of  metal  but  to  its  well-directed  fire  and  to  the  skill 
with  which  it  w^as  managed,  and  also  Second  Lieuts.  T.  P.  Oliver  and 
J.  W.  Moseley,  of  the  same  company,  who  rendered  valuable  assistance 
to  Lieutenant  Humbert.  First  Lieut.  Barton,  of  the  same  company, 
displayed  great  skill  and  coolness  in  the  management  of  the  mortar, 
which  had  considerable  effect  upon  the  enemy.  Too  much  praise  can- 
not be  given  to  these  gallant  officers  and  to  the  detachments  under  their 
command. 

Capt.  F.  T.  Miles,  of  the  Calhoun  Guard,  Charleston  Battalion,  who 
was  stationed  at  my  batteries  during  the  previous  night  and  whose 
command  was  the  first  placed  in  position,  has  my  sincere  thanks.  He 
and  his  men  fought  like  heroes  and  did  all  that  men  could  do. 

Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard  and  Maj.  David  Ramsay  conducted  them- 
selves with  the  utmost  coolness  and  were  as  gallant  as  officers  could  be. 
They  both,  as  well  as  their  entire  command,  acted  with  commendable 
courage  and  determination  and  deserve  the  thanks  of  the  country. 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  D.  Smith,  commanding  the  Pee  Dee  Battalion  and  a 
most  gallant  officer,  was  the  first  that  attracted  my  attention  when  the 
infantry  were  coming  up  to  the  engagement,  and  to  him  I am  indebted 
for  having  relieved  my  left  flank  at  a very  critical  time.  I noticed  that 
several  of  his  men  were  shot  down  before  he  could  get  into  position,  and 
that,  after  the  enemy  had  been  driven  back  the  first  time  and  while  they 
were  on  their  second  charge,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Smith  went  out  upon 
the  field  in  front  of  the  battery,  gathered  up  as  many  of  the  small-arms 
of  the  enemy  as  he  could  carry  and  gave  them  to  his  own  men,  whose 
guns  had  refused  to  fire.  I commend  him  to  your  favorable  notice.  His 
command  acted  with  great  courage. 

My  thanks  are  also  due  to  Major  Hudson,  who  acted  with  decided 
gallantry. 

I must  also  speak  in  high  terms  of  the  actions  of  Lieut.  J.  B.  Hitch- 
ing, of  Company  H,  who  was  in  command  of  the  Reed  Battery  at 
Clarke’s  house,  which  battery  consisted  of  two  smooth-bore  24-pounder 
guns,  and  also  of  my  adjutant,  Lieut.  E.  J.  Frederick,  who,  seeing  that 
the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  were  concealed  on  my  right  flank  over  the 
marsh  and  were  picking  off  my  men,  proceeded  immediately  to  the 
above  battery,  when  he  and  Lieutenant  Kitchings  soon  dislodged  them 
and  poured  well-directed  shots  into  them  as  they  retreated. 

To  Captain  McCreery,  of  the  Ordnance  Department,  as  well  as  to  Cap- 
tain Bonneau  and  Lieutenants  Matthews  and  Hall,  of  our  gunboat,  I 
return  my  sincere  thanks  for  their  valuable  services  at  the  oolumbiad 
battery. 


96 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XXVI 


The  casualties  in  the  two  companies  of  my  regiment  that  were  en- 
gaged are  as  follows.* 

I estimate  the  loss  of  the  enemy  as  near  as  I can  at  from  600  to  800; 
341  of  their  dead  are  buried  in  front  of  my  batteries;  107  were  taken 
prisoners:  many  wounded  and  who  have  since  died,  and  I conjecture 
that  some  were  drowned.  Large  quantities  of  their  wounded  were 
carried  off  by  their  ambulances.  About  400  stand  of  small-arms  fell 
into  our  hands,  together  with  one  horse  wounded  in  the  mouth,  and 
numerous  smaller  articles. 

For  the  casualties  in  the  Charleston  Battalion  (Lieutenant-Colonel 
Gaillard)  and  the  Pee  Dee  Battalion  (Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith),*  to- 
gether with  their  reports  concerning  the  behavior  of  officers  and  men, 
1 beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  the  accompanying  documents,  marked  re- 
spectively A and  B.f 

It  is  proper  to  state  that  the  forces  under  my  command  did  not 
amount  to  more  than  500  men  until  the  arrival  of  the  Louisiana  Bat- 
talion, but  this  small  force  manfully  stood  their  ground  against  an 
assaulting  force  of  from  1,000  to  5,000  men,  among  whom  were  the 
picked  regiments  of  the  enemy,  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York  (High- 
landers) and  the  Eighth  Michigan,  notwithstanding  that  they  had  for 
fourteen  days  and  nights  been  subjected  to  the  most  arduous  duties. 

On  Sunday  night,  the  15th  instant,  I received  orders  from  Brigadier- 
General  Evans  to  the  effect  that,  although  it  might  require  superhuman 
exertions,  he  expected  me  to  take  the  guns  off  of  the  gunboat  and  place 
them  in  battery  on  land.  This  was  impossible  unless  I had  had  a force 
and  the  means  under  my  control  that  were  necessary  to  move  these  guns. 
I therefore  had  to  have  the  gunboat  moved  up  to  Secessionville,  where 
there  was  a wharf.  In  the  mean  time  I,  with  the  two  companies  of  my 
own  regiment,  proceeded  to  throw  up  the  earthworks  of  the  batteries, 
which  was  not  completed  until  3 o’clock  the  next  morning.  My  men 
were  so  much  fatigued,  not  only  from  the  night  work  but  from  a very 
spirited  engagement  the  day  previous,  which  lasted  several  hours, 
against  the  gunboats  and  land  batteries  of  the  enemy,  that  I allowed 
them  to  lie  down  to  rest.  They  had  hardly  fallen  asleep  when  the 
alarm  was  given,  and  this  was  the  first  time  that  any  man  was  allowed 
to  sleep  without  his  arms  in  his  hands  and  at  the  spot  that  he  would 
have  to  use  them  during  the  time  that  I had  been  in  command  of  the 
post. 

In  conclusion,  I would  state  that  the  great  victory  achieved  on  June 
16  over  such  a superior  force  of  the  enemy  is  owing  entirely  to  the 
patriotism,  love  of  freedom,  and  indomitable  courage  of  the  officers  and 
men  under  my  command.  Every  man  did  his  duty. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  sentiments  of  high  regard,  your  obedient 
servant, 

T.  G.  LAMAB, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post . 

Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 


* Nominal  list  omitted.  Losses  tabulated  in  Report  No.  24,  p.  90. 
t Embodied  in  inclosures,  pp.  88-89,  to  Pemberton’s  report. 


97 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESS10NVILLE,  S.  C. 

[Correction.] 

Hamburg,  S.  0.,  July  15, 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton,  Commanding : 

General:  In  my  report  to  you  I only  estimated  the  loss  of  the 
enemy  to  be  from  600  to  800 ; I now  find  that  it  is  nearer  1,000  to  1,500. 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  G.  LAMAE, 

Colonel  First  Regiment  Artillery , S.  C.  Volunteers. 


No.  27. 

Report  of  Maj.  David  Ramsay , First  South  Carolina  ( Charleston ) Bat- 
talion. 

Secessionville,  James  Island,  S.  0., 

June  21,  1862. 

Colonel:  I beg  leave  to  forward  to  you  a list  of  casualties  in  the 
Charleston  Battalion  in  the  engagement  of  the  16th  instant.* 

It  is  hardly  possible  to  enumerate  the  individual  instances  of  valor 
and  good  conduct.  All  did  their  duty,  and  the  list  of  dead  and  wounded 
will  testify  with  what  devotion.  Out  of  about  100  men  40,  besides  the 
2 of  the  field  and  staff,  were  killed  or  wounded.  You  are  aware  of  the 
distinguished  conduct  and  skill  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard,  in  com- 
mand after  you  were  wounded  until  the  arrival  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
McEnery,  and  I only  mention  as  peculiarly  noticeable  Lieutenant 
Campbell,  of  Company  F,  who  repulsed  personally  a storming  party, 
using  a handspike  until  he  seized  a rifle;  also  Mr.  Josiah  Tennent, 
of  the  Calhoun  Guard,  who  felled  no  less  than  6 of  the  enemy.  Capt. 
William  Byan’s  good  service  at  a gun  you  can  appreciate  yourself. 
Lieut.  George  Brown  and  Sergeant  Hendricks,  of  Company  F,  deserve 
mention  for  bringing  ammunition  through  a heavy  fire,  and  most  par- 
ticularly Lieut.  Alexander  A.  Allemong,  of  the  Irish  Volunteers,  who 
: passed  and  repassed  a severe  fire  of  musketry  and  cannon  several 
times  with  ammunition  in  his  arms.  I have  mentioned  those  especially 
noticeable,  but  can  only  repeat  that  I refrain  from  enumerating  others 
simply  because  it  would  be  to  furnish  a roll  of  those  engaged. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  EAMSAY, 

Major , Commanding  Charleston  Battalion. 

Col.  T.  G.  Lamar. 


No.  28. 

Report  of  Col.  S.  D.  Goodlett , Twenty-second  South  Carolina  Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-second  Begiment  S.  C.  Vols., 
Camp  on  James  Island , S.  C .,  June  18, 1862. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  cas- 
ualties in  my  command  originating  from  the  fight  of  the  16th  instant : 


* Nominal  list  omitted.  Losses  embodied  in  Report  No.  24,  p.  90. 

7 R R — VOL  XIV 


98 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


In  obedience  to  an  order  from  headquarters  I detailed  100  picked 
men,  10  from  each  company,  to  go  as  a fatigue  party  about  1 a.  m.  of 
the  16th  instant  to  Secessionville.  I placed  Capt.  Joshua  Jamison  in 
command  of  the  detail,  and  Lieuts.  L.  S.  Hill,  H.  H.  Sally,  and  J.  B. 
Cobb  were  detailed  as  lieutenants,  thus  completing  a command  of  one 
company.  This  detail  arrived  at  Secessionville  in  time  to  meet  the  first 
onset  of  the  enemy.  Captain  Jamison  and  Lieutenants  Hill,  Sally,  and 
Cobb  acted  with  great  coolness,  courage,  and  determination,  and  sus- 
tained and  supported  Captain  Reed’s  battery  to  the  last.  The  ranks  of 
this  detail,  as  will  be  seen  by  Exhibit  A,*  accompanying  this  report, 
were  decimated.  Killed,  10;  wounded,  7. 

The  balance  of  my  command  were  ordered  to  support  the  battery  to 
the  right  of  Secessionville,  where  a galling  fire  was  opened  upon  us 
from  the  enemy’s  artillery  without  damage.  We  were  then  ordered  to 
the  support  of  Secessionville  and  arrived  there  at  the  close  of  the  en- 
gagement. 

I am  happy  to  state  that  my  command  throughout  acted  with  cool- 
ness and  determination,  and  that  too  much  praise  cannot  be  bestowed 
upon  Captain  Jamison  and  the  lieutenants  and  detail  before  alluded 
to,  for  the  manner  in  which  they  demeaned  themselves  in  the  fight. 

I would  state  one  fact  before  bringing  this  report  to  a close,  that 
according  to  the  numbers  actively  engaged  the  detail  of  100  men  made 
from  my  command  under  Captain  Jamison  suffered  more  in  proportion 
than  any  of  the  forces  engaged  on  our  side. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  D.  GOODLETT, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Twenty-second  Eegt .,  South  Carolina  Vols. 

General  Evans,  James  Island,  S.  C. 


No.  29. 

Report  of  Col.  Johnson  Hagood , First  South  Carolina  Infantry , command- 
ing advanced  forces. 

Headquarters  Advanced  Forces, 

James  Island , S.  C.,  June  18,  1862. 

Captain  : I am  required  to  report  the  operations  of  the  troops  under 
my  command  on  the  16th  instant: 

Some  days  previously  I had  had  the  honor  to  be  placed  in  command 
of  a corps  composed  of  the  First  and  Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  the  Eutaw  Battalion,  and  McEnery’s  Louisiana  Battalion, 
to  which  were  assigned  the  duties  of  the  advanced  guard.  The  force  at 
Secessionville,  however,  continued  to  keep  out  in  front  of  that  position 
its  own  outposts,  which  were  not  under  my  command,  and  made  no 
direct  report  to  me.  This  has  since  been  changed. 

On  the  night  of  the  15th  and  16th  the  troops  on  outpost  duty  under 
my  command  consisted  of  seven  companies  of  Stevens’  Twenty-fourth 
South  Carolina  Regiment,  six  companies  of  Hagood’s  First  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers,  and  one  company  of  the  Forty-seventh  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers, Colonel  Williams,  all  under  the  immediate  charge  of  Colonel 
Stevens.  They  covered  the  whole  front  of  our  lines  from  the  Seces- 
sionville road  to  Newtown  Cut.  The  picket  from  Secessionville  covered 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  99 

the  space  from  the  Secessionville  road  to  the  marsh  on  the  left  of  our 
lines. 

At  4.30  a.  m.  on  the  16th  I received  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Stevens 
that  the  Secessionville  pickets  had  been  driven  in  and  that  the  enemy 
were  advancing  in  force  upon  that  position.  I immediately  ordered 
under  arms  the  portion  of  the  First  Eegiment  not  on  picket  and  Colonel 
Simonton’s  Eutaw  Battalion,  directing  them  to  proceed  down  the  Bat- 
tery Island  road  in  front  of  our  intrenehments  to  the  flank  of  the  enemy’s 
advance,  and  ordered  Colonel  McEnery’s  Louisiana  Battalion  to  pro- 
ceed in  rear  by  the  bridge  to  Secessionville,  delivering  these  orders  in 
person. 

Proceeding  in  advance  down  the  Battery  Island  road,  I ordered  for- 
ward one  of  the  two  6-pounders  of  Boyce’s  battery  stationed  at  the 
crossing  of  the  Fort  Johnson  road,  and  arriving  at  the  scene  of  action 
found  the  enemy  making  their  second  advance  upon  the  post  at  Seces- 
sionville. A thicket  of  felled  trees  ran  parallel  with  their  line  of  ad- 
vance and  about  400  yards  west  of  it,  on  the  edge  of  which  next  the 
enemy  Colonel  Stevens  had  deployed  about  100  men,  who  had  been  on 
picket  duty  near  that  point.  These  men  were  from  the  companies  of 
Captains  Tompkins,  Pearson  (Lieutenant  Hamiter  commanding),  and 
Gooding  (Lieutenant  Beckham  commanding),  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Begi- 
ment  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  The  Battery  Island  road,  so  ob- 
structed as  to  be  impassable  by  troops  or  vehicles,  ran  between  this 
felled  thicket  and  a dense  wood  stretching  toward  Grimball’s,  on  the 
Stono.  Simonton’s  battalion  coming  up  was  placed  behind  the  felled 
thicket  in  line  of  battle,  its  right  resting  near  the  Battery  Island  road, 
and  the  detachment  of  the  First  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers 
was  placed  in  reserve  in  the  Battery  Island  road,  throwing  out  a strong 
line  of  skirmishers  toward  the  Stono  (which  runs  nearly  parallel  with 
this  road)  to  guard  against  an  advance  from  that  point.  Boyce’s  piece, 
under  Lieutenant  Jeter,  was  placed  on  Simonton’s  left  at  the  extremity 
of  the  felled  thicket.  The  object  of  this  disposition  was  chiefly  defen- 
sive, as  a general  advance  upon  our  lines  seemed  imminent.  Three 
regiments  of  infantry  advanced  in  front  of  us,  but  beyond  musket  range, 
to  attack  the  west  flank  of  the  work  at  Secessionville,  being  supported 
by  a battery  of  field  artillery  near  the  Battery  Island  road,  in  front  of 
and  beyond  Simonton’s  right.  Lieutenant  Jeter  was  directed  to  open 
upon  these  regiments,  which  he  did  with  effect.  I immediately  sent  to 
the  general  commanding,  asking  to  be  supported  in  making  an  attack 
upon  the  rear  and  flank  of  these  regiments.  When  the  permission  to 
attack  and  the  assurance  of  support  arrived  the  enemy  had  retreated. 

In  the  mean  while  the  fire  of  Jeter’s  piece  drew  upon  us  a heavy  fire 
from  the  enemy’s  field  battery,  which,  from  the  sheltered  position  of 
our  troops,  did  but  little  damage,  and  four  companies  of  the  Third  Ehode 
Island  Eegiment  were  sent  in  as  skirmishers  to  seize  the  felled  woods 
and  capture  the  piece.  Stevens’  skirmishers  gallantly  repelled  them. 
A portion  of  the  enemy,  however,  penetrated  to  Simonton’s  line  of  bat- 
tle, and  one  of  his  companies  and  a platoon  of  another  were  for  a few 
minutes  engaged  in  driving  them  back.  A few  casualties  in  other  por- 
tions ot  his  line  occurred  from  the  random  fire  of  the  enemy  engaged 
with  our  skirmishers,  and  one  man  in  the  detachment  from  the  First 
Eegiment  was  wounded  in  the  same  way.  The  enemy  in  retiring  were 
seen  carrying  off  their  wounded.  Six  men  were  left  dead  in  front  of  our 
skirmishers ; 12  were  left  dead  farther  on  toward  Secessionville,  where 
the  three  regiments  spoken  of  were  fired  upon  by  Lieutenant  Jeter, 
making  their  loss  in  this  part  of  the  field  18  killed  j 11  prisoners  were 


100 


COASTS  OF  S.  C GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


captured,  of  whom  8 were  wounded ; 68  small-arms,  mostly  Enfield  rifles, 
were  abandoned  by  them  and  recovered  by  this  command.  Our  loss 
was  8 killed,  22  wounded,  and  2 missing. 

Appended  is  a detailed  list  of  casualties.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Colonel  First  South  Carolina  Vols .,  Comdg . Advanced  Forces . 

Capt.  Mallory  P.  King, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  James  Island, 

June  22, 1862. 

Colonel  Hagood, 

Commanding  Advanced  Line , &c . : 

Colonel  : In  the  absence  of  General  Evans,  first  in  command  on  the 
16th  instant,  allow  me  to  thank  you  for  your  distinguished  services  on 
that  day,  and  through  you  to  thank  Colonel  Stevens  and  the  other  gal- 
lant officers  and  men  under  your  command  for  their  noble  and  gallant 
service  at  that  time.  Please  make  known  my  views  to  your  command. 
Yery  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  DUNCAN  SMITH, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


No.  30. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  McEnery , Fourth  Louisiana  Battalion. 

Secession ville,  James  Island,  S.  C., 

June  20,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
part  taken  in  the  battle  of  the  16th  instant  near  Secessionville  by  my 
battalion : 

A little  after  dawn  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant  Colonel  Ha- 
good, commanding  First  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  came 
in  person  to  ray  quarters,  about  2J  miles  distant  from  this  place,  and 
ordered  me  to  liave  my  battalion  under  arms  and  march  immediately 
to  the  Secessionville  battery,  at  which  place  an  engagement  with  the 
enemy  was  being  had.  With  promptness  the  battalion  was  formed, 
and  the  march,  at  double-quick,  wras  begun  in  the  direction  of  Seces- 
sionville. When  arrived  at  the  first  cross-roads  some  little  delay  en- 
sued arising  from  my  ignorance  of  the  road  leading  to  Secessionville. 
After  the  lapse  of  a few  moments  1 was  assured  as  to  the  right  road, 
and  instantly  the  battalion  was  moved  off  at  double-quick  for  the  scene 
of  action. 

Arriving  at  Secessionville,  I was  informed  that  the  enemy  in  force 
were  advancing  on  the  right  of  the  battery  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
marsh,  directly  up  the  marsh  to  the  bridge.  I hastened  my  command 
at  a run  through  an  open  ground  to  the  woods  on  the  marsh.  In  cross- 

* Embodied  in  Report  No.  24,  p.  90.  Nominal  list  omitted. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  101 

ing  this  open  marsh,  and  while  placing  the  battalion  in  position  on  the 
outer  edge  of  the  woods,  it  was  exposed  to  a terrific  fire  from  the 
enemy’s  gunboats,  siege  battery,  fixed  batteries,  and  small-arms.  I 
Ihen  ordered  the  men  to  advance  in  the  skirt  of  woods,  the  better  to 
view  the  enemy  and  afford  it  protection  from  the  incessant  fire  of  the 
enemy.  At  this  point  for  half  an  hour  the  fire  on  both  sides  was 
indeed  terrific.  Finally  the  enemy  wavered,  fell  back,  and  then  began 
his  precipitate  retreat  on  the  right  and  in  front.  The  gallant  Lamar 
being  struck  down,  and  being  the  senior  officer  present  I caused  an 
incessant  volley  of  grape  and  canister  to  be  poured  into  the  broken 
and  retreating  columns  of  the  enemy  until  they  passed  beyond  view. 
Colonel  Goodlett,  my  senior  officer,  arriving  about  12  m.,  assumed 
command. 

I cannot  speak  in  terms  of  too  high  praise  of  the  coolness,  bravery, 
and  gallantry  of  the  officers  and  men  of  my  little  command.  I went 
into  the  action  with  250  men  and  succeeded  in  putting  to  route  twice 
that  force  of  the  enemy  on  the  right.  I think  that  this  force  of  the 
enemy  would  undoubtedly  have  completely  flanked  the  battery  but  for 
our  timely  arrival.  The  small  band  of  brave  men  in  the  fort,  exhausted 
and  broken  down  in  their  almost  superhuman  exertions  in  repelling 
the  foe  in  front,  must  have  been  unequal  to  the  task  of  successfully 
engaging  the  enemy  in  front  and  on  the  right. 

It  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  a correct  list  of  the  slain  and  wounded  of 
the  enemy,  as  in  his  retreat  he  bore  off  the  field  many  of  his  dead  and 
wounded;  168  of  the  enemy  were  buried  on  the  field. 

My  battalion  brought  from  the  battle-field  in  front  the  following 
arms  and  accouterments,  which  have  been  delivered  to  the  ordnance 
officer,  viz : 


Enfield  rifles  (in  good  condition) 27 

Enfield  rifles  (damaged) ^ 4 

Rifled  muskets  (in  good  condition) 8:i 

Springfield  muskets  (in  good  condition) * !”!*!!""!  62 

Springfield  muskets  (damaged) 6 


TotaI 182 

Cartridge  boxes . 70 

Saddles 2 

These  arms  and  accouterments  were  gathered  on  that  part  of  the 
field  in  front.  Troops  belonging  to  other  commands,  I understand, 
picked  up  a great  many  arms  and  accouterments  on  the  height  across 
the  marsh.  X suppose  the  above  arms  are  about  one- third  of  the 
number  captured. 

The  following  is  a list  of  casualties  in  my  battalion,  to  wit:* 

This  report  would  have  been  made  earlier,  but  now  is  the  first  oppor- 
tunity since  the  battle  that  I have  had  to  write  it. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

. J.  McEKERY, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Fourth  Louisiana  Battalion . 

Capt.  Mallory  P.  King, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Embodied  in  Report  No.  24,  p.  90. 


102  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

No.  31. 

Report  of  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens , Twenty  fourth  South  Carolina  Infantry 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fourth  Eegiment  S.  0.  Vols., 

James  Island , S.  C.,  June  18,  1862. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  orders  I beg  to  submit  the  following 
report  of  the  part  taken  by  my  regiment  in  the  battle  of  Secessionville  j 
on  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant : 

Seven  companies  of  the  Twenty -fourth  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers, with  six  companies  of  First  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volun-  i 
teers  and  one  from  the  Forty-seventh  Georgia  Eegiment,  constituted 
the  picket  force  placed  under  my  command,  and  with  which  I went  on 
duty  on  Sunday,  15th  instant.  This  force  covered  our  whole  picket  line 
except  that  in  front  of  Secessionville,  which  was  guarded  by  pickets 
from  the  force  stationed  at  that  post.  All  remained  quiet  along  the 
line  during  the  day  and  night,  and  at  daylight  I rode  to  Newtown  Cut 
with  a view  to  visit  and  inspect  the  pickets.  On  reaching  that  point  I 
distinctly  heard  the  guns  of  the  enemy  in  front  of  Secessionville,  and 
started  on  my  return  to  that  point.  On  my  way  I encountered  a cou- 
rier with  the  intelligence  that  the  enemy  had  advanced  in  large  force 
to  storm  our  works  at  Secessionville.  This  information  I immediately 
forwarded  to  yourself  and  to  the  headquarters  of  the  brigadier-general 
commanding,  proceeding  myself  to  the  front  to  verify  the  statement.  In 
passing  I took  portions  of  four  companies  of  my  regiment,  which  hap- 
pened to  be  on  duty  in  that  vicinity,  and  moved  them  in  the  direction 
of  the  abatis  of  felled  timber  extending  on  the  left  of  the  Battery  Island 
road.  I ordered  Captain  Wever  (Company  I)  to  occupy  this  abatis  to 
prevent  the  enemy  from  penetrating  it  with  his  skirmishers.  The  de- 
tachment of  my  other  three  companies,  viz,  Company  D,  Captain  Good- 
ing ; Company  G,  Lieutenant  Hamiter,  and  Company  K,  Captain  Tomp- 
kins, numbering  less  than  100  men,  were  posted  in  a heavy  thicket 
extending  from  the  abatis  to  the  marsh  on  the  left.  On  taking  this 
position  I found  the  enemy  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  at  Hill’s  houses, 
to  my  right  and  front.  With  my  weak  force  this  position  could  only 
be  defensive,  and  I rode  back  to  ask  for  artillery  and  support,  which  • 
were  brought  up  by  you. 

As  all  of  the  subsequent  events  passed  under  your  own  observation 
it  is  unnecessary  to  report  them,  except  that  I would  especially  mention 
Captain  Tompkins,  Co.  K,  Lieutenant  Beckham,  of  Co.  G,  and  the  de- 
tachments from  these  two  companies,  who  held  their  position  gallantly 
in  the  front  and  did  excellent  service  until  ordered  to  withdraw. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Capers,  my  second  in  command,  having  been 
sent  by  you  to  order  fire  to  be  opened  from  the  new  24-pounder  bat- 
tery in  advance  of  our  lines,  was  retained  by  General  Evans  at  that 
post,  and  directed  the  fire  of  the  battery  with  his  usual  gallantry  and 
efficiency.  Major  Hammond  remained  at  his  post  in  charge  of  the 
picket  on  the  Gill  road  and  Newtown  Cut.  After  the  enemy  had  left 
the  field  I returned  to  my  picket  duties  until  regularly  relieved. 

I append  a list  of  the  casualties  in  my  own  regiment.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

C.  H.  STEVENS, 

Colonel  Twenty  fourth  South  Carolina  Volunteer  Regiment. 
Col.  Johnson.  Hagood, 

First  South  Carolina  Vol.  Regt .,  Comdg.  Advanced  Forces. 


Nominal  list  omitted.  Losses  embodied  in  Report  No.  24,  p.  90. 


Chap.  XxVl.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


103 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  H.  Simonton , Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 

Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Eutaw  Regiment,  Twenty-fifth  S.  0.  Vols., 

June  17,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
results  of  the  engagement  of  yesterday  to  my  regiment : 

Having  been  ordered  to  move  at  reveille,  I formed  and  marched  my 
regiment  to  the  field  in  rear  of  Hill’s  house,  and  having  then  reported 
to  Colonel  Hagood,  was  placed  by  him  in  position  behind  a hedge. 
Upon  being  placed  in  position  I was  informed  that  Colonel  Stevens 
had  a portion  of  his  regiment  deployed  as  skirmishers  in  our  front,  and 
was  ordered  to  take  all  precautions  to  prevent  our  men  firing  into  them. 
Shortly  after  we  took  position  we  were  put  under  a heavy  fire  of  small- 
arms,  directed  principally  against  my  left  wing.  In  obedience  to  orders 
I kept  my  men  under  restraint  and  prevented  any  firing  until  feeling 
satisfied  that  the  enemy  were  actually  in  my  front.  I then  gave  orders 
to  fire.  After  a brisk  fire  of  about  a half  hour  they  were  driven  off. 
During  their  retreat  we  were  exposed  to  an  enfilading  fire  from  a field 
battery  on  our  flank.  Below  I append  a list  of  casualties.* 

The  behavior  of  my  regiment  was  such  as  I could  have  wished.  Lieu- 
tenant Blum,  of  the  Washington  Light  Infantry,  Company  B,  whose 
company  was  chiefly  under  fire,  distinguished  himself  by  his  extreme 
coolness,  encouraging  his  men.  He  rendered  most  efficient  aid  in  re- 
straining their  natural  desire  to  return  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  The  con- 
duct of  his  men  could  not  be  surpassed.  They  were  under  my  eye  all 
the  time,  Two  of  his  men,  Privates  J.  Campbell  Martin  and  T.  Grange 
Simons,  jr.,  the  first  wounded  in  the  head  and  leg,  and  the  other  in 
three  places,  with  his  clothing  riddled,  continued  to  fire  until  taken 
from  the  field. 

A large  number  of  arms  and  accouterments  were  recovered  from  the 
field  and  several  prisoners  were  captured.  With  this  I inclose  the 
reports  of  Lieutenant  Blum  and  of  Captain  Adger,  quartermaster.  The 
arms  and  accouterments  are  in  the  hands  of  the  latter,  subject  to  your 
order. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  Joseph  Walker, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


m.  33. 

Report  of  Lieut.  R.  A.  Blum , Twenty -fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

Camp  Pettigrew,  James  Island,  S.  C., 

June  16,  1862. 

I beg  leave  to  report  the  following  casualties  and  incidents  of  this 
morning’s  engagement : 


Nominal  list  omitted.  Losses  embodied  in  Report  No.  24,  p.  90. 


104 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Shortly  after  our  regiment  had  taken  its  position  my  company  was 
subjected  to  repeated  volleys  discharged  from  the  thicket  immediately 
in  our  front,  which  we  had  been  informed  was  held  by  a company  from 
Colonel  Stevens’  regiment.  On  this  account,  in  obedience  to  orders 
from  Colonel  Hagood,  we  did  not  reply  for  several  minutes. 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  single  out  individual  instances  when  all 
behaved  with  the  utmost  coolness  and  bravery,  but  I feel  that  it  is  but 
just  to  report  the  conduct  of  John  Campbell  Martin  and  T.  Grange 
Simons,  jr.,  as  worthy  of  special  notice.  After  being  severely  wounded 
they  persisted  in  reloading  and  firing  until  overcome  by  exhaustion.* 

I am,  yours,  respectfully,  R A BLUM, 

Lieutenant , Comdg.  W.  L.  I.,  Company  B,  Butaw  Regiment. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Simonton. 


No.  34. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  E.  Adger , Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

Camp  Pettigrew,  James  Island,  S.  C., 

June  16,  1862. 

Colonel  : I beg  leave  to  make  the  following  return  of  arms  and 
accouterments,  &c.,  recovered  from  the  field  during  and  subsequent  to 
this  morning’s  engagement  with  the  enemy  : 

Enfield  rifles  (in  order) ^ 

Enfield  rifles  (needing  repair) 1* 

Enfield  rifles  (not  repairable) j? 

Minie  rifles  (in  order) _ 

Total  number  of  arms ^ 

Cartridge  boxes - 

Cartridge  boxes  and  belts 

Total - 70 

Waist  belts 

Waist  belts  (clasps  wanting) _ 

Total =j^ 

OQ 

Bayonet  scabbards 2° 

Cap  boxes Qzji 

Cartridges  (Enfield) ; 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  ADGEB, 

Quartermaster  and  Acting  Ordnance  Officer,  Eutaw  Begt. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Simonton, 

Comdg.  Eutaw  Regiment  (Twenty fifth  S.  C.  Volunteers). 


Nominal  list  omitted.  Losses  embodied  in  Report  No.  24,  p.  90. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SIMMONS*  BLUFF,  S,  C.  105 

JUNE  21,  1862. — Engagement  at  Simmons’  Bluff,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Gapt.  Edward  L.  Parker , C.  8.  Army , Marion  (S.  G.)  Artillery  * 

Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Run , June  23,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston , A G.  : 

Major  : Herewith  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  official  report  of 
Captain  Parker,  Marion  Artillery,  of  the  affair  with  the  gunboats  at 
Simmons7  Bluff  on  the  21st  instant.  Owing  to  the  absence  of  the  regi- 
ment of  Colonel  McCullough  the  rifle  pits  were  not  complete  when  the 
attack  commenced.  I am  having  them  arranged  and  have  strengthened 
the  position  with  two  additional  companies.  I would  here  state  that  I 
will  forward  the  report  of  the  engagement  on  James  Island  on*  the 
16th  instant  as  soon  as  I can  collect  the  reports  of  the  immediate  com- 
manders. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  Gf.  EVANS, 
Brigadier-  General. 


[Inclosure.] 

Simmons7  Bluff,  S.  C.,  June  21, 1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  about  11  a.  m.  this  day 
the  alarm  was  given  of  two  gunboats  approaching.  I was  at  Colonel 
Whaling’s  place,  on  a visit  to  pickets  there  stationed,  and  caused  the 
alarm  to  be  given  also  from,  that  point.  My  guns  were  in  the  road  and 
wagons  parked  before  I could  get  to  camp,  nothing  having  been  lost. 
The  boats  approached  rapidly — one  large  three-masted  propeller  and  a 
side-wheel,  probably  the  Planter. 

I ordered  the  companies  of  Captains  McJunkin  and  Barnett  into  the 
incomplete  pits  in  process  of  construction  for  riflemen,  directing  them 
if  driven  from  the  pits  to  fall  back  and  skirmish  (if  they  landed)  along 
the  road  and  in  the  corn  back  of  Simmons7  negro  settlement.  The  bat- 
tery I ordered  to  the  bluff,  where  I am  erecting  batteries  for  my  guns 
about  800  yards  above  the  point.  The  road  through  the  corn  was  so 
miry  from  the  recent  rains  that  my  guns  could  not  use  them,  and  I had 
to  take  a circuit  and  approach  it  from  the  north.  When  we  cleared  the 
road  we  found  the  large  vessels  just  below  the  point,  the  Planter  on 
the  south  side  of  said  point.  To  reach  the  bluff  I would  have  had  my 
battery  exposed  to  fire  from  both  ships  for  400  or  500  yards,  and  then 
would  only  be  able  to  reach  the  large  vessel  at  the  range  before  named, 
say  800  yards.  I deemed  it  wiser,  as  I could  inflict  no  injury,  to  run 
no  risk. 

The  fire  of  shot,  shell,  case-shot,  and  canister  was  very  heavy  from 
both  ships.  I kept  my  men  and  guns  under  cover,  anticipating  a land- 
ing. The  riflemen  kept  up  a continuous  and  steady  fire  until  their  posi- 
tion was  enfiladed,  when  they  retreated  to  the  road,  straggling  far  ahead 
of  their  officers  up  it.  I halted  them  and  deployed  them  to  the  left  of 
road,  directing  a gradual  advance,  under  cover  of  woods,  hedges,  and 
corn,  to  the  negro  settlement.  The  men  were  very  much  fatigued  and 
I could  not  get  the  movement  properly  executed.  A few  men  were 


* The  report  of  Lieut.  A.  C.  Rbind,  U.  S.  Navy,  appears  in  the  Annual  Report  of  the 
Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  1,  1862. 


106  COASTS  OT  S.  C.,  <U.,  And  MID.  AND  EAST  TLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

landed  from  the  Planter,  I think,  who  got  as  far  as  the  infantry  tents 
and  burned  them.  My  pieces  I had  withdrawn  to  the  causeway,  as 
both  boats,  shelling  vigorously,  moved  up  as  though  to  land  above  our 

position.  „ , ,,  . i 

One  of  the  scouts  reported  to  Major  O’Neill  that  the  enemy  had 
landed  and  were  marching  up.  My  guns  were  then  thrown  forward, 
and  I detailed  scouts  from  my  own  men,  who  proceeded  to  a point  be- 
tween the  two  camps,  under  charge  of  Lieutenant  Lowndes.  Two  of  my 
pieces  were  to  take  position  near  the  bluff  on  left  of  road,  two  in  our 
drill  ground  on  the  right;  Colonel  McCullough,  who  had  arrived,  to 
advance  under  cover  of  the  hedges  to  the  point  where  my  scouts  were 
with  four  companies;  Major  O’Neill,  with  the  other  companies,  to  ad- 
vance through  the  corn — and  thus  I hoped,  had  they  landed,  to  attack 
them  in  front  and  flank.  They,  however,  had  not  landed  any  force,  and 
I can  only  conjecture  that  they  landed  at  all.  Had  the  original  inten- 
tion been  carried  out,  and  the  riflemen  on  leaving  the  pits  occupied  the 
road  and  the  corn,  I think  we  might  have  been  able  to  bring  our  guns 
into  play ; as  it  was,  1 thought  my  best  plan  was  to  keep  prepared  for 
what  I expected— a landing.  Before  we  could  reach  the  boats,  how- 
ever, immediately  after  burning  the  tents  they  turned  and  went  tepidly 
off.  The  buildings  at  the  point  were  much  injured  by  shell,  grape,  can- 
ister, &c.,  and  some  very  narrow  escapes  were  run. 

The  conduct  of  the  men  while  in  the  pits  was  very  good,  and  they 
all  say  that  cries  were  heard  after  several  shots.  The  men  kept  very 
close  on  deck.  Had  rifle  pits  been  dug  all  along  the  banks  I believe 
that  the  enemy  would  have  suffered  very  much;  as  it  was,  it  was  very 
difficult  to  rally  the  men  after  leaving  the  pits.  Very  little  time  was 
given  for  a proper  disposition  of  the  troops.  I do  not  think  that  over 
twenty  minutes  elapsed  between  the  alarm  and  the  first  shot.  Some 
system  of  signals  is  necessary  by  which  we  may  be  notified  of  the  en- 
trance of  a vessel  into  the  river  while  out  of  our  sight.  The  lookout  on 
the  mast  of  the  steamer  enables  her  to  direct  her  fire  at  objects  not  seen 
from  her  hull.  Captains  McJunkin’s  and  Barnett’s  companies  have  both 
some  baggage. 

I have  no  casualties  to  report.  One  shot  passed  through  my  com- 
missary room,  but  our  stores  were  out  of  it.  Lieut.  [James]  Salvo,  of  the 
Washington  Artillery,  came  over,  offering  Capt.  [George  H.]  Walter’s 
battery,  and  was  of  much  service  to  me.  I declined  sending  for  the 
battery,  as  under  the  circumstances  I did  not  think  it  could  be  advan- 
tageously used. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  L.  PARKER, 
Captain  Marion  Artillery , Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  A.  L.  Evans,  C.  S.  Army, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c.,  Adams  Pun. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  EVACUATION  OF  JAMES  ISLAND,  S.  C.  107 

JUNE  28-JULY  7,  1862. — Evacuation  of  James  Island,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

Ho.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  tlie  South. 
No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter , JJ.  S.  Army , commanding  Department 

of  the  South. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Fort  Royal , S.  G .,  July  10,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  delicate  operation  of  with- 
drawing our  forces  from  James  Island,  the  reasons  for  which  step  were 
given  in  my  letter  dated  the  27th  ultimo,*  has  been  successfully  accom- 
plished, without  injury  to  a single  man  or  the  abandonment  of  one  pound 
of  public  property.  The  main  portion  of  our  forces  are  now  aggregated 
at  this  point,  North  Edisto,  and  Beaufort,  all  possible  precautions  being 
taken  to  secure  their  health  and  comfort,  and  with  results  fully  meeting 
my  most  sanguine  expectations.  No  epidemic  fevers  have  yet  appeared 
in  any  portion  of  the  command,  though  the  great  number  of  men  pros- 
trated on  James  Island  by  bilious  and  low  typhoid  fevers  and  the  in- 
creasing sick  list,  attributed  to  malarial  debility,  gave  warning  of  what 
we  might  have  expected  had  the  occupation  of  our  position  there  been 
continued. 

I have  concluded  to  retain  for  the  present  at  Beaufort  the  2,000  troops 
under  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.Brannan,  originally  brought  up  from  Key  West 
and  the  Tortugas  to  take  part  in  the  attack  on  Charleston.  Garrisons 
of  abundant  strength  were  left  behind  under  my  direction  by  Brigadier- 
General  Brannau,  and  as  the  health  of  the  troops  retained  at  Beaufort 
stood  undoubtedly  in  need  of  renovation,  and  as  there  are  better  oppor- 
tunities for  regimental  and  more  especially  brigade  drill  at  that  point, 
the  advantages  of  this  course  are  obvious.  Should  there  be  any  serious 
threatening  of  foreign  intervention,  however,  these  troops  will  be  im- 
mediately returned  to  their  respective  stations  ; but  in  the  absence  of 
any  pressing  cause  for  their  return  to  Key  West  and  the  Tortugas  the 
climate  of  Beaufort,  salubrious  par  excellence , recommends  it  during 
the  sickly  months  now  approaching.  It  is,  moreover,  a central  point, 
from  which,  if  necessary,  the  troops  can  be  transported  in  any  direction 
with  the  facilities  of  water  transit. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

D.  HUNTEK, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright , U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  [J.  S.  Forces, 

James  Island , S.  O.,  June  29,  1862. 
Major  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  letter 


See  p.  43. 


108 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap. XXVI. 

of  the  major-general  commanding,  dated  the  27th  instant,*  instructing 
me  to  abandon  James  Island  with  the  forces  under  my  command,  and 
in  obedience  thereto  have  already  sent  oft'  such  of  the  sick  as  could  not 
march  with  their  regiments,  and  have  been  to-day  shipping  stores  and 
the  horses  of  the  cavalry,  which  will  be  the  first  of  the  command  to 
leave.  I hope  to  be  able  to  accomplish  the  whole  movement  success- 
fully, removing  everything  without  loss.  The  movement  to  Legareville, 
with  the  balance  of  the  command  left  after  the  first  detachment  is  sent 
away,  will  occasion  much  labor  and  I fear  loss  of  time,  as  the  difficulties 
of  approach  to  that  place  by  steamers  are  serious.  It  might  be  well  to 
leave  it  to  my  judgment  whether  to  make  the  transfer  or  not.  On  this 
point  I would  ask  early  instructions. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Dept.)  Hilton  Head)  8.  C. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

James  Island)  8.  (7.,  July  4,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  two  regiments  of  the  Sec- 
ond Brigade  of  General  Stevens’  division— the  One  hundredth  Pennsyl- 
vania Eegiment  and  the  Seventy- ninth  New  York  Eegiment — under 
their  brigade  commander,  Colonel  Leasure,  will  leave  this  morning  for 
Hilton  Head,  and  that  the  third  regiment  of  that  brigade  will  be  sent 
by  the  Cosmopolitan,  now  expected  momentarily,  as  soon  as  she  arrives. 
Bockwell’s  battery  also  goes  to-day.  I am  very  much  embarrassed  in 
the  embarkation  of  the  troops  for  the  want  of  a sufficiency  of  transpor- 
tation, and  would  most  urgently  request  that  everything  that  can  be 
spared  in  the  way  of  steamers  which  can  enter  the  Stono  be  sent  here 
at  once.  The  Staten  Islander  and  the  Mayflower  would  help  me  out 
very  much.  So  far  the  weather  has  been  such  as  to  preclude  the  use 
of  the  Vanderbilt,  as  it  has  been  impossible  to  transfer  troops  to  her 
outside,  and  the  propellers  Potomac  and  Locust  Point  have  been  of  no 
service.  They  will  be  sent  down  as  soon  as  orders  can  be  got  to  them, 
and  as  their  draught  is  not  too  great  for  the  waters  about  Hilton  Head, 
it  is  suggested  they  might  for  two  or  three  days  take  the  place  of  the 
steamers  asked  for  above. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General)  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , Hilton  Head)  S.  C. 


Headquarters  TJ.  S.  Forces, 

James  Island)  S.  (7.,  July  5,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  steamer  Cosmopolitan 
leaves  for  Hilton  Head  at  10  a.  m.  to-day  with  four  pieces  of  artillery, 
the  Forty-sixth  New  York  Eegiment,  belonging  to  Second  Brigade,  of 


See  Inclosure  No.  5 to  Hunter’s  report  of  Juue  27,  p.  47. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  EVACUATION  OF  JAMES  ISLAND,  S.  C.  109 

Stevens7  division,  Colonel  Leasure  commanding,  and  the  Eighth  Michi- 
gan, of  the  First  Brigade,  Colonel  Fenton  commanding.  There  now 
remain  here  two  regiments  of  Fenton’s  brigade  (the  Seventh  Connect- 
icut and  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts)  and  the  two  regiments  desig- 
nated for  Edisto  (Sixth  Connecticut  and  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania), 
and  four  pieces  of  artillery,  with  quartermaster’s  horses,  wagons,  am- 
bulances, and  some  stores.  If  the  two  steamers  for  which  I wrote 
urgently  yesterday  are  sent  and  the  schooners  capable  of  carrying 
horses  and  wagons  are  returned  we  shall  be  able  to  get  off  everything 
by  the  next  move,  and  I think  successfully.  So  far  everything  has 
been  quiet  along  the  lines,  though  the  enemy  has  reoccupied  as  we 
have  withdrawn. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C. 


Headquarters  IJ.  S.  Forces, 

James  Island , S.  (7.,  July  6,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding,  that  the  Ben  DeFord  leaves,  this  morning  with 
quartermaster’s  stores,  horses,  and  the  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts 
Regiment,  which  regiment  belongs  to  the  brigade  of  Colonel  Fenton. 
Our  present  position  is  a strong  one,  and  I do  not  anticipate  any  trou- 
ble from  the  enemy ; yet  I am  of  course  anxious  to  get  off  the  remainder 
of  the  command  with  the  least  possible  delay.  I would  therefore  most 
urgently  request  that  the  Ben  De  Ford  be  discharged  to-night  and  sent 
back  to-morrow  morning,  and  that  the  Cosmopolitan  and  Delaware,  if 
not  already  started,  be  sent  here  at  the  same  time. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding . 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

A.  A.  G.,  Dept,  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Hdisto  Island , S.  0.,  July  9,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I arrived  here  about  8 p.  m. 
on  the  evening  of  the  7th  instant  with  the  Sixth  and  Seventh  Connecti- 
cut and  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  Regiments,  and  that  all  the  troops 
were  landed  by  6 a.  m.  the  next  morning. 

For  the  present  I have  established  the  camps  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
landing  near  the  place  marked  on  the  Coast  Survey  map  as  the  “Pt. 
of  Pines  House,”  deeming  this  as  the  most  eligible  position  on  account 
of  the  facilities  for  receiving  supplies,  as  well  as  for  the  health  of  the 
command.  A position  at  Eddingsville  or  on  Botany  Bay  Island,  imme- 
diately upon  the  sea  shore,  would  no  doubt  be  more  healthy  and  com- 
fortable; *but  as  military  positions  they  are  less  desirable.  Edisto 
Island,  as  you  are  probably  aware,  bears  the  reputation  of  being  very 
unhealthy  in  summer,  and  it  was  the  custom  of  the  resident  planters  to 


110 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 


abandon  it  as  early  as  June  and  go  to  Eddingsville,  which  is  a small 
collection  of  summer  houses  upon  a sand  ridge  immediately  upon  the 
sea;  yet  so  far  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  it  is  not  as  healthy  as 
any  of  the  other  islands  along  the  coast.  The  actual  sickly  season  has 
not,  however,  I presume,  fairly  been  entered  upon. 

If  the  island  is  to  be  permanently  occupied  it  would  be  a matter  of 
proper  precaution  to  erect  certain  defenses  and  arm  them  with  heavy 
guns,  with  which  we  could  act  effectively  upon  any  field  batteries  the 
enemy  might  easily  land  for  the  purpose  of  attack.  At  present  we 
have  to  relv  upon  the  artillery  of  the  gunboats  for  this.  The  fast  land 
upon  the  opposite  side  of  the  Edisto  River  is  about  2 miles  distant,  and 
a battery  of  heavy  guns  would  seriously  annoy  us.  I should  like  a few 
heavy  guns  to  reply  to  such  an  attempt;  but  upon  this  point  I will 


write  again  in  a day  or  two. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

A.  A.  (r.,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C. 


JUNE  30- JULY  1,  1862.— Bombardment  of  Tampa,  Fla. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  Middle 
and  East  Florida. 

No.  2.— Capt.  J.  W.  Pearson,  C.  S.  Army,  Osceola  Rangers. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  Middle  and  Fast  Florida. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

Tallahassee , Fla .,  July  8,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy  commenced 
shelling  the  town  of  Tampa  with  one  vessel  on  the  30th  ultimo.  There 
are  two  companies  (Pearson’s  and  Chambers’]  stationed  at  Tampa,  and 
my  advices  are  that  our  batteries  are  replying  deliberately  and  regu- 
larly to  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  I apprehend  no  attempt  on  the  part  of  . 
the  Federals  to  capture  Tampa.  The  force  engaged  (one  vessel)  for- 
bids such  an  idea.  I presume  they  intend  to  annoy  us  for  killing  and 
capturing  their  men  on  our  coast. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient 
servant, 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


Chap.  XXVI.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  TAMPA,  FLA.  Ill 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  W.  Pearson , G.  S,  Army , Osceola  Rangers. 

Tampa  Bay,  Fla.,  July  2,  1862. 

Dear  Sir  : I now  have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  a spirited  little 
battle  between  my  command  and  a Federal  gunboat,  commanded  by 
Captain  Drake,  in  which  God  has  given  us  a victory: 

On  Monday  morning,  June  30,  the  gunboat  hove  in  sight  in  the  bay, 
and  after  sounding  and  maneuvering  to  get  a favorable  position  came 
to  anchor,  turned  her  broadside  to  us  and  opened  her  ports,  and  then 
started  a launch,  with  a lieutenant  and  20  men,  bearing  a flag  of  truce, 
toward  our  shore.  I immediately  manned  one  of  my  boats  with  18 
men  and  met  them  in  the  bay,  determined  that  they  should  not  land 
on  my  shore,  and  on  meeting  the  boat  the  lieutenant  in  command  re- 
ported he  had  been  sent  by  Captain  Drake  to  demand  an  unconditional 
surrender  of  the  town.  My  reply  to  him  was  that  we  did  not  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  the  word  surrender;  there  was  no  such  letter  in 
our  book;  we  don’t  surrender.  He  then  said  they  would  commence 
shelling  the  town  at  6 o’clock,  and  I told  hkn  to  pitch  in.  We  then 
gave  three  hearty  cheers  for  the  Southern  Confederacy  and  the  Federal 
boat  crew  said  nothing.  Each  party  then  returned  to  their  respective 
places  to  prepare  for  action.  I had  a part  of  my  ammunition,  &c.,  moved 
1 mile  in  the  rear  and  placed  a guard  over  them.  In  the  mean  time 
the  women  and  children  moved  out  a mile  or  so,  and  at  6 o’clock  they 
promptly  opened  fire  on  us  with  heavy  shell  and  shot,  and  after  two 
shots  from  them  we  opened  from  our  batteries,  consisting  of  three 
24-pounder  cannon.  Both  parties  then  kept  up  a regular  fire  until  7 
p.  m.,  about  one  hour,  when  they  lowered  their  flag  and  ceased  to  fire. 
We  fired  three  guns  after  they  stopped.  We  fired  twenty-two  shots 
and  they  fired  twenty.  They  struck  our  batteries  several  times.  They 
threw  rifle  shot  and  11-inch  shell.  This  we  know,  as  we  now  have  one 
of  these  shells  in  our  yard  that  did  not  explode.  They  lay  out  of  the 
range  of  our  guns  (the  vessel)  by  from  2£  to  2£  miles  from  our  batteries, 
but  we  put  our  guns  up  to  the  utmost  capacity.  It  is  said  by  outsiders 
who  were  close  lookers-on  that  we  struck  their  vessel. 

I am  proud  to  say  that  my  men  behaved  handsomely  on  the  occasion, 
though  some  of  them  had  never  before  fired  a cannon.  I had  them 
drilled  in  ten  minutes  so  they  were  as  old  veterans,  and  I would  here 
mention  the  name  of  Captain  Gettis  in  the  highest  terms.  He  took 
command  of  one  of  the  batteries  manned  by  a green  squad  of  my  men 
who  had  never  fired  a cannon  before,  his  own  company  having  left  a 
few  days  previous  for  Tennessee.  Captain  Gettis  acted  with  that  cool 
firmness  which  characterizes  the  man  in  all  his  various  spheres  at  the 
» bar  and  legislative  councils;  and  I would  also  remark  here  that  the 
citizens  behaved  handsomely,  showing  loyalty  to  the  backbone. 

As  I before  remarked,  the  firing  ceased  at  7 p.  m.,  each  party  remain- 
ing on  the  field  ready  to  renew  the  conflict  at  daylight. 

The  next  morning  at  daylight  I repaired  to  my  batteries,  but  the 
vessel  seemed  to  be  repairing  damages  or  fixing  something  and  did  not 
get  ready  for  action  until  about  10  a.  m.,  at  which  time  she  opened  fire 
on  us  with  heavy  shell  and  shot  and  kept  it  up  until  12  o’clock — two 
hours.  W^3  kept  our  ground,  but  did  not  fire  in  consequence  of  their 
being  out  of  the  range  of  our  guns  and  ammunition  too  scarce  to  be 
wasted  foolishly. 

At  12  o’clock  they  stopped  firing,  for  dinner  I supposed,  and  we 


112 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

rested* upon  our  ground  until  2 o’clock,  when  I sent  up  our  flag,  aud  it 
seemed  to  float  so  proudly  and  beautifully,  showing  its  broad  side  to 
them , it  made  them  furious.  They  then  fired  at  us  two  powerful  shots  in 
rapid  succession,  then  weighed  anchor,  and  in  a few  minutes  showed 
us  her  stern,  and  left  us  in  peaceful  possession  of  the  town  that  they 
had  the  evening  before  demanded  unconditional  surrender  of  in  such 
furioso-gusto  manner. 

Nobody  hurt  on  our  side;  we  cannot  tell  what  damage  was  done  to 

them.  „ , . 

My  son,  the  bearer  of  this,  will  answer  you  all  questions  you  desire 

to  ask,  as  he  was  at  one  of  the  batteries. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J F ’ J.  W.  PEARSON, 

Captain  Osceola  Rangers  and  Commander  of  Post 
General  Joseph  Einegan,  Tallahassee , Fla. 


JULY  4,  1862.— Affair  at  Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  S.  Walker , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Third  Military 

. District. 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville , S.  <7.,  July  5,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday,  July  4, 1 drove 
in  the  enemy’s  pickets  at  Port  Royal  Perry  with  a section  of  the  Beau- 
fort Artillery,  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott  commanding,  supported  by  15  men 
of  Company  I,  Eleventh  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  One 
piece  was  taken  to  the  bulkhead,  and  under  cover  of  its  fire  a boat, 
manned  with  12  men  of  the  artillery,  under  command  of  Sergeant 
Barnwell,  landed  at  the  ferry -house  with  a barrel  of  turpentine.  Inside 
the  house  was  found  a barricade,  from  which  they  had  annoyed  my 
pickets  with  long-range  rifles.  The  whole  was  burned  to  the  ground. 
A very  large  coil  of  rope,  which  it  is  supposed  they  had  used  in  cross- 
ing the  ferry  the  night  previous  to  the  attack  on  the  railroad,  was 
brought  away.  At  the  conclusion  of  our  operations,  which  lasted 
about  thirty  minutes,  the  enemy  brought  up  a 12-pounder  and  made 
some  rather  wild  firing,  by  which  nobody  was  hurt. 

All  the  movements  were  marked  with  coolness  and  precision. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ’ W.  S.  WALKER, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JULY  9,  1862.— Expedition  to  Fenwick’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Maj.  R.  J . Jeffords , C.  8.  Army , Sixth  South  Carolina  Bat- 
talion Cavalry. 


Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville , S.  C.,  July  1G,  1862. 


Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia: 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  report  of  operations  by  Maj. 


Chap.  XXYI.] 


113 


EXPEDITION  TO  FENWICK’S  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

E.  J.  Jeffords,  commanding  Sixth  Battalion  Cavalry,  upon  the  night 
of  the  9th  July,  made  under  my  order,  to  effect  a diversion  in  favor  of 
General  Evans,  who  expected  to  attack  the  enemy  at  daylight  of  the 
same  date.  Though  nothing  was  effected,  owing  to  the  failure  of  the 
attack  by  ^General  Evans,  I think  it  proper  to  call  your  attention  to 
the  characteristic  activity  and  enterprise  shown  by  Major  Jeffords  on 
the  occasion. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 


Hdqrs.  Sixth  Battalion  Cavalry,  S.  C.  Yols., 
Chisolmville , 8.  <7.,  July  9,  1862. 

Colonel:  I beg  to  report  that  1 left  Chapman’s  Fort  on  evening  of 
the  7th  with  130  commissioned  and  non-commissioned  officers  and  pri- 
vates, and  proceeded  to  Fenwick’s  Island,  landing  on  rear  in  Mosquito 
Creek.  I sent  out  a small  reconnaissance  to  Major  Murray’s  planta- 
tion, they  soon  after  returning,  seeing  no  signs  of  the  enemy.  I pro- 
ceeded down  the  island  to  Seabrook’s  place,  on  Pon  Pon  River.  I 
took  from  this  point  a general  survey  of  Otter  Island,  Saint  Helena 
Sound,  Pon  Pon  River,  and  the  neighborhood  around.  On  Otter 
Island  I saw  two  of  the  enemy’s  flags  flying,  one  very  large;  in  mouth 
of  Ashepoo  one  sloop  of  war,  and  just  at  entrance  of  river  one  gunboat 
(steam).  There  were  no  vessels  on  South  Edisto  or  Pon  Pon  River. 
The  boats  in  Ashepoo  could  not  reach  Pon  Pon  without  passing  through 
Mosquito  or  going  25  miles  around,  so  I delayed,  awaiting  attack  of  Gen- 
eral Evans,  until  after  sunrise.  Hearing  no  guns  (which  was  a necessity, 
should  he  have  fired,  as  only  the  Pon  Pon  River  divided  me)  I returned 
to  boats,  3 miles  off,  first  showing  myself  in  force  plainly  to  the  sloop 
of  war  in  Ashepoo.  She  promptly  had  the  long  roll  beaten,  but  as 
tide  was  against  her  I apprehended  no  danger.  I proceeded  to  Hutch- 
inson’s Island,  found  no  enemy,  they  only  visiting  there  from  time  to 
time.  I was  informed  by  an  old  negro  the  enemy  had  removed  most  of 
the  young  negroes  to  Hilton  Head,  stating  they  were  unable  to  protect 
them  from  our  attacks  where  they  were.  At  flood  tide  the  enemy  ad- 
vanced up  Ashepoo,  shelling  Hutchinson’s  Island,  and  coming  up  to 
within  2 miles  of  Chapman’s  Fort.  I immediately  manned  boats  and 
had  them  removed  25  miles  up  Ashepoo  to  Heyward’s  plantation. 

I am  sorry  the  diversion  has  not  met  with  some  success.  It  was  one 
of  great  danger,  as  I could  have  been  easily  and  completely  cut  off. 
The  fatigue  was  very  severe,  rowing  heavily-laden  boats  near  100  miles 
mostly  against  a swift  current.  The  men  behaved  splendidly,  and  I 
only  wish  I had  a better  field  for  operation. 

The  gun  with  detachment  arrived  in  good  time;  it  was  fired  once 
from  boat  with  great  ease. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


R.  J.  JEFFORDS, 
Major.  Commanding. 

Col.  W.  S.  Walker. 


P.  S. — I destroyed  four  boats,  one  fine  one,  on  Hutchinson’s  Island. 
3 R R — VOL  xiv 


114 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


JULY  9-10,  1862.— Demonstration  against  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Joint  G.  Pemberton , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston,  S.  G .,  July  10,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  Colonel  Walker, 
commanding  at  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. : 

Four  flat-boat  loads  of  troops  landed  at  Port  Royal  Ferry ; two  gunboats  shelling; 
troops  continue  landing.  Enemy  advancing  with  heavy  force — artillery  and  infantry. 
* W.  S.  WALKER, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

I have  sent  troops  to  meet  them. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  10, 1862. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

The  following  telegram  just  received  from  General  Evans : 


Adams  Run,  S.  C.,  July  10,  1862. 

I have  reconnoitered  the  enemy  on  Edisto.  He  is  in  large  force  and  still  landing 
troops  and  provisions.  Yesterday  he  attacked  my  pickets  on  Dawho  and  Wadmalaw. 
I have  sent  one  regiment  to  the  assistance  of  Colonel  Walker  at  Pocotaligo. 

& N.  G.  EVANS. 


I do  not  believe  the  enemy  have  many  troops  on  the  coast.  Colonel 
Walker  reports  they  have  recrossed  at  Port  Royal  Ferry.  Pickets 
generally  exaggerate 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


AUGUST  13,  1862.— Engagement  on  Black  River,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel , Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

Camp  Marion, 

Near  Georgetown , S.  C .,  August  15,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  an  engagement  with 
the  Federals,  which  is  as  follows : 

On  Wednesday,  the  13th  instant,  about  noon,  the  enemy’s  gunboats 
and  a small  tug  made  their  appearance  in  Winyaw  Bay,  in  front  of 
Georgetown,  and  anchored.  They  remained  there  until  about  3 a.  m. 
of  the  14th,  when  they  moved  off  very  cautiously  up  Black  River  to 
Mrs.  Sparkman’s  plantation,  some  20  miles  above  Georgetown.  I 
immediately  took  all  the  forces  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  and 
arrived  there  as  soon  as  possible.  Before  getting  there,  however,  I 
heard  heavy  firing  in  the  direction  of  the  section  of  artillery  belonging 
to  Captain  Ward’s  battery,  but  not  being  able  to  get  any  commuuica- 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


115 


AFFAIR  ON  PINCKNEY  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

tion  with  them,  cannot  as  yet  give  you  any  of  the  particulars,  but  sup- 
posed they  had  an  engagement,  but  owing  to  a deserter  being  with 
them  I fear  they  took  the  battery  in  the  rear.  I,  with  my  forces  on 
this  side,  arrived  just  in  time  to  see  them  land  at  Mrs.  Sparkman’s. 
We  then  deployed  our  men  on  both  sides,  above  and  below,  and  drove 
them  back  to  their  boats,  and  when  they  tried  to  get  off  they  found 
the  boat  aground,  and  it  took  the  tug  about  two  hours  to  get  it  oft*  we 
giving  them  a pretty  brisk  fire  from  the  bank  all  the  while.  She  ran 
up  the  river  a tew  hundred  yards  and  turned  to  come  back  and  gave 
us  a few  shell  and  a heavy  fire  with  their  small-arms,  which  we  re- 
turned as  she  passed  by.  I then  threw  the  forces  at  every  favorable 
place  on  the  river  below  and  fired  on  them  as  they  passed 

We  were  engaged  about  five  hours.  I don’t  think  the’enemv’s  loss 
could  have  been  less  then  50  killed  and  wounded.  Our  casualties  are 
2 wounded,  both  slightly.  I will  report  from  the  other  side  as  early  as 
possible.  J 

I take  great  pleasure  in  saying  that  the  troops  with  me  on  this  side 
acted  with  great  promptness  and  bravery. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

W.  P.  EMANUEL, 

General  S.  B.  Gist.  Maj°r’  0ommandin9- 


AUGUST  21,  1862. — Affair  on  Pinckney  Island,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Lieut.  Col.  John  H.  Jackson,  Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia. 

No.  3.— Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Military  District. 

No.  4.— Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  Beaufort  (S.  C.)  Artillery. 


No.  1. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  H.  Jackson , Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry . 

^ 7 Headquarters, 

Craham/s  Plantation , August  21,  1862— 7.30  a.  m. 

Sir  : I have  just  received  reports  from  Pinckney  Island  that  the  com- 
pany posted  on  the  eastern  end  of  the  island  was  surprised  this  morn- 
ing by  apparently  three  companies  of  the  rebels.  The  lieutenant  in 
command  was  taken  prisoner  and  about  40  men : 1 sergeant  and  5 pri- 
vates escaped  and  are  reported  on  their  way  to  these  headquarters. 
They  report  the  rebels  at  6 o’clock  this  morning  on  the  island  in  some 
lorce,  ami  wearing  a blue  uniform  similar  to  our  own.  I have  notified 
all  my  officers  to  have  their  commands  in  readiness  to  move  on  to  Pinck- 
ney  Island.  As  you  have  been  notified  from  Seabrook  I wait  further 
orders,  thinking  you  may  think  proper  to  send  a gunboat  to  cut  off  the 
retreat  of  the  rebels. 

Yours,  with,  respect, 

JOHN  H.  JACKSON, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

H,  W,  Carruthers,  Post  Adjutant, 


116 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Hdqrs.  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers, 
Graham’s  Plantation , Hilton  Head,  S.  G .,  Aug.  21,  1862 — 10.45. 

Sir:  Yours  in  reply  to  my  communication  of  this  morning  is  received. 

After  sending  my  report  I learned  from  some  of  those  who  escaped 
from  the  inland  that  Lieutenant  Wiggin  was  left  on  the  island  either 
killed  or  wounded  badly,  and  that  a number  of  our  men  were  left  there 
either  killed  or  wounded. 

Major  Plimpton,  with  a detachment  from  each  of  the  four  companies 
on  the  river,  immediately  landed  on  Pinckney  Island  to  investigate  the 
whole  affair  as  far  as  possible  and  to  recover  those  of  our  men  who 
were  killed  or  wounded.  Lieutenant  Wiggin  and  1 private,  killed  in 
resisting  the  attack,  have  been  sent  to  Seabrook’s  Wharf,  with  some 
wounded  men,  who  need  the  attendance  of  a surgeon.  I gave  Captain 
Emmons  orders  to  send  to  Hilton  Head  for  a surgeon,  which  I suppose 
he  has  done  ere  this.  I have  a report  at  this  moment  from  the  captain 
commanding  the  picket  on  the  western  end  of  the  island,  who  has 
visited  his  posts,  and  they  report  all  quiet  during  the  night ; heard  no 
guns,  cries,  or  anything  of  the  kind,  and  also  report  that  the  enemy’s 
pickets  present  no  unusual  appearance.  They  have  fired  however  on 
our  pickets  a number  of  times  this  morning. 

I shall  be  able  to  send  40  men  to-night  to  occupy  Company  H’s  former 
position.  On  Pinckney  Island  there  are  a large  number  of  contrabands 
and  several  well -cultivated  plantations.  The  contrabands  need  pro- 
tection and  the  plantations  are  valuable  for  their  produce. 

I have  been  all  over  the  island  lately,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
it  needs  five  or  six  companies  on  the  island  to  prevent  these  raids  on 
our  pickets.  Please  inform  me  if  I shall  continue  to  post  pickets  on 
that  end  of  the  island. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

JOHN  H.  JACKSON, 
Commanding  Third,  New  Hampshire  Volunteers. 


Hdqrs.  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  G.,  September  1,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  present  the  following  report  respect- 
ing an  attack  on  the  picket  of  this  regiment  stationed  on  Pinckney 
Island.  The  attack  took  place  just  before  daylight  ou  the  morning  of 
Thursday,  August  21.  The  enemy  landed  on  the  island  from  six  boats, 
five  of  them  landing  above  the  pickets,  and  approached  the  camp  from 
the  side  where  no  guard  was  stationed  and  fired  a volley  before  they 
were  discovered.  The  other  boat  came  around  the  point  to  where  one 
of  our  pickets  was  stationed  very  near  the  camp.  The  sentinel  chal- 
lenged twice  and  the  lieutenant  stepped  from  his  tent  and  approached 
him.  He  had  gone  but  a short  distance  when  a volley  was  fired  from 
the  enemy,  they  being  then  in  the  camp. 

Lieutenant  Wiggin  was  found  dead  a short  distance  from  his  tent, 
with  eight  or  nine  wounds  on  his  body.  The  rebels  remained  but  a 
short  time  on  the  island,  and  took  but  little  of  the  company  property 
and  did  not  destroy  the  tents.  The  enemy  have  presented  no  unusual 
appearance  since  the  attack.  Our  loss  was:  Killed,  1 lieutenant,  3 
privates ; total,  4.  Wounded,  2 privates ; total  2.  Missing,  3 sergeants, 
4 corporals,  29  privates ; total,  36.  One  of  the  wounded  men  has  since 
died,  and  the  other  was  severely  wounded  and  may  not  recover. 

A number  of  the  rebels  were  either  killed  or  wounded,  according  to 
the  report  of  one  of  the  corporals  who  was  taken  prisoner,  but  the 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


AFFAIR  ON  PINCKNEY  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


117 


squad  having  him  in  charge  was  fired  upon,  probably  by  their  own  men 
in  the  darkness,  and  the  fire  was  returned.  In  the  confusion  the  cor- 
poral escaped,  the  guard  at  his  side  being  shot  dead. 

On  the  6th  of  August  3 men  of  Company  H deserted  from  Pinckney 
Island,  and  a new  disposition  of  the  pickets  was  immediately  made 
and  the  utmost  vigilance  urged  upon  the  lieutenant  (Wiggin)  com- 
manding that  post.  At  different  times  two  detachments  of  fresh  men 
were  sent  to  Pinckney  Island  to  prevent  the  old  pickets  from  relaxing 
their  vigilance  from  great  fatigue.  At  the  time  when  the  last  detach- 
ment was  sent  I accompanied  it,  and  examined  all  the  picket  posts,  and 
pointed  out  particularly  the  necessity  of  great  vigilance  at  the  very 
point  where  the  enemy  landed  on  the  21st  ultimo,  and  called  the  par- 
ticular attention  of  the  lieutenant  to  the  importance  of  the  post. 

Since  the  surprise  of  the  company  (H)  I have  learned  that  the  lieu- 
tenant (most  unaccountably  to  me)  removed  entirely  the  guard  at  that 
post  and  the  patrol  from  that  point  along  the  road  to  their  camp.  Lieu- 
tenant Wiggin  proved  himself  a brave  man  at  the  battle  on  James 
Island,  June  16,  and  nothing  previous  to  this  unfortunate  affair  has 
ever  happened  to  shake  my  confidence  in  his  ability  as  an  officer. 

It  was  a great  lack  of  vigilance  and  judgment  on  his  part,  and  his 
too  strong  sense  of  security  cost  him  the  loss  of  his  life  and  the  regi- 
ment the  loss  of  nearly  an  entire  company.  Every  precaution  was 
taken  on  my  part  to  prevent  any  surprise  of  that  post. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  H.  JACKSON, 

Colonel , Commanding  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers. 
Major-General  Hunter,  Comdg.  Department  of  the  South. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Map  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton , C.  S.  Army , commanding  De- 
partment of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  <7.,  August  27,  1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  reports  of  Col.  W.  S. 
Walker  and  Capt.  S.  Elliott,  Beaufort  Light  Artillery,  of  an  expedition 
against  the  enemy  stationed  on  Pinckney  Island.  In  forwarding  these 
reports  I would  respectfully  call  your  attention  to  the  gallantry  and 
good  conduct  of  Captains  S.  Elliott  and  Mickler,  who  conducted  the 
expedition  with  complete  success  to  our  arms. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General.,  Commanding. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  Third  Military 

District. 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville , S.  C .,  August  22,  1862. 
Major;  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  from  the  reconnaissance  of 


118 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Colcock,  of  the  Second  Battalion  Cavalry,  and  Capt. 
J.  H.  Mickler,  Eleventh  Infantry,  and  the  information  obtained  from  3 
deserters,  I was  persuaded  that  a force  of  the  enemy  stationed  in  the 
northeastern  point  of  Pinckney  Island,  and  believed  not  to  exceed  100 
men,  could  be  surprised  and  captured.  For  this  purpose  I ordered 
Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  of  the  Beaufort  Artillery,  with  Capt.  J.  H.  Mick- 
ler,  Eleventh  Infantry,  to  organize  a boat  expedition.  I refer  you  to 
the  inclosed  report  of  Captain  Elliott  for  a clear  and  unreserved  state- 
ment of  his  operations. 

For  a due  understanding  of  the  hazardous  nature  of  the  undertaking 
it  is  necessary  to  state  that  a gunboat  cruises  in  that  immediate  neigh- 
borhood, and  that  her  masts  were  seen  through  the  trees  from  the 
enemy’s  encampment.  There  was  not  only  the  danger  attending  an 
attack  upon  an  enemy  nearly  equal  in  force,  but  the  still  greater  risk 
of  being  intercepted  by  the  powerful  batteries  of  a war  steamer.  The 
conception  of  the  expedition  required  daring  and  great  rapidity  of  ex- 
ecution. A prolonged  contest,  even  if  successful,  would  have  been 
fatal  in  its  results.  I knew  that  the  high  qualities  of  the  leaders  and 
their  men  would  secure  the  prompt  execution,  and  the  result  has  amply 
justified  my  confidence.  While  great  credit  is  due  to  every  officer  and 
man  engaged,  I must  specially  mention  the  conspicuous  services  of 
Captains  Elliott  and  Mickler.  My  position  in  front  of  an  enemy  oc- 
cupying islands  and  commanding  their  approach  with  powerful  war 
steamers,  as  well  as  the  character  of  my  force,  consisting  mainly  of 
cavalry  armed  with  shot-guns,  has  disabled  me  from  undertaking  any 
large  operations  against  the  enemy.  I believe,  however,  I have  suc- 
ceeded in  impressing  him  with  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  my  force 
by  means  of  repeated  attacks  upon  his  pickets  at  various  points,  which 
would  seem  to  indicate  the  confidence  and  audacity  of  a strong  and 
threatening  force. 

I have  been  indebted  to  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  who  is  a sailor  as  well 
as  a soldier,  for  the  organization  and  largely  for  the  execution  of  these 
affairs.  With  great  zeal  and  enterprise  he  has  contributed  a sagacity 
and  prudence  which  have  invariably  secured  success.  His  officers  and 
men  have  proved  worthy  of  their  commander.  They  have  borne  ex- 
posure, fatigue,  and  hunger  with  unshrinking  courage  and  alacrity. 
Captain  Mickler  has  but  recently  been  under  my  command,  but  in  that 
short  time  his  boldness  as  a scout  and  his  gallantry  as  a leader  have 
sustained  liis  well-earned  reputation.  I would  commend  all  the  officers 
and  men  engaged  in  the  expedition  to  the  most  favorable  notice  of  the 
general  commanding. 

I inclose  a copy  of  the  only  order  of  special  interest  among  those  cap- 
tured. I will  send  the  prisoners  to  Charleston  as  soon  as  I have  ex- 
amined them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W,  S.  WALKEB, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  B.  Waddy,  A.  A.  G.,  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  Beaufort  (S.  C.)  Artillery. 

McPhersonville,  S.  C.,  August  22, 1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  an  expedi* 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  AFFAIR  ON  PINCKNEY  ISLAND,  S.  C.  119 

tion  to  Pinckney  Island,  organized  in  pursuance  to  orders  from  district 
headquarters : „ 

On  the  18th,  in  company  with  Captain  Mickier,  I made  a careful  re* 
connaissance  of  the  island  and  formed  my  plan  of  attack.  I extended 
orders  to  Captain  Mickier  to  transport  four  boats  from  Horton’s  to  Bear 
Island  and  to  join  me  on  the  evening  of  the  21st  with  100  men.  I also 
directed  that  50  men  of  the  Beaufort  Artillery,  with  muskets  and  a 
4-pounder  boat  gun,  should  meet  me  at  Boyd’s  Landing  on  the  19th, 
in  order  to  take  six  boats  to  Foot  Point  and  Bear  Island  by  the  way  of 
Broad  River.  The  dispositions  were  successfully  accomplished  within 
the  required  time. 

On  the  21st,  at  3 a.  m.,  I left  Bear  Island  with  detachments  of  Cap- 
tains Mickler’s,  Leadbetter’s,  and  Wescoat’s  companies,  under  the  com- 
mand of  their  captains,  and  of  the  Beaufort  Artillery,  under  Lieuten- 
ant Stuart,  amounting  in  all  to  120  men,  36  of  whom  acted  as  oarsmen, 
and  remained  in  the  boats,  nine  in  number. 

Passing  down  a creek  10  miles  in  length,  I landed  at  early  dawn  on 
Pinckney  Island,  300  yards  in  rear  of  the  dwelling-house,  which  is  sit- 
uated at  the  apex  of  an  angle  whose  sides  include  [incline]  about  40°. 
Deploying  rapidly  across  the  base,  I moved  forward  toward  the  point 
over  ground  on  one  side  open  and  on  the  other  covered  by  a dense 
thicket  up  to  the  camp  of  Company  H,  Third  Regiment  New  Hamp- 
shire Volunteers,  surprising  them,  killing,  according  to  the  most  careful 
estimate,  15  and  capturing  36,  4 of  whom  were  wounded.  Six  were 
seen  to  escape  and  5 are  known  to  have  been  absent.  These,  with 
the  previous  numbers  named,  give  62;  the  number  on  their  morning 
report  book.  The  lieutenant  in  command,  the  only  officer  present, 
either  escaped  or  was  killed.  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  the  latter. 
To  avoid  delay  in  so  exposed  a position  I forbade  the  men  to  touch  an 
article,  and  we  returned,  bringing  off  the  company  records  and  two 
tine  boats,  having  remained  on  the  island  fifteen  minutes. 

Eight  of  my  men  were  wounded,  6 of  them,  I regret  to  say,  by  their 
own  men.  This  is  the  more  provoking,  as  I earnestly  and  repeatedly 
warned  both  officers  and  men  against  this  very  danger.  Some  pallia- 
tion may  exist  in  the  fact  that  some  of  the  men  were  engaged  for  the 
first  time  ; that  the  disaster  sprung  from  an  excess  of  zeal  and  courage, 
and  that  there  was  not  light  enough  to  distinguish  persons  at  any  dis- 
tance. The  mixture  of  small  detachments  too,  at  all  times  an  element 
of  confusion,  is  especially  so  in  surprises  at  night,  when  the  necessity 
of  silence  demands  the  most  rigid  discipline  and  uniformity  of  action. 

I take  pleasure  in  saying  that  the  whole  command  acted  with  great 
spirit  and  determination.  It  is  a just  tribute  to  a gallant  officer  to  say 
that  Captain  Mickier,  by  his  ceaseless  energy  and  labor  for  days  and 
nights  previously,  as  well  as  by  his  valuable  suggestions,  contributed 
in  no  small  degree  to  the  success  of  the  enterprise,  while  by  his  im- 
petuous courage  he  rendered  complete  the  surprise  of  the  enemy. 

Inclosed  are  lists  of  our  wounded  * and  of  the  prisoners.  I send  also 
the  books  and  papers  captured.f 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 
Captain  Beaufort  Artillery , Commanding  Expedition . 

Lieut.  E.  H.  Barnwell, 

A.  A.  Cr.,  Third  Military  District , Department  S.  C. 


Nominal  list  shows  8 men  wounded. 


tNot  found. 


120  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  0.,  August  27,  1862. 

Capt.  S.  Elliott, 

( Commanding  Beaufort  Artillery ), 

Captain  Mickler: 

Captain  : I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  ex- 
press his  sincere  thanks  to  yon  and  the  troops  under  your  command 
for  their  gallant  conduct  in  the  late  successful  expedition  against  the 
enemy  on  Pinckney  Island.  The  designing  and  successful  carrying 
out  of  such  expedition,  as  attested  by  the  rout  and  complete  annihila- 
tion of  the  enemy,  prove  irresistibly  the  foresight  of  the  designer  and 
the  gallantry  of  his  troops.  To  you  therefore  and  to  your  command 
are  tendered  by  the  major-general  commanding  the  thanks  of  the  de- 
partment under  his  command. 

R.  W.  MEMMIKGER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


SEPTEMBER  10,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Kilkenny  River,  S.  C. 

Congratulatory  letter  of  J.  R.  Waddy , C.  8.  Army , Assistant  Adjutant- 
General^  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  (7.,  September  14,  1862. 
Capt.  J.  L.  McAllister,  H.  M.  Rifles  : 

Captain  : I am  instructed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say 
to  you  that  he  is  highly  gratified  at  the  gallant  conduct  of  yourself  and 
the  officers  and  men  of  your  company  engaged  in  the  skirmish  on  the 
Kilkenny  River  with  the  enemy  on  September  10,  1862.  The  major- 
general  commanding  wishes  you  to  return  his  heartfelt  thanks  to  all 
concerned  for  their  gallantry  on  the  occasion  above  referred  to. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


SEPTEMBER  11,  1862. — Engagement  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

Baldwin,  Fla.,  September  12, 1862. 

I have  placed  a battery  of  six  guns  on  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  which 
was  not  discovered  by  the  enemy  until  completed.  Soon  after  it  was 
engaged  for  four  and  a half  hours  by  two  gunboats.  We  crippled  one 
of  the  boats  and  drove  the  other  off.  Loss  on  our  side,  1 man  killed 
and  8 slightly  wounded.  I have  sent  down  to-day  four  large  guns  to 
strengthen  the  battery. 

JOS.  FIKEGAK, 
Brigadier- General  j Commanding. 


General  S.  Cooper. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  ST.  JOHN'S  BLUFF,  FLA. 


121 


Bdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Dept.  East  and  Middle  Fla., 
Tallahassee , Fla.,  September  15,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Saturday  morning, 
the  6th  instant,  I moved  from  this  place  with  a detachment  of  Cap- 
tain Gamble’s  light  artillery  and  two  12-pounder  rifle  guns,  under  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Yillepigue,  and  two  8-inch  howitzers,  removed 
from  the  battery  at  Saint  Mark’s.  At  Lake  City  I took  with  me  two  32- 
pounder  rifle  guns,  previously  sent  there,  and  proceeded  to  the  Saint 
John’s  Eiver  at  Jacksonville.  There  I ordered  a detachment  of  Cap- 
tain Dunham’s  company — the  Milton  Artillery — to  accompany  me  to 
work  the  two  32-pounder  rifle  guns  and  the  two  8-inch  howitzers,  and 
placed  the  whole  force  under  the  command  of  Captain  Dunham.  The 
guns  and  necessary  ammunition  were  crossed  over  the  river  at  Jack- 
sonville in  flats  on  Sunday,  and  the  command  proceeded  down  the  east 
bank  of  the  Saint  John’s  to  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  about  5 miles  from  its 
mouth,  where  two  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  were  lying  at  anchor. 
The  command  was  supported  by  the  three  companies  of  Captain  Bre- 
vard, by  Captain  Westcott’s  company  of  Partisan  Bangers,  by  Captain 
Stephens’  company  of  cavalry,  and  by  Captain  Bichard’s  company  of 
the  First  Florida  Special  Battalion,  ordered  to  accompany  it  to  guard 
against  a land  attack.  I remained  with  the  expedition  to  give  it  my 
personal  supervision. 

On  Tuesday  night  [9th]  the  six  guns  were  placed  in  position  on  Saint 
John’s  Bluff,  where  the  ammunition  supplies  and  the  whole  force  had 
been  concentrated  without  the  observation  of  the  enemy. 

At  10  o’clock  Wednesday  morning,  finding  that  our  movement  was 
still  undiscovered  by  the  enemy,  I went  back  to  Jacksonville,  to  have 
two  8-inch  columbiads  and  two  8-inch  howitzers,  which  I had  brought 
from  the  Upper  Saint  John’s  in  contemplation  of  this  movement,  brought 
down  to  the  bluff,  hoping  to  place  them  in  position  before  we  were  dis- 
covered by  the  enemy. 

On  Wednesday,  about  8 p.  m.,  one  of  the  gunboats  approached 
within  three-fourths  of  a mile  of  the  bluff,  as  was  usual  with  her,  and 
threw  nine  shells  on  the  point.  Our  men  did  not  reply,  but  remained 
quiet. 

At  daylight  [11th]  our  guns  opened  on  her,  when  she  immediately 
moved  out  of  range ; not,  however,  before  she  was  struck  several  times. 
Signals  were  immediately  made  by  her  to  the  other  gunboat  and  they 
both  moved  up  and  attacked  the  batteries.  The  engagement  continued 
for  four  and  a half  hours,  resulting  in  the  crippling  of  one  of  the  boats 
and  driving  the  other  off.  Little  or  no  damage  was  done  to  the  bat- 
teries, and  the  loss  of  life  on  our  side  was  1 man  killed  and  8 slightly 
wounded. 

I regret  to  report  that  Capt.  J.  H.  McBory,  acting  engineer  officer, 
who  rendered  valuable  services,  was  seriously  injured  by  an  accidental 
bayonet  wound  while  sliding  down  an  embankment. 

Captain  Dunham,  in  command,  behaved  with  great  coolness  and 
bravery,  as  did  also  Captain  Bichard,  commanding  a section  of  the 
heavy  guns;  Lieutenant  Villepigue,  commanding  a section  of  Gamble’s 
battery;  Lieutenant  Stevens,  of  Milton  Artillery,  commanding  section 
of  heavy  guns,  and  Lieut.  T.  E.  Buckman,  ordnance  officer,  actiug  adju- 
tant of  the  command,  to  whom  much  credit  is  due. 

The  large  guns  have  been  sent  down,  and  I hope  the  battery  is  by  this 
time  strong  enough  to  resist  any  attack  that  may  be  made. 

The  officers  report  their  several  commands  to  have  behaved  with  gal- 
lantry while  under  fire. 


122 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.}  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


If  I can  hold  the  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  as  I hope  to  do,  it  will  relieve  the 
valley  of  the  Saint  John’s  from  the  marauding  incursions  of  the  enemy 
and  afford  a base  for  operations  against  Saint  Augustine.  Could  I have 
one  regiment  of  infantry  for  service  in  East  Florida  I think  I could  take 
Saint  Augustine  and  hold  it.  I respectfully  ask,  if  a regiment  can  be 
spared,  that  it  be  ordered  to  report  to  me. 

My  assistant  adjutant-general,  Captain  Call,  who  accompanied  the 
expedition,  rendered  efficient  service  throughout. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient 
servant, 

JOS.  FINE G AH, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.  C.  S.  Army , Richmond , Va. 


[Indorsement.] 

If  General  Beauregard  can  spare  a regiment  from  Savannah  tempo- 
rarily, request  him  to  order  it  to  report  to  General  Finegan. 

G.  W.  R. 


SEPTEMBER  17,  1862. — Engagement  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan , C.  S.  Army. 

Lake  City,  Fla.,  September  19,  1862. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  five  gunboats  engaged  the  battery  at 
Saint  John’s  Bluff  and  continued  the  engagement  for  five  hours,  when 
they  retired.  Our  loss,  2 killed  and  3 wounded.  The  enemy,  having 
failed  to  pass  our  batteries,  may  attempt  a land  attack.  I am  prepar- 
ing for  it  and  will  be  there  to-night.  Can  you  send  me  one  regiment 
of  infantry  from  the  coast  of  Georgia  or  Carolina?  I need  them  very 
much.  Answer  by  telegraph. 

JOS.  FINEGAH, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


SEPTEMBER  24,  1862.-Affair  on  Skull  Creek,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  William  B.  Barton , Forty-eighth  Hew  York  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces  on  the  Savannah  River, 
Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  September  25,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding  the  department,  that  yesterday,  having  received 
information  that  a squad  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  some  10  or  15  in  num- 
ber, were  visible  on  the  shore  of  the  main -land  opposite  the  northwest 


Chap.  XX  Vt.  1 


AFFAIR  Oft  SKULL  CREEK,  S.  C. 


123 


end  of  Pinckney  Island,  with  35  men  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York 
Volunteers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Miller,  and  a detachment 
of  Company  G,  Third  Rhode  Island  Volunteer  Artillery,  in  charge  of 
Lieutenant  Fry,  on  board  steamer  Planter,  I proceeded  through  Cali- 
bogue  Sound  to  Skull  Creek,  opposite  the  point  referred  to.  When  the 
steamer  was  yet  some  4 miles  distant  the  greater  portion  of  the  party 
retired,  leaving  only  a picket  of  some  3 or  4 men,  who  fled  in  the  great- 
est haste  at  the  first  discharge  from  our  guns.  I continued  shelling 
them  until  they  were  out  of  range,  when,  by  my  direction,  Lieutenant 
Miller,  with  his  party,  landed,  securing  saddles,  bridles,  holsters,  pistols, 
rifles,  coats,  blankets,  ammunition,  rations,  &c.,  belonging  to  the  picket 
and  bringing  them  on  board  the  steamer.  The  picket  at  this  point 
were  formerly  very  annoying  to  the  troops  on  outpost  duty  on  Hilton 
Head,  and  were  once  or  twice  shelled  out  by  direction  of  General  Hun- 
ter and  the  buildings  burned,  since  which  they  have  appeared  only  at 
intervals.  I have  reason  to  believe  that  if  the  tug  Starlight  was  placed 
at  my  disposal  for  a few  days  I could  greatly  injure,  and  perhaps  de- 
stroy, two  of  the  enemy’s  steamers  which  are  daily  anchored  in  the 
Savannah  River  just  inside  Four-Mile  Point.  These  boats  come  down 
from  Savannah  every  morning  at  about  7 o’clock  to  convey  laborers, 
vho  are  employed  upon  the  obstructions  in  the  river,  comedo  anchor, 
and  lie  without  steam  until  7 p.  m.  This  I know  from  personal  obser- 
vation and  the  statements  of  deserters,  contrabands,  &c.,  who  have 
recently  come  within  our  lines.  With  the  Planter  and  Starlight  I could 
take  a position  out  of  range  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  and,  I think,  inflict 
serious  damage  upon  the  boats  referred  to. 

May  I respectfully  request  that  the  Starlight  be  sent  to  report  to  me 
:emporarily,  and  that  the  permission  of  the  major-general  commanding 
)e  given  me  to  make  the  attempt  as  above  ? With  the  same  boats  and 
ive  companies  of  my  own  regiment  (which  would  leave  five  companies 
n the  fort)  I could  greatly  annoy  the  enemy  by  proceeding  up  the  Bluff- 
on  River  to  the  village  of  that  name,  and  shelling  a considerable  rebel 
orce  now  encamped  there  and  destroying  extensive  salt-works  2 miles 
ibove.  Neither  of  these  little  expeditions  would  involve  much,  if  any, 
Isk,  and  would  necessitate  the  weakening  of  the  garrison  at  Pulaski 
or  only  a few  hours,  and  that  in  the  day-time.  I would  like  very  much 
o undertake  them.  I send  herewith  several  statements*  received 
rom  deserters,  contrabands,  &c.,  recently  taken  here,  as  well  as  the 
leserters  themselves.  The  report  of  the  latter  as  to  the  number  of 
nen  in  and  around  Savannah  I deem  entirely  unreliable,  as  on  being 
closely  questioned  they  fail  to  show  more  than  from  3,000  to  5,000 
roops  there. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

WM.  B.  BARTON, 

Colonel  Forty-eighth  New  Yorh  Volunteers , Comdg.  Post. 
Maj.  W.  P.  Prentice, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


*Not  found. 


124 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

SEPTEMBER  30-0CT0BER  3,  1862, — Reconnaissances  on  May  and  Sa- 
vannah Rivers,  Ga. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Ormsby  M.  Mitchel,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the 
South. 

No.  2. — Col.  William  B.  Barton,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Ormsby  M.  Mitchel , TJ.  S.  Army , commanding  De- 
partment of  the  South. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  (7.,  October  5,  1865. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  result  of  several  minor 
expeditions  which  have  been  ordered  out  in  this  department  since  my 
last  communication  : 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th  ultimo  Col.  W.  B.  Barton,  Forty-eighth 
New  York  Volunteers,  left  Fort  Pulaski  with  two  transports,  the 
Planter  and  Starlight,  which  have  been  temporarily  armed,  and  with  a 
force  of  about  500  infantry  from  his  own  regiment.  The  object  was  to 
surprise  the  enemy  at  Bluifton,  on  May  River,  and  to  destroy  extensive 
salt-works  in  the  vicinity  of  the  town.  The  troops  were  successfully 
landed,  but  the  enemy’s  pickets,  giving  intelligence  of  our  approach, 
the  enemy  hastily  evacuated  the  place,  but  did  not  succeed  in  escaping 
the  shot  and  shell  which  were  thrown  into  their  ranks  from  two  30  and 
two  20  pounder  Parrott  guns  with  which  the  Planter  was  armed.  Very 
extensive  salt-works,  the  range  of  vats  reaching  more  than  a quarter  of 
a mile,  with  all  their  kettles  and  furnaces,  were  completely  demolished, 
while  a most  valuable  reconnaissance  was  made  of  the  region  in  the 
direction  of  Hardeeville,  on  the  Savannah  and  Charleston  Railroad. 

On  the  morning  of  the  1st  [3d]  instant  Colonel  Barton,  in  command 
of  the  same  steamers,  moved  from  Fort  Pulaski  up  the  Savannah  River 
to  a point  a short  distance  beyond  the  second  Coast  Survey  station  on 
Elba  Island.  The  object  intended  to  be  gained  was  to  make  a recon- 
naissance up  the  river  in  the  direction  of  Fort  Jackson,  and  to  destroy, 
if  possible,  some  of  the  rebel  steamers  in  use  upon  the  obstructions 
now  being  placed  in  the  river.  On  reaching  the  point  above  indicated 
fire  was  opened  upon  the  steamers  of  the  enemy,  which  got  up  steam 
and  retreated  as  rapidly  as  possible  under  cover  of  Fort  Jackson. 
After  a short  time  three  of  the  steamers  again  came  out  and  attempted 
to  make  fast  to  the  iron-clad  battery,  which  is  anchored  about  500  yards 
below  the  fort.  The  rapidity  and  accuracy  of  our  fire  drove  the  boats 
from  the  floating  battery  back  to  the  fort,  while  some  of  our  shells 
reached  and  exploded  in  or  over  the  fort  itself.  While  our  boats  were 
engaged  in  firing  upon  the  steamers  of  the  enemy  a rebel  battery,  upon 
Carston’s  Bluff,  opened  fire  upon  them,  but  a few.  shots  from  our  long 
guns  silenced  them,  and,  it  is  supposed,  inflicted  some  damage  upon  a 
regiment  of  infantry  encamped  near  and  in  the  earthwork.  This  re- 
connaissance seems  to  have  produced  great  commotion  in  the  city  of 
Savannah,  as  the  house-tops  were  soon  covered  with  a multitude  of 
spectators.  From  the  facts  developed  by  Colonel  Barton  I am  inclined 
to  believe  that  a joint  attack  upon  Savannah  by  the  Army  and  Navy 
would  be  crowned  with  success. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


MAY  AND  SAVANNAH  RIVERS,  GA. 


125 


At  the  request  of  Admiral  DuPont,  commanding  the  South  Atlantic 
Blockadiug  Squadron,  an  expedition  was  formed,  under  the  command 
of  Brigadier-General  Brannan,  to  co-operate  with  the  Navy  in  the  cap- 
ture of  a fort  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  about  7 miles  above  the  mouth  of 
Saint  John’s  Biver.  One  of  the  transports  engaged  in  the  expedition 
has  just  come  in  for  a supply  of  coal,  bringing  a report  from  .General 
Brannan  announcing  the  capture  of  the  fort,  which  was  evacuated  by  the 
enemy  after  an  attack  by  our  gunboats.  The  rebels  seemed  to  have  left 
the  work  in  very  great  haste,  as  their  guns  were  all  mounted,  loaded, 
and  in  good  condition,  the  ammunition  served,  and  everything  in  excel- 
lent fighting  order.  The  magazine  will  be  blown  up  and  the  works  will 
be  utterly  destroyed.  It  is  intended  to  bring  off  the  guns,  namely,  two 
8-inch  columbiads,  two  8-inch  guns,  smooth  bore,  two  8-inch  howitzers, 
and  two  4.6-inch  rifled  guns.  The  gunboats  had  proceeded  up  the  river 
some  distance,  and  report  a large  amount  of  corn  on  the  river,  which 
will  be  either  brought  away  or  destroyed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  M.  MITCHEL, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  Washington , D.  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  William  B.  Barton , Forty-eighth  New  Yorlc  Infantry. 

Headquarters  IT.  S.  Forces, 

On  the  Savannah  Biver , Fort  Fulashi , Ga.,  October  4,  1862. 

Lieutenant- Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information 
of  the  general  commanding,  that  in  accordance  with  the  permission 
granted  in  his  communication  of  September  26  I left  this  post  at  1 
o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  30th  ultimo,  with  armed  steamers  Planter 
and  Starlight,  having  on  board  five  companies  Forty-eighth  New  York 
State  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Capt.  D.  W.  Strickland,  and  a 
detachment  of  Company  G,  Third  Bhode  Island  Artillery,  in  charge  of 
Capt.  John  H.  Gould.  We  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  May — commonly 
called  Bluffton — Biver,  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  before  daybreak, 
and  proceeded  as  rapidly  as  possible  up  the  river.  My  original  design 
was  to  land  the  infantry  force  at  a point  1£  miles  this  side  of  Bluffton, 
and  by  making  a rapid  march  gain  a point  in  the  rear  of  the  village  to 
which  all  the  roads  leading  from  it  converge,  and  thus  cutting  off  a 
squadron  of  cavalry  I knew  to  be  stationed  there.  Unfortunately,  how- 
ever, when  within  half  a mile  of  this  point,  in  the  thick  fog  which  pre- 
vailed the  Planter  ran  aground,  and  the  noise  of  the  engines  in  getting 
her  off  revealed  us  to  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  rendered  anything  like 
a surprise  impossible.  I however  landed  the  troops  as  soon  after  the 
steamer  got  afloat  as  possible,  and  directing  Captain  Strickland  to 
skirmish  and  scout  the  country  thoroughly  and  to  keep  up  constant 
communication  with  me  through  his  signal  officer,  proceeded  with  the 
steamers  directly  up  to  Bluffton,  keeping  some  half  a mile  ahead  of 
the  troops  on  shore.  This  village  is  one  of  the  most  defensible  pos- 
sible against  an  attack  by  water,  as  the  river  makes  a sharp  turn  a 
short  distance  from  it  and  the  bluffs  entirely  command  the  narrow 
channel  through  which  vessels  necessarily  approach  bows  on.  We 


126  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 

found  the  town  entirely  deserted,  however,  although  there  was  every 
evidence  that  a portion  of  the  inhabitants  and  the  enemy’s  cavalry  had  i 
just  left.  I remained  here  only  long  enough  for  the  infantry  to  come  i 
up,  but  pushed  on  up  the  river  to  Crowell’s  plantation  and  Gadsden’s 
Bluff,  where  I had  learned  there  were  extensive  salt-works.  Immedi- 
ately after  leaving  the  wharf  we  discovered  some  200  cavalry  and  a body 
of  infantry  rapidly  retreating  down  the  Hardeeville  road,  which  was 
skirted  on  the  opposite  side  by  impassable  woods,  but  entirely  open  on 
the  side  toward  us.  We  opened  fire  upon  them  from  all  our  guns,  and 
I am  convinced  most  effectively ; our  shell  exploded  very  frequently 
directly  among  them,  and  there  was  soon  a perfect  stampede.  I feel  cer- 
tain that  their  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  must  have  been  very  consid- 
erable. We  continued  firing  until  they  were  entirely  out  of  sight  and 
range,  by  which  time  we  had  reached  Crowell’s  plantation,  which  had 
been  left  by  its  owner  half  an  hour  before. 

The  salt-works  here  we  completely  demolished,  tearing  down  the  fur- 
naces and  vats  and  destroying  the  kettles.  Some  contrabands  made 
their  appearance,  who  pointed  out  the  location  of  other  salt-works  just 
above,  which  we  also  destroyed.  These  last  were  very  extensive,  the 
vats  extending  for  more  than  a quarter  of  a mile.  The  yield  of  salt 
must  have  been  very  great.  Meanwhile  the  enemy  again  made  his 
appearance  on  a high  bluff  a mile  distant  with  a piece  of  artillery 
drawn  by  four  horses,  but  upon  the  first  discharge  of  our  guns  they 
beat  a most  precipitate  retreat.  As  we  had  fully  accomplished  the 
object  of  our  expedition,  and  nothing  more  remained  to  be  done,  we  re- 
turned to  Fort  Pulaski. 

On  our  way  down  we  stopped  again  at  Bluffton,  and  carried  off  a con- 
siderable quantity  of  furniture  from  the  deserted  houses,  which  is  now 
at  this  post,  subject  to  the  disposal  of  the  general  commanding. 

In  behalf  of  my  officers  and  myself  1 would  respectfully  request  that 
we  be  permitted  to  retain  these  articles  for  our  use  while  at  this  post. 
The  reconnaissance  made  of  the  roads  to  and  beyond  Bluffton  was  most 
complete  and  perfect,  and  I trust  at  some  future  time  may  prove  useful 
in  future  operations  toward  Savannah.  All  the  roads  bore  evidence  of 
the  confused  retreat  of  the  enemy.  I learned  among  other  things  that 
the  force  at  Hardeeville  does  not  consist  of  over  three  regiments,  and 
that  there  are  two  not  very  formidable  batteries  between  Bluffton  and 
that  place,  both  on  the  main  road. 

It  affords  me  pleasure  to  add  that  the  officers  and  men  of  my  com- 
mand conducted  themselves  during  the  day  in  the  most  commendable  : 
manner,  embarking  and  disembarking  in  perfect  order  and  with  great  j 
promptness.  They  were  only  disappointed  that  they  did  not  get  a 
nearer  view  of  the  enemy. 

I would  mention  as  especially  deserving  of  commendation  Captain  j 
Strickland,  who  commanded  the  land  forces,  and  Captain  Coan,  in 
charge  of  skirmishers,  both  of  Forty-eighth  New  York  State  Volun- 
teers ; also  Captain  Gould  and  Lieutenant  Fry,  Third  Rhode  Island 
Artillery,  for  their  excellent  gunnery.  Adjt.  A.  W.  Goodell,  of  my  regi-  ; 
ment,  also  rendered  me  efficient  aid. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

WM.  B.  BARTON, 

Colonel  Forty -eighth  New  York  Volunteers , Comdg.  Post . 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Prentice, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Chief  of  Staff. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C.  127 

SEPTEMBER  30-0CT0BER  13,  1862.— Expedition  from  Hilton  Head.  S.  C., 
to  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla. 

SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRIJSTCII^YL  EVENTS. 

October  1,  1862.— Engagement  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff. 

2,  1862.— Skirmishes  between  May  port  Mills  and  Saint  John’s  Bluff. 

3,  1862. — Capture  of  Saint  John’s  Bluff. 

5,  1862. — Recapture  of  Jacksonville. 

6-9,  1862.— Expedition  from  Jacksonville  to  Lake  Beresford. 

7,  1862. — Capture  of  the  Governor  Milton. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Brannan,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  2.— Lieut.  Col.  Tilghman  H.  Good,  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  3. — First  Lieut.  George  H.  Hill,  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  Acting  Signal 
Officer,  including  expedition  from  Hilton  Head  to  Pocotaligo  River,  S.  C., 
October  21-23,  1862. 

No.  4.— Lieut.  Franklin  E.  Town,  Forty-second  New  York  Infantry,  Acting  Signal 
Officer,  of  recapture  of  Jacksonville. 

No.  5.— Lieut.  George  W.  Bacon,  Aide-de-Camp,  of  capture  of  the  Governor  Milton. 
No.  6.— Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  Middle 
and  East  Florida. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  Col.  C.  F.  Hopkins,  C.  S.  Army,  and  resulting  correspondence. 


m.  i. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Brannan , TJ.  S.  Army , commanding  expe- 
dition. 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Forces, 

TJ.  S.  Transport  Ben  He  Ford, 
Saint  John’s  River , Fla.,  October  4,  1862. 

General  : In  accordance  with  your  instructions  I arrived  within  the 
bar  of  this  river  on  the  afternoon  of  the  1st  of  the  present  month,  and 
the  same  night  effected  a landing  at  a place  known  as  Mayport  Mills. 
I afterward  established  a position  on  Mount  Pleasant  Creek,  though 
with  great  difficulty,  owing  to  the  swampy  nature  of  the  country  and 
the  number  of  unfordable  creaks  intersecting  it.  On  our  first  arrival  in 
the  river  the  rebels,  as  far  as  I could  ascertain,  received  re-enforcements, 
making  their  garrison  in  Saint  John’s  Bluff  batteries  about  1,200  in- 
fantry and  cavalry,  with  a light  battery  of  eight  guns,  in  addition  to 
the  heavy  armament  of  the  batteries.  I further  learned  that  they  were 
momentarily  expecting  re- enforcements  from  Georgia. 

On  the  1st  instant  the  gunboats  made  a reconnaissance  on  the  river, 
and  were  immediately  and  warmly  engaged  by  the  batteries  on  Saint 
John’s  Bluff,  on  which  they  withdrew. 

However  yesterday,  the  3d  instant,  on  making  a further  reconnais- 
sance, the  batteries  were  found  to  have  been  evacuated  by  the  rebels. 
I immediately  advanced  from  my  position  on  Mount  Pleasant  Creek 
and  occupied  the  batteries  and  late  camps  of  the  enemy.  The  batteries, 
which  are  skillfully  constructed,  well  armed,  and  well  supplied  with 
ammunition,  appear  to  have  been  deserted  in  great  haste,  the  guns  be- 
ing all  mounted,  loaded,  and  in  good  condition,  the  ammunition  served, 
find  everything  in  excellent  fighting  order,  I am  in  fact  utterly  at  a 


128 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XXVI. 


loss  to  account  for  tliis  sudden  evacuation  on  the  part  of  the  rebels,  as, 
in  addition  to  a most  skillfully  constructed  line  of  defense,  the  position 
possesses  natural  advantages  which  render  it  almost  impregnable,  and, 
with  the  number  of  men  which  I know  to  have  occupied  it,  the  position 
might  have  been  maintained  for  a considerable  time  and  the  task  of 
reducing  it  rendered  one  of  extreme  difficulty  and  danger  to  a much 
larger  force  than  I had  at  my  disposal.  In  advancing  to  Mount  Pleas- 
ant Creek  our  pickets  had  some  skirmishing  with  the  rebels ; indeed, 
during  our  entire  advance  to  Saint  John’s  Bluffi  the  guerrillas  continued 
to  show  themselves  in  the  woods,  and  occasionally  to  fire  at  us,  even 
after  the  evacuation  of  the  batteries.  They,  however,  did  us  no  injury. 

On  the  2d  instant  a scouting  party  of  the  Forty-seventh  Regiment 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  under  Captain  Keck,  of  that  regiment,  sur- 
prised a camp  of  the  rebels,  taking  some  camp  equipage  and  about  sixty 
stand  of  arms  of  all  descriptions,  but  chiefly  rifles.  The  men  effected 
their  escape,  having  horses  and  being  much  favored  by  the  intricate 
nature  of  the  ground. 

I am  much  indebted  to  the  gunboats,  Captain  Steedman,  TJ.  S.  Navy, 
in  command,  for  the  prompt  and  energetic  manner  in  which  they  as- 
sisted at  the  disembarkation  of  the  troops,  and  the  valuable  assistance 
rendered  by  their  howitzers  in  covering  the  landing  and  advance  of  the 
infantry. 

On  leaving  this  point  it  is  my  intention  to  blow  up  the  magazines  and 
utterly  destroy  the  works  on  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  and  1 am  at  present 
engaged  in  removing  the  guns,  which  I propose  to  take  with  me,  they 
beiug  of  considerable  value,  their  number  and  caliber  as  follows,  viz: 
Two  8-inch  columbiads,  two  8-inch  guns,  smooth  bore,  two  8-inch  how- 
itzers, and  two  4.6-inch  rifled  guns.  I return  the  transport  Cosmopolitan, 
and  respectfully  request  that  I may  receive  by  her  rations  for  my  com- 
mand for  ten  days  from  the  10th  instant,  as  it  will  yet  take  me  some 
time  to  complete  my  work  on  this  river. 

Owing  to  information  received  yesterday,  the  3d  instant,  as  to  the 
strength  of  the  enemy,  I deemed  it  expedient,  on  consultation  with 
Captain  Steedman,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  gunboats,  to  send  the 
Cosmopolitan  to  Fernandina,  Fla.,  and  to  call  on  that  garrison  for  re- 
enforcements  to  my  command.  This  call  Colonel  Rich,  Ninth  Regiment 
Maine  Volunteers,  commanding,  promptly  answered  to,  by  sending  300 
men,  who  arrived  early  this  morning.  The  occasion  for  which  they 
were  required,  however,  having  passed,  I sent  them  back  per  this  ship. 
The  gunboats  proceeded  up  the  river  yesterday  and  will  return  this 
afternoon.  Captain  Steedman,  who  has  just  returned,  states  that  there 
is  much  corn  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  This  I propose  to  take  with  me, 
if  possible;  if  not,  to  destroy  it.  He  (Captain  Steedman)  was  informed 
that  three  Georgia  regiments  were  to  have  arrived  at  Jacksonville  this 
morning ; but  in  consequence  of  the  evacuation  were  ordered  back. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

j.  M.  BRANNAN, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C. 


Hdqrs.  Expedition  to  Saint  John’s  River, 

Steamship  Ben  De  Ford , October  13,  1862. 
Colonel:  In  accordance  with  orders  received  from  headquarters  De- 
partment of  the  South,  I assumed  command  of  the  following  forces  in- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  HIDTON  HEAD,  S.  C.  129 

tended  to  operate  against  the  rebel  batteries  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff  and 
such  other  parts  of  the  Saint  John’s  River  as  should  contain  rebel  works : 
The  Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Col.  T.  H.  Good, 
effective  strength  825;  Seventh  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Col. 
Joseph  R.  Hawley,  effective  strength  647 ; section  of  First  Connecticut 
Light  Battery,  Lieutenant  Cannon,  effective  strength  41;  detachment 
of  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Captain  Case,  effective  strength  60. 
Total  1 573. 

The  expedition  left  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  on  the  afternoon  of  Septem- 
ber 30,  on  the  transports  Ben  De  Ford,  Boston,  Cosmopolitan,  and  Nep- 
tune, and  arrived  off  the  bar  of  Saint  John’s  River  early  on  the  follow- 
ing morning  (October  1),  but  was  unable  to  enter  the  river  until  2 p. 
m.  the  same  day,  owing  to  the  shallowness  of  the  channel. 

This  expedition  was  joined  by  the  following  fleet  of  gunboats,  Capt. 
Charles  Steedman,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding,  ordered  to  co-operate  with 
it:  Paul  Jones,  flag-ship;  Cimarron,  Captain  Woodhull ; Water  Witch, 
Lieutenant-Commander  Pendergrast;  Hale,  Lieutenant-Commander 
Snell;  Uncas,  Lieutenant-Commander  Crane;  Patroon,  Lieutenant-Com- 
mander Uran. 

On  the  expedition  coming  withiu  the  river  three  gunboats  were 
sent  up  to  feel  the  position  of  the  enemy  and  were  immediately  and 
warmly  engaged  by  the  batteries,  apparently  of  heavy  armament,  on 
Saint  John’s  Bluff/  A landing  was  effected  at  a place  known  as  May- 
port  Mills,  a short  distance  from  the  entrance  of  the  river,  and  the  en- 
tire troops,  with  their  arms,  horses,  and  rations,  were  on  shore  by  9 
o’clock  on  the  night  of  the  1st.  The  country  between  this  point  and 
Saint  John’s  Bluff  presented  great  difficulties  in  the  transportation  of 
troops,  being  intersected  with  impassable  swamps  and  unford  able 
creeks,  and  presenting  the  alternative  of  a march,  without  land  trans- 
portation, of  nearly  40  miles,  to  turn  the  head  of  ‘the  creek,  or  to  re- 
land up  the  river  at  a strongly  guarded  position  of  the  enemy.  On 
further  investigation  of  the  locality  a landing  was  effected  for  the  in- 
fantry about  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  at  a place  known  as 
Buckhorn  Creek,  between  Pablo  and  Mount  Pleasant  Creeks ; but, 
owing  to  the  swampy  nature  of  the  ground,  it  was  found  impracti- 
cable to  land  the  cavalry  and  artillery  at  that  point.  Here  the  gun- 
boats rendered  most  valuable  assistance,  by  transporting  the  troops 
in  their  boats  and  in  sending  their  light  howitzers  to  cover  their  land- 
ing. Col.  T.  H.  Good,  with  the  entire  infantry  and  the  marine  howit- 
zers, was  ordered  to  proceed  immediately  to  the  head  of  Mount  Pleasant 
Creek,  and  there  establish  a position  to  cover  the  landing  of  the  cavalry 
and  artillery.  This  movement  was  executed  with  great  promptness  and 
skill,  surprising  and  putting  to  flight  the  rebel  pickets  on  that  creek. 
Indeed,  the  landing  of  the  troops  at  Buckhorn  Creek  and  their  rapid 
movements  on  Mount  Pleasant  Creek  proved  to  be  most  fortunate  for 
us,  such  a proceeding  being  so  unexpected  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  as 
entirely  to  disarrange  any  plans  they  may  have  formed  to  prevent  our 
landing.  The  pickets  retired  in  such  haste  and  trepidation  as  to  leave 
their  camps  standing,  their  arms,  and  even  a great  portion  of  their  wear- 
ing apparel  behind  them,  and  the  men  themselves  may  thank  the  intri- 
cate nature  of  the  ground,  together  with  their  superior  knowledge  of  a 
country  almost  impracticable  to  a stranger,  that  they  effected  their 
escape. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  3d  the  command  of  artillery  and  infantry 
was  in  position  at  the  head  of  Mount  Pleasant  Creek,  distant  about 

9 R R— VOL  xiv 


130  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  J LA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

2 miles  from  the  enemy’s  works  on  Saint  John’s  Bluff.  Here  the 
statements  of  those  belonging  to  the  locality,  though  conflicting  and 
unreliable  in  the  extreme,  appeared  to  agree  in  placing  the  strength 
of  the  rebels  at  1,200  cavalry  and  infantry,  in  addition  to  the  heavy 
batteries,  which  they  represented  as  containing  nine  heavy  pieces, 
two  of  them  -being  columbiads.  Under  these  circumstances  1 deemed 
it  expedient,  on  consultation  with  Captain  Steedman,  U.  S.  Navy, 
commanding  naval  forces,  to  call  upon  the  garrison  of  Fernandina 
for  re-enforcements.  To  this  call  Colonel  Rich,  Ninth  Regiment  Maine 
Volunteers,  commanding  that  garrison,  responded  promptly  by  send- 
ing 300  men  early  on  the  following  morning.  Later  on  that  day, 
from  further  information  received,  Captain  Steedman,  at  my  request, 
sent  three  gunboats  to  feel  the  position  of  the  rebels,  shelling  them 
as  they  advanced,  when  the  batteries  were  found  to  be  evacuated ; after 
which  Lieutenant  Snell,  U.  S.  Navy,  sent  a boat  ashore  and  raised  the 
American  flag,  finding  the  rebel  flag  in  the  battery.  The  U.  S.  steamer 
Water  Witch  retaining  possession  of  the  batteries  until  the  arrival  of 
the  land  forces,  the  command  immediately  advanced  from  the  position 
on  Mount  Pleasant  Creek  and  occupied  the  batteries  and  late  camp  of 
the  enemy.  At  about  8 o’clock  on  the  evening  of  the  3d  the  cavalry, 
not  having  landed  with  the  portion  of  the  troops,  were  here  disem- 
barked. I found  the  late  position  of  the  enemy  on  Saint  John’s  Bluff 
to  be  one  of  great  strength,  and  possessing  a heavy  and  effective  arma- 
ment, with  a good  supply  of  ammunition,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  accom- 
panying inventory  of  ordnance  captured — the  works  being  most  skill- 
fully and  carefully  constructed  and  the  position  greatly  enhanced  by 
the  natural  advantages  of  the  ground,  it  being  approachable  from  the 
land  by  but  one  route,  which  would  lead  the  attacking  party  through 
a winding  ravine  immediately  under  the  guns  of  the  position,  and  from 
the  narrowness  of  the  channel  at  this  point  and  the  elevation  of  the 
bluff  rendering  the  fighting  of  the  gunboats,  most  difficult  and  danger- 
ous. Most  of  the  guns  were  mounted  on  a complete  traverse  circle, 
and  indeed,  taking  everything  into  consideration,  I have  no  doubt  but 
that  a small  party  of  determined  men  could  have  maintained  this  posi- 
tion for  a considerable  time  against  even  a larger  force  than  was  at  my 
disposal. 

On  the  day  following  my  occupation  of  these  works  (October  4)  I 
proceeded  to  dismount  the  guns  and  to  remove  them  and  the  ammuni- 
tion on  board  the  transport  Neptune,  which  work  was  completed  on  the 
7th,  when  I forwarded  them  to  Hilton  Head,  and  caused  the  magazines 
to  be  blown  up,  and  otherwise  destroyed  the  entire  works  on  the  bluff. 
On  first  occupying  the  bluff  Captain  Steedman,  with  his  gunboat,  pro- 
ceeded immediately  to  Jacksonville,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  all 
boats  and  otherwise  intercepting  the  passage  of  the  rebel  troops  across 
the  river. 

On  the  5th,  leaving  the  work  of  removing  the  guns  from  Saint  John’s 
Bluff  to  Col.  T.  H.  Good,  Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teers, my  second  in  command,  I proceeded  up  the  river  as  far  as  Jack- 
sonville in  the  transport  Ben  De  Ford  with  785  infantry.  I observed  a 
large  quantity  of  corn  and  other  crops  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  which 
it  was  at  first  my  intention  either  to  remove  or  destroy.  This  purpose 
I afterward  abandoned  as  impracticable,  not  having  either  forces  or 
transportation  sufficient  to  remove  it  and  seeing  from  the  communication 
of  the  major-general  commanding  that  he  did  not  desire  the  delay  nec- 
essary to  destroy  it.  The  rebels  had  a light  battery  of  eight  pieces 
and  a position  in  readiness  to  receive  seven  heavy  guns  at  a place  called 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C. 


131 


Yellow  Bluff,  which  they  appear  to  have  lately  evacuated.  Jackson- 
ville I found  to  be  nearly  deserted,  there  being  but  a small  portion  of 
its  inhabitants  left — chiefly  old  men,  women,  and  children.  On  our  first 
arrival  some  few  rebel  cavalry  were  hovering  around  the  town,  but 
they  immediately  retired  on  my  establishing  a picket  line.  From  this 
town  and  its  neighborhood  I bring  with  me  several  refugees  and  about 
276  contrabands,  including  men,  women,  and  children. 

On  the  6th,  hearing  that  some  rebel  steamers  were  secreted  in  the 
creeks  up  the  river,  I sent  the  Darlington,  with  100  men  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  in  charge  of  Captain  Yard, 
with  two  24-pounder  light  howitzers  and  a crew  of  25  men,  all  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant  Williams,  U.  S.  Navy,  and  a convoy  of 
gunboats,  to  cut  them  out.  This  party  returned  on  the  morning  of  the 
9th  with  a rebel  steamer,  Governor  Milton,  which  they  captured  in  a 
creek  about  230  miles  up  the  river  and  about  27  miles  from  the  town 
of  Enterprise.  Lieutenant  Bacon,  my  aide-de-camp,  accompanied  the 
expedition.  Finding  that  the  Cosmopolitan,  which  had  been  sent  to 
Hilton  Head  tor  provisions,  had  so  injured  herself  in  returning  across 
the  bar  as  to  be  temporarily  unfit  for  service,  I sent  the  Seventh  Regi- 
ment  Connecticut  Volunteers  to  Hilton  Head  by  the  steamer  Boston 
on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  instant,  with  the  request  that  she  might  be 
returned,  to  assist  in  the  transportation  to  Hilton  Head  of  the  re- 
maining portion  of  my  command. 

On  the  return  of  the  successful  expedition  after  the  rebel  steamers,  on 
the  9th  I proceeded  with  that  portion  of  my  command  to  Saint  John’s 
Bluff,  awaiting  the  return  of  the  Boston. 

On  the  11th  instant  I embarked  the  section  of  the  First  Connecticut 
Light  Battery,  with  their  guns,  horses,  &c.,  and  one  company  of  the 
F orty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  on  board  the  steamer 
Darlington,  sending  them  to  Hilton  Head  via  Fernandina,  Fla.  On  the 
11th,  the  Boston  having  returned,  1 embarked  myself,  with  the  last  re- 
maiuiug  portion  of  my  command,  except  one  company  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  left  to  assist  and  protect  the  Cosmo- 
politan, for  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  on  the  12th  instant,  and  arrived  at  that 
place  on  the  13th  instant.  The  captured  steamer  Governor  Milton  I 
left  in  charge  of  Captain  Steedman,  XL  S.  Navy. 

it  is  evident  that  the  troops  in  this  portion  of  the  country,  from  their 
being  in  separate  and  distinct  companies,  have  not  sufficient  organiza- 
tion or  determination  to  attempt  to  sustain  any  one  position  ; but  seem 
rather  to  devote  themselves  to  a system  of  guerrilla  warfare,  as  was 
exemplified  in  our  advance  on  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  where,  even  after  the 
evacuation  of  the  fort,  they  continued  to  appear  on  our  flank  and  in 
our  front ; but,  as  they  seemed  to  fear  a too  near  approach,  their  fire 
was  never  effective. 

The  gunboats  rendered  great  and  valuable  assistance  during  this  ex- 
pedition, and  high  praise  is  due  to  their  commander,  Capt.  Charles 
Steedman,  II.  S.  Navy,  for  the  prompt  and  energetic  manner  in  which 
he  entered  into  every  scheme  for  the  reduction  of  the  enemy  and  the 
destruction  of  their  works  and  the  zeal  and  activity  with  which  he 
personally  superintended  every  detail  of  his  portion  of  the  duties  ; and, 
further,  for  his  generous  assistance  in  relieving  the  transport  Cosmo- 
politan. 

1 ascertained  at  Jacksonville  that  the  enemy  commenced  evacuating 
the  Bluff  immediately  after  the  surprise  of  their  pickets  near  Mount 
Pleasant  Creek,  on  the  3d  instant. 

It  affords  me  pleasure  to  state  that  the  most  perfect  harmony  and 


132 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


good  feeling  existed  between  the  two  branches  of  the  service  in  every 
respect,  doubtless  owing  to  the  gallant  and  gentlemanly  conduct  of  the 
commander  of  the  naval  forces. 

The  troops  under  my  command  showed  great  energy,  zeal,  and 
activity,  and  a desire  to  meet  the  enemy ; but  the  latter  were  too  fleet 
for  them.  I doubt  not  they  will  give  a good  account  of  themselves 
when  the  opportunity  affords. 

I am  much  indebted  to  my  staff,  Oapt.  L.  J.  Lambert,  assistant  adju- 
tant general  5 Capt.  I.  Coryell,  assistant  quartermaster,  and  Lieuts.  I. 
Y.  Germain  and  G.  W.  Bacon,  aides-de-camp,  for  their  zeal,  energy, 
and  attention  to  their  duties  during  the  entire  expedition,  particularly 
the  three  latter  officers,  who  were  always  ready  at  all  times  for  any 
duty.  To  Captain  Coryell,  assistant  quartermaster,  the  Quartermaster’s 
Department  owes  much  for  his  untiring  energy  and  activity  in  giving 
his  valuable  assistance  to  the  transport  Cosmopolitan  after  her  accident. 
I am  also  under  obligation  to  Capt.  A.  P.  Rockwell,  First  Connecticut 
Light  Batterj^,  who  acted  as  additional  aide-de-camp,  and  to  the  offi- 
cers of  the  Signal  Corps,  Lieuts.  G.  H.  Hill  and  F.  E.  Town,  who  per- 
formed their  duties  with  great  satisfaction  to  me  and  the  expedition. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  M.  BRANNAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  P.  Prentice, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Pept.  of  the  South,  Hilton  Head , S.  C. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Lieut . Col.  Tilghman  H.  Good,  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania 

Infantry. 

Headquarters  IJ.  S.  Forces, 

Mount  Pleasant  Landing,  Fla.,  October  2,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  for  the  informa- 
tion of  the  general  commanding  : 

In  accordance  with  orders  received  I landed  my  regiment  on  the  bank 
of  Buckhorn  Creek  at  7 o’clock  yesterday  morning.  After  landing  I 
moved  forward  in  the  direction  of  Parker’s  plantation,  about  1 mile, 
being  then  within  about  1-J  miles  of  said  plantation.  Here  I halted  to 
await  the  arrival  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Regiment.  I advanced 
two  companies  of  skirmishers  toward  the  house,  with  instructions  to 
halt  in  case  of  meeting  any  of  the  enemy  and  report  the  fact  to  me. 
After  they  had  advanced  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  they  halted 
and  reported  some  of  the  enemy  ahead.  I immediately  went  forward 
to  the  line  and  saw  some  5 or  6 mounted  men  about  700  or  800  yards 
ahead.  I then  ascended  a tree,  so  that  I might  have  a distinct  view  of 
the  house,  and  from  this  elevated  position  I distinctly  saw  one  company 
of  infantry  close  by  the  house,  which  1 supposed  to  number  about  30  or 
40  men,  and  also  some  60  or  70  mounted  men.  After  waiting  for  the 
arrival  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers  until  10  o’clock,  and  it 
not  appearing,  1 dispatched  a squad  of  men  back  to  the  landing  for  a 
6-pounder  field  howitzer  which  had  been  kindly  offered  to  my  service 
by  Lieutenant  Boutelle,  of  the  Paul  Jones.  This  howitzer  had  been 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C. 


133 


stationed  on  a flat-boat  to  protect  our  landing.  The  party,  however, 
did  not  arrive  with  the  piece  until  12  o’clock,  in  consequence  of  the 
difficulty  of  dragging  it  through  the  swamp.  Being  anxious  to  have 
as  little  delay  as  possible,  I did  not  await  the  arrival  of  the  howitzer, 
but  at  11  a.  in.  moved  forward,  and  as  I advanced  the  enemy  fled. 
After  reaching  the  house  I awaited  the  arrival  of  the  Seventh  Con- 
necticut and  the  howitzer.  After  they  arrived  I moved  forward  to  the 
head  of  Mount  Pleasant  Creek  to  a bridge,  at  which  place  I arrived  at 
2 p.  m.  Here  I found  the  bridge  destroyed,  but  which  I had  repaired 
in  a short  time.  I then  crossed  it  and  moved  down  on  the  south  bank 
toward  Mount  Pleasant  Landing.  After  moving  about  1 mile  down  the 
bank  of  the  creek  my  skirmishing  companies  came  upon  a camp,  which 
evidently  had  been  very  hastily  evacuated,  from  the  fact  that  the  occu- 
pants had  left  a table  standing  with  a sumptuous  meal  already  pre- 
pared for  eating.  On  the  center  of  the  table  was  placed  a fine,  large 
meat  pie  still  warm,  from  which  one  of  the  party  had  already  served 
his  plate.  The  skirmishers  also  saw  3 mounted  men  leave  the  place  in 
hot  haste.  I also  found  a small  quantity  of  commissary  and  quarter- 
master’s stores,  with  23  tents,  which,  for  want  of  transportation,  I was 
obliged  to  destroy.  After  moving  about  a mile  farther  on  I came  across 
another  camp,  which  also  indicated  the  same  sudden  evacuation.  In 
it  I found  the  following  articles,  viz : Eighteen  Hall’s  breech-loading 
carbines,  12  double-barreled  shot-guns,  8 breech-loading  Maynard  rifles, 
11  Enfield  rifles,  and  96  knapsacks.  These  articles  I brought  along  by 
having  the  men  carry  them.  There  were,  besides,  a small  quantity  of 
commissary  and  quartermaster’s  stores,  including  16  tents,  which,  for 
the  same  reason  as  stated,  I ordered  to  be  destroyed.  I then  pushed 
forward  to  the  landing,  where  I arrived  at  7 p.  m. 

We  drove  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  in  small  parties  along  the  entire 
march.  The  march  was  a difficult  one,  in  consequence  of  meeting  so 
many  swamps  almost  knee-deep. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  GOOD, 

Colonel  Forty -seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers . 

Captain  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Saint  John’s  Bluff , Fla.,  October  3,  1862. 

Sir:  For  the  information  of  the  general  commanding  I have  the 
honor  to  make  the  following  report: 

At  9 o’dock  last  night  Lieutenant  Cannon  reported  to  me  that  his 
command,  consisting  of  one  section  of  the  First  Connecticut  Battery, 
was  then  coming  up  the  creek  on  flat-boats  with  a view  of  landing.  At 
4 o’clock  this  morning  a safe  landing  was  effected  and  the  command 
was  ready  to  move.  The  order  to  move  to  Saint  John’s  Bluff  reached 
me  at  4 p.  m.  yesterday.  In  accordance  with  it  I put  the  column  in 
motion  immediately  and  moved  cautiously  up  the  bank  of  the  Saint 
John’s  Biver,  the  skirmishing  companies  occasionally  seeing  small 
parties  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  retiring  in  our  front  as  we  advanced. 
When  about  2 miles  from  the  bluff'  the  left  wing  of  the  skirmishing  line 
came  upon  another  camp  of  the  enemy,  which,  however,  in  consequence 
of  the  lateness  of  the  hour,  I did  not  take  time  to  examine,  it  being  then 
already  dark. 


134 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


After  my  arrival  at  the  bluff,  it  being  then  7.30  o’clock,  I dispatched 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Alexander  with  two  companies  back  to  the  last- 
named  camp  (which  I found,  from  a number  of  papers  left  behind,  to 
have  been  called  Camp  Hopkins  and  occupied  by  the  Milton  Artillery, 
of  Florida)  to  reconnoiter  and  ascertain  its  condition.  ' Upon  his  return 
he  reported  that  from  every  appearance  the  skedaddling  of  the  enemy 
was  as  sudden  as  in  the  other  instances  already  mentioned,  leaving 
their  trunks  and  all  the  camp  equipage  behind;  also  a small  quantity 
of  commissary  stores,  sugar,  rice,  half  barrel  of  flour,  one  bag  of  salt, 
&c.,  including  60  tents,  which  I have  brought  in  this  morning.  The 
commissary  stores  were  used  by  the  troops  of  my  command. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  GOOD, 

Colonel  Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pa.  Vols .,  Corndg. 

Captain  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  First  Lieut.  George  H.  Hill , Fifty -fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry, 

Acting  Signal  Officer , including  expedition  from  Hilton  Head,  to  Poco- 

taligo  River , S.  <7.,  October  21-23,  1862. 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  November  1,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report : October  1 I was  at  Mayport 
Mills,  Saint  John’s  Eiver,  Florida,  on  duty  with  the  expedition  under 
command  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan,  Lieutenant  Town,  acting  signal 
officer,  being  on  board  the  flag-ship  Paul  Jones,  of  the  naval  squadron, 
Captain  Steedman  commanding.  We  kept  constant  communication 
open  between  the  land  and  naval  forces.  The  signals  were  very  ex- 
tensively used,  both  day  and  night,  until  the  evening  of  the  3d,  after 
the  retreat  of  the  enemy  from  the  battery  on  Saint  John’s  Bluff.  The 
signals  were  also  of  some  service  in  advancing  up  the  river  to  Jack- 
sonville on  the  5th;  and  upon  our  arrival  at  Jacksonville  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  5th,  our  pickets  being  attacked  by  the  enemy’s  cavalry, 
and  Lieutenant  Town  having  .gone  on  board  the  gunboat  Cimarron 
that  vessel  was  ordered  to  shell  the  enemy.  The  firing  being  regulated 
by  the  signals,  the  enemy  were  soon  driven  back  some  miles  from  our 
lines.  While  at  Jacksonville  Lieutenant  Town  and  myself  kept  com- 
munication open  between  the  Navy  and  the  force  on  shore.  On  the 
morning  of  the  12th  we  left  the  Saint  John’s  Eiver,  and  on  tl^  morning 
of  the  13th,  we  having  arrived  here,  I was  directed  by  General  Bran- 
nan  to  report  to  Lieutenant  Keenan,  chief  acting  signal  officer  Depart- 
ment of  the  South,  for  duty.  From  the  13th  to  the  21st  I remained  on 
duty  at  the  station  at  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  when,  having  received  orders 
from  Lieutenant  Keenan,  I reported  to  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan,  on 
board  the  U.  S.  transport  Ben  De  Ford,  to  accompany  an  expedition 
up  the  Coosawhatchie  Eiver.  The  fleet  consisted  of  15  vessels  (gunboats 
and  transports).  There  being  six  other  signal  officers  on  the  gunboats 
and  transports  we  successfully  kept  communication  open  between  Gen- 
eral Brannan,  commanding  the  troops,  Captain  Steedman,  command- 
ing the  naval  forces,  General  Terry,  on  board  the  U.  S.  transport  Bos- 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C. 


135 


ton,  and  the  other  commanders  of  the  different  gunboats  and  trans- 
ports. At  about  12  o’clock  midnight  of  the  21st  on  board  the  Paul 
Jones  were  displayed  three  red  lights  (the  signal  previously  agreed  on), 
and  the  expedition  started  up  the  Broad  and  Coosawhatchie  Bivers, 
the  Paul  Jones  leading  off.  At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  we 
anchored  in  the  Coosawhatchie  River,  off  the  mouth  of  the  Pocotaligo 
River,  at  a place  known  as  Mackay’s  Point,  and  as  the  different  vessels 
came  up  their  troops  were  at  once  landed.  Lieutenant  Cross  accompa- 
nied General  Terry  ashore  and  opened  communication  with  me.  From 
6 a.  m.  till  about  11.30  a.  m.,  during  the  debarkation  of  the  troops,  the 
signals  were  extensively  used,  so  much  so  in  fact  that  there  was  at  no 
time  an  interval  of  five  minutes  that  1 was  not  engaged  in  either  send- 
ing or  receiving  messages,  orders,  and  reports  of  the  operations  of  the 
force  on  the  land.  At  about  11.30  a.  in.,  October  22,  most  of  the  troops 
being  landed  and  having  pushed  forward,  General  Brannan  and  staff 
landed,  and  we  soon  reached  the  head  of  the  column.  When  about  6 
miles  from  the  place  of  landing  we  came  in  sight  of  the  enemy’s  cav- 
alry at  a place  known  as  Caston.  We  opened  on  them  with  the  artil- 
lery, advancing  as  we  fired.  We  were  soon  received  with  a heavy  fire 
from  the  enemy’s  artillery  posted  in  a thick  wood.  As  the  country  was 
low  and  thickly  wooded,  and  the  troops  not  being  able  to  act  in  concert 
with  the  gunboats,  our  services  as  signal  officers  were  rendered  useless. 
Lieutenant  Cross  acted  as  aide  to  General  Terry  and  1 acted  as  aide 
to  General  Brannan  throughout  the  day,  the  other  signal  officers  re- 
maining on  board  the  gunboats.  After  an  engagement  of  nearly  an 
hour  the  enemy  fell  back  to  the  north  side  of  a creek,  destroying  the 
bridge  in  their  retreat.  Here  the  enemy  made  another  stand  at  a place 
known  as  Frampton,  but  after  a resistance  of  about  two  hours  they 
were  again  compelled  to  retreat.  They  fell  back  to  the  east  side  of 
Pocotaligo  River,  where  they  seemed  to  have  rifle  pits.  They  destroyed 
the  bridge  across  the  Pocotaligo  River,  rendering  it  impossible  for  us 
to  reconstruct  the  bridge  in  front  of  their  battery  of  field  pieces  and 
the  river  was  not  fordable.  At  this  point  it  is  believed  the  enemy 
received  re-enforcements.  We  engaged  the  enemy  here  until  dark, 
when,  our  ammunition  being  nearly  exhausted,  we  fell  back  to  the  place 
of  landing  (Mackay’s  Point)  in  the  morning,  a distance  of  about,  10 
miles,  and  by  4 a.  m.  October  23  the  whole  command  had  reached 
Mackay’s  Point,  and  during  the  day  embarked  on  board  the  transports 
and  returned  to  Hilton  Head.  I learn  that  our  loss  in  killed,  wounded, 
and  missing  was  419.*  That  of  the  enemy  must  have  also  been  severe, 
besides  having  lost  several  prisoners.  During  the  embarkation  of  the 
troops  and  until  we  arrived  at  Hilton  Head  the  signal  detachments 
were  kept  employed  and  of  some  service.  On  the  morning  of  the  24th 
I received  orders  from  General  Brannan  to  report  to  Lieut.  E.  J.  Kee 
nan,  chief  acting  signal  officer  Department  of  the  South,  for  duty,  and 
I have  since  been  on  duty  at  this  station  at  Hilton  Head. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  H.  HILL, 

First  Lieut.,  Fifty-fifth  Rcgt,  Pa.  Vols .,  Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Maj.  Albert  J.  Myer, 

Signal  Officer , U.  S.  Army , Washington , JD.  0. 


* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  148. 


136 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ohap.  X£Vi. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Second  Lieut.  Franlclin  F.  Town , Forty-second  New  York  In- 
fantry, Acting  Signal  Officer , of  recapture  of  Jacksonville. 

Office  of  the  Signal  Office, 

Beaufort , S.  C .,  October  13,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  ou  the  23d  of  Sep- 
tember, in  obedience  to  an  order  from  Lieut.  E.  J.  Keenan,  chief  signal 
officer  Department  of  the  South,  I reported  to  Brigadier -General  Bran- 
nan  for  special  service,  to  accompany  an  expedition  being  organized 
under  his  command  to  proceed  to  Saint  John's  Bluff,  Fla.  In  obe- 
dience to  General  Brannan’s  orders  I embarked  on  the  25th  of  Septem- 
ber, and  the  expedition  proceeded  as  far  as  Hilton  Head,  S.  0.,  from 
whence  we  returned  to  Beaufort  and  disembarked  the  same  afternoon, 
the  prevalence  of  a severe  storm  preventing  the  sailing  of  the  expedi- 
tion. On  the  30th  of  September  we  again  embarked,  and  arrived  at 
Saint  John’s  River  early  the  following  morning  (October  1).  1 was 

then  stationed  on  board  the  gunboat  Paul  Jones,  by  order  of  Lieut. 
G.  11.  Hill,  senior  signal  officer  of  the  expedition.  Before  the  landing 
of  the  troops  was  completed  it  was  discovered  that  the  enemy  had 
abandoned  their  battery  on  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  and  on  the  3d  of  Octo- 
ber the  Paul  Jones  went  up  the  river  to  Jacksonville.  The  Paul  Jones 
returned  to  the  Bluff  the  following  morning,  and  on  the  5th  she  accom- 
panied General  Brannan  to  Jacksonville,  General  Brannan  being  on 
the  steamer  Boston  with  part  of  a regiment.  That  afternoon  our 
forces,  who  had  been  sent  out  as  skirmishers,  met  a party  of  the  enemy 
who  were  behind  the  town,  and  the  gunboat  Cimarron  opened  a fire  of 
shell  upon  the  enemy.  During  the  firing  I was  stationed  on  the  Cimar- 
ron to  assist  in  directing  the  fire  by  sign  il.  After  the  firing  ceased  I 
returned  to  the  Paul  Jones.  On  the  12th  of  October  I embarked  to 
return  on  the  steamer  Boston,  General  Brannan  being  on  the  Ben 
De  Ford.  Lieutenant  Hill  and  myself  kept  the  steamers  in  communica- 
tion with  each  other  until  our  arrival  at  Hilton  Head  this  morning 
(October  13).  There  being  no  resistance  by  the  enemy,  our  signals  were 
used  only  as  a means  of  communication  between  General  Brannan, 
whose  headquarters  were  on  board  the  steamer  Ben  De  Ford,  and  Cap- 
tain Steed  man,  commanding  the  gunboat  fleet  at  Saint  John’s,  and 
were  not  used  on  shore.  The  signals  were  very  extensively  used,  and 
I am  happy  to  say  to  the  gratification  of  General  Brannan,  who  testifies 
in  his  report  of  the  expedition  to  their  efficiency  and  usefulness. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANKLIN  E.  TOWN, 

Second  Lieut.  Forty-second,  N.  Y.  Vols .,  and  Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Maj.  A.  J.  Myer,  Signal  Officer , U.  S.  Army , Washington. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Lieut.  George  W.  Bacon , Aide- de-C amp , of  capture  of  the  Gov- 
ernor Milton. 

Headquarters  Tenth  Army  Corps, 

Hilton  Head , S.  0.,  December  30,  1862. 
Captain:  For  the  information  of  the  general  commanding  I have 


Chap.  XXVI.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C.  137 

the  honor  to  report  the  facts  in  regard  to  the  case  of  the  captured 
steamer  Governor  Milton. 

On  October  6 last,  in  obedience  to  orders,  I proceeded  with  the 
expedition  sent  from  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  up  the  Saint  John’s  River,  in 
search  of  rebel  steamers. 

At  9 p.  m.  the  next  day,  October  7,  discovered  the  steamer  Governor 
Milton  in  a small  creek,  *2  miles  above  Hawkinsville;  boarded  her  in  a 
small  boat,  and  found  that  she  had  been  run  in  there  but  a short  time 
before,  as  her  fires  were  not  yet  out.  Her  engineer  and  mate,  then  in 
charge,  were  asleep  on  board  at  the  time  of  her  capture.  They  in- 
formed us  that  owing  to  the  weakness  of  the  steamer’s  boiler  we  found 
her  where  we  did,  as  they  had  intended  to  take  her  up  as  far  as  Enter- 
prise. We  returned  with  our  prize  the  next  day. 

When  the  expedition  returned  from  the  Saint  John’s  River  the  Gov- 
ernor Milton  was  left  with  Captain  Steedman,  who  was  in  command 
of  the  naval  forces  in  the  Saint  John’s,  and  was  used  by  him  for  nearly 
two  weeks,  after  making  some  repairs  to  her  boiler  and  machinery, 
when  she  was  sent  to  Hilton  Head,  and  there  appraised  by  the  Navy  at 
$2,000,  and  turned  over  to  the  Quartermaster’s  Department,  in  whose 
employ  she  has  been  ever  since.  The  Governor  Milton  is  now  at  Beau- 
fort, S.  0.,  for  the  purpose  of  having  her  boiler  and  machinery  repaired, 
she  being  entirely  unfit  for  use  in  her  present  condition. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  W.  BACON, 
Lieutenant  and  Aide-dS-Gamp. 

Capt.  Louis  J.  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  6. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen . Joseph  Finegan , C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Depart- 
ment of  Middle  and  Fast  Florida. 

Lake  City,  Fla.,  October  2,  1862. 

I am  hard  pressed  on  the  Saint  John’s  River ; 3,000  men  reported  by 
the  commanding  officer  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff  as  having  landed  at 
May  port  Mills.  The  enemy  engaged  our  batteries  again  and  were  re- 
pulsed. Please  send  me  one  regiment  of  infantry  as  soon  as  possible. 
I asked  for  a regiment  some  ten  days  since,  but  have  not  heard  from 
you  on  the  subject. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Lake  City,  Fla.,  October  2,  1862. 

Gentlemen  : I am  hard  pressed  on  the  Saint  John’s  River.  The 
commanding  officer  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff  reports  3,000  Federals  are 
being  landed  at  Mayport  Mills.  The  enemy  engaged  our  batteries 
again  yesterday  for  the  third  time  and  were  repulsed.  I have  not  suf- 
ficient men  to  resist  a land  attack  if  made  in  force.  Do  go  at  once  to 
the  Secretary  and  get  one  or  two  regiments  of  infantry  from  the  coast  of 


1 38 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


Georgia.  If  1 had  them  for  a few  days  it  might  save  the  Saint  John’s 
River  and  perhaps  East  Florida. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-General. 

Hon.  James  S.  Baker, 

Hon.  A.  E.  Maxwell, 

Hon.  James  B.  Dawkins, 

Hon.  R.  B.  Hiltcn. 


Hdqrs.  Proy.  Forces,  Dept.  East  and  Middle  Fla., 

Jacksonville , Fla.,  October  3,  1862. 

On  my  arrival  on  the  river  last  night  I found  that  the  post  at  Saint 
John’s  Bluff  had  been  evacuated.  The  enemj'  made  a landing  some ^5 
miles  in  the  rear  of  the  battery,  but  in  what  force  I am  unable  to  say. 
As  at  present  advised  I think  we  had  sufficient  force  to  hold  the  place, 
and  that  its  abandonment  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hopkins,  the  com- 
manding officer,  was  a gross  military  blunder,  that  may  require  inves- 
tigation. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper. 


No.  7. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  C.  F.  Hopkins , C.  8.  Army , and  resulting  corre- 
spondence. 

Camp  Dunham,  Fla.,  October  8,  1862. 

General  : Below  I have  the  honor  to  submit  such  a statement  as  the 
circumstances  will  permit  of  my  proceedings  at  the  post  of  Saint  John’s 
Bluff  from  September  26  to  October  3 : 

Ou  taking  command  of  the  post  I proceeded  to  examine  the  condition 
of  the  magazines,  batteries,  &c.,  and  set  at  work  fatigue  details  to 
strengthen  and  put  them  in  thorough  repair.  When  I arrived  there 
were  five  gunboats  in  the  river;  on  September  29  another  came  over 
the  bar,  and  on  the  30th  auother,  making  in  all  seven  gunboats.  They 
made  no  movement  toward  attacking  the  batteries.  From  this  fact, 
together  with  reports  from  our  pickets  that  heavy  work  was  being  done 
on  board  the  boats,  I became  apprehensive  that  forces  would  be  landed 
and  the  batteries  attacked  by  land  troops  in  reverse.  Acting  upon  this 
suspicion  I immediately  dispatched  you  a communication,  from  which 
I copy  the  following  expressions : 

I deem  it  necessary  that  at  least  one  regiment  of  infantry  should  he  sent  to  this 
point  without  delay  to  protect  our  rear.  * * * The  force  of  infantry  now  here  is 

not  sufficient  to  repel  an  attack  made  in  force,  and  in  addition  to  the  limited  number 
for  rear  defense  we  have  not  ammunition  sufficient  for  small-arms  for  more  than  one 
hour’s  tight  closely  contested. 

Later  on  the  same  day  I wrote  you  a communication,  in  which  the 
following  expressions  occur: 

I am  fully  impressed  with  the  belief  that  the  enemy  contemplate  a land  attack,  as 
they  will  and  have  found  ir  impracticable  to  succeed  by  water.  I cannot  urge  upon 
you  too  strongly,  general,  the  necessity  for  sending  as  soon  as  practicable  re-enforce- 
ments of  infantry. 


Chap.  XXVi] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C. 


139 


In  the  same  letter  I advised  you  that — 

Sergeant  Floyd,  of  Captain  [J.]  Westcott’s  company,  reported  that  from  the  old 
light-house  he  could  distinctly  see  a very  large  number  of  men  on  both  decks  of  a 
large  transport  steamer,  which  was  anchored  not  more  than  hall  a mile  from  where  he 
was. 

On  the  1st  instant  three  large  transports  entered  the  river,  and  at  2 
p.  m.  three  gunboats  engaged  our  batteries  and  were  repulsed  after  an 
hour’s  fight.  I then  dispatched  an  order  to  Captain  Dunham,  command 
ing  at  Yellow  Bluff,  from  which  I copy  the  following  expressions : 

Three  large  transports  have  j ust  come  into  the  river,  all  crowded  with  troops.  There 
are  also  seven  gunboats,  making  in  all  ten  vessels.  The  fact  of  their  concentrating 
here  so  many  vessels  and  troops  is  sufficient  evidence  of  their  intention  to  land  a large 
force.  You  will  therefore  dismount  the  three  cavalry  companies  under  your  com- 
mand and  send  them  over  to-night  by  the  steamer. 

During  the  engagement  between  the  gunboats  and  our  batteries  the 
enemy  commenced  landing  infantry  and  artillery  at  Mayport  Mills.  Of 
this  fact  1 informed  you  in  the  same  telegram  reporting  the  engagement. 
I also  dispatched  an  order  to  Captain  [Joseph  L.J  Dunham,  from  which 
I copy  the  material  portion  : 

The  enemy  landed  this  afternoon  at  Mayport  Mills  about  3,000  men;  also  artillery. 
You  will  repair  without  delay  to  these  headquarters  with  your  whole  command.  We 
need  your  artillery  immediately. 

The  cavalry  companies  dismounted,  numbering  about  110  men,  were 
sent  without  delay;  the  artillery  was  not  sent.  It  is  proper,  however, 
to  add  that  his  horses  were  at  a distance  and  his  caissons  not  with  his 
pieces,  and  both  time  and  means  of  transportation  were  very  limited. 
Of  these  facts  I was.not  aware  when  the  order  was  sent.  When  I be- 
came aware — through  a letter  from  Captain  Dunham — that  the  artillery 
could  not  be  obtained,  I then  wrote  him  a further  order,  which  was  sent 
him  by  the  messenger  bringing  his  letter,  directing  him  to  send  over 
immediately  all  the  men  he  could  spare,  and  that  I would  do  my  utmost 
to  arm  them,  so  that  they  might  act  as  infantry.  To  this  I received  no 
reply.  This  was  written  at  3 a.  m.  on  the  2d  instant. 

At  an  early  hour  on  the  2d  instant  intelligence  was  received  from  Cap- 
tain [W.  E.]  Chambers,  commanding  a squadron  of  cavalry,  that  daring 
the  preceding  night  the  enemy  had  landed  in  considerable  force  at  Green- 
field and  were  still  rapidly  landing.  I immediately  informed  Major  [T. 
W.]  Brevard,  commanding  the  infantry  in  rear  of  the  batteries,  of  the 
intelligence  received,  and  directed  him  to  place  his  forces  in  line  of  bat- 
tle upon  the  position  previously  pointed  out  to  him  and  so  to  remain 
until  further  orders.  I could  distinctly  see  from  my  position  at  the  bat- 
tery the  landing  of  the  enemy.  The  troops  were  transferred  from  May- 
port  Mills  to  Greenfield,  as  the  transports  were  plying  between  the  mill 
and  the  mouth  of  Pablo  Creek  and  thence  up  the  creek  in  launches. 
I immediately  directed  Captain  Chambers  to  annoy  them  as  much  as 
possible  when  they  commenced  advancing,  and,  if  imssible,  to  hold  them 
in  check,  it  being  impossible  to  prevent  the  landing  without  field  artil- 
lery, as  they  were  under  cover  of  their  guns. 

Captain  Chambers  proceeded  to  deploy  his  men  as  skirmishers  as  ad- 
vantageously as  the  circumstances  would  permit.  After  some  time  he 
informed  me  that  the  enemy  had  commenced  their  advance  in  the  follow- 
ing order,  viz:  Two  hundred  skirmishers  in  front,  with  a reserve;  then 
their  advance  of  three  companies,  and  in  rear  their  main  column  of  2,500 
men ; also  artillery.  Captain  Chambers,  after  holding  his  position  as  long 
as  he  considered  he  could  do  so  without  being  flanked,  informed  me  that 


140 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

he  had  commenced  falling  back.  This  was  about  1 p.  m.  From  my  posi- 
tion at  the  batteries  I perceived  that  the  landing  still  rapidly  progressed 
after  Captain  Chambers  fell  back  and  continued  for  several  hours,  so 
that  Captain  Chambers  could  not  have  seen  the  full  number,  as  men 
were  landed  in  large  numbers  after  he  left  the  position  from  which  his 
estimate  was  made.  I communicated  constantly  with  Captain  Cham- 
bers and  Major  Brevard,  receiving  information  from  the  former  and 
conveying  to  the  latter  the  result  of  my  observations  and  sending  such 
directions  as  were  considered  necessary  Irom  time  to  time.  Captain 
Chambers  was  compelled  to  fall  back  steadily  before  the  enemy,  and 
finding  that  his  camp  would  soon  fall  into  their  hands,  burned  his  tents 
and  other  property.  He  still  kept  me  informed  of  his  position  and  that 
of  the  enemy,  and  his  couriers  informed  me  that  the  enemy  were  bring- 
ing field  artillery  with  them. 

About  this  time  a messenger  came  from  Major  Brevard,  asking  leave 
to  proceed  with  his  command  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy  and  contest 
his  passage  through  the  swamps,  of  which  there  were  a few  between 
them  and  the  batteries.  I perceived  that  this  was  our  best  chance  to 
annoy  the  enemy  With  any  effect  and  granted  the  leave  asked.  Before 
Major  Brevard  could  move,  however,  intelligence  was  received  from  Cap- 
tain Chambers  that  the  enemy  were  now  coming  in  two  columns— one  on 
the  road  as  heretofore  and  the  other  much  farther  to  the  right.  This 
second  column  had  crossed  Mount  Pleasant  Creek,  and  both  columns 
moved  apace  with  each  other,  guided  by  signal  sounds.  Major  Brevard 
was  now  directed  to  remain  in  his  present  position.  Shortly  after  this 
further  intelligence  came  from  Captain  Chambers  that  the  enemy  had 
passed  through  his  camp  and  were  within  a few  miles  of  the  infantry, 
in  rear  of  the  batteries  under  Major  Brevard.  It  was  now  growing  late, 
and  Captain  Chambers  was  directed  to  fall  back  nearer  to  Major  Bre- 
vard’s position,  as  there  was  every  indication  that  the  enemy  would 
make  no  halt,  and  it  was  desired  to  have  his  men  in  sufficient  proximity 
to  place  them  as  circumstances  should  require  when  the  enemy  came 
up.  I also  sent  out  from  the  batteries  a detachment  of  45  men,  leaving 
only  four  gun  detachments  at  the  bluff.  Deeming  it  necessary  to 
strengthen  the  infantry,  Captain  [W.]  Stephens,  with  his  own  com- 
pany and  this  detachment,  was  directed  to  take  position  considerably 
to  the  left  of  Major  Brevard’s  line,  as  it  was  now  tolerably  certain  that 
one  of  the  columns  of  the  enemy  would  follow  the  river  as  nearly  as 
possible,  in  order  that  the  advantage  to  them  of  their  guns  upon  their 
shipping  would  be  greater.  The  enemy  now  ceased  their  march. 

I now  perceived  that  with  the  greatly  superior  forces  brought  against 
us  it  would  be  impossible  to  successfully,  or  with  any  hope  of  success,  | 
make  a stand  against  them.  Our  forces  in  rear  did  not  number  more 
than  500  men,  including  the  detachment  sent  from  the  batteries.  This 
detachment  was  partially  armed  with  the  almost  useless  arms  turned 
over  by  Captain  Dickison.  Captain  [ W.  H.]  Milton  was,  in  effect,  un- 
provided with  ammunition,  and  Captain  Chambers  reported  the  am- 
munition of  his  squadron  damaged  by  the  rain,  which  fell  constantly 
during  the  day.  This  was  not,  therefore,  an  efficient  force.  I had  only 
four  gun  detachments  at  the  batteries.  The  enemy  had,  by  report  of 
Mr.  Haynes  (in  every  respect  a reliable  man),  3,000  men;  also  artillery,  j 
By  the  estimate  of  Captain  Chambers  they  had  2,500  men  in  their  main 
column  (also  artillery)  at  the  time  he  was  forced  to  fall  back  Irom 
Greenfield,  and  for  four  hours  after  Captain  Chambers  had  fallen  back 
from  my  position  at  the  batteries  I could  distinctly  perceive  that  rapid 
lauding  was  still  in  progress.  From  the  number  of  boats  used  and  the 


Chap.  XXVI.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C.  141 

rapidity  with  which  they  plied  between  the  vessels  and  the  landing  I 
estimated  that  they  could  not  have  landed  less  after  Captain  Chambers 
had  fallen  back  than  300  men  per  hour.  Therefore,  at  the  very  small- 
est estimate,  not  less  than  1,000  men  were  landed  after  Captain  Cham- 
bers had  left  the  ground.  Against  this  force  it  was  simply  impossible 
to  hold  the  batteries.  I therefore  called  a conference  of  the  officers  at 
the  batteries.  Captain  [John  C.]  Bichard,  Lieutenant  Stuart,  and  my- 
self were  present,  and  the  question  of  the  practicability  of  holding  the 
place  was  discussed.  The  opinion  was  unanimous  that  our  forces  were 
not  sufficient  to  resist  those  against  us  in  our  rear.  I then  sent  a 
courier  to  Major  Brevard,  informing  him  of  our  conference  at  the  bat- 
teries, and  requesting  him  to  procure  an  expression  of  opinion  from  him- 
self and  the  officers  commanding  companies  outside  the  batteries.  In 
the  mean  time,  however,  I understood  a conference  had  been  held  by 
the  several  captains  under  Major  Brevard,  sustaining  unanimously  the 
opinion  that  the  forces  there  were  insufficient  to  repel  the  enemy  in 
front.  At  9 p.  m.  the  post  was  reluctantly  abandoned. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  F.  HOPKINS, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Comdg.  Department  of  Middle  and  Eastern  Florida. 


[Indorsement.] 

Bespectfully  referred  for  the  information  of  the  commanding  general. 
While  I impute  no  want  of  courage  to  the  officer  in  command,  I consider 
that  he  mistook  his  duty  as  an  officer  in  not  making  a personal  recon- 
naissance of  the  enemy,  their  strength,  position,  &c.,  and  in  not  resist- 
ing with  the  whole  force  at  his  command  their  approach  to  his  works. 
If  overpowered  by  actual  conflict  with  the  enemy  it  was  then  the  duty 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hopkins  to  have  spiked  his  guns  and  destroyed 
his  ammunition  and  retire  in  the  best  order  he  could.  Neither  of  these 
seems  to  have  been  done.  The  evacuation  seems  to  have  taken  place 
some  eighteen  or  twenty  hours  before  the  approach  of  the  enemy  by 
land.  The  guns  were  not  spiked,  nor  the  ammunition,  of  which  there 
was  a large  quantity,  destroyed. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Apalachicola  Biver  Defenses, 
Alum  Bluff,  Fla.,  December  24,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  com- 
manding general,  that  his  communication  of  November  3,  through  Gen- 
eral Finegan,  has  been  received.  In  reply,  I inclose  my  demand  for  a 
court  of  inquiry  and  the  decision  of  the  court.  Brigadier-General  Fin- 
egan says  in  his  report  to  you  that  I mistook  my  “duty  as  an  officer  in 
not  making  a personal  reconnaissance  of  the  enemy,  their  strength, 
position,”  &c.  In  reply  to  this  I assert  that  I did  make  a personal  recon- 
naissance of  the  enemy  with  a glass  from  the  batteries,  and  could  plainly 
and  distinctly  see  the  men  as  they  disembarked  from  the  transports  into 
smaller  boats  and  were  conveyed  up  to  the  landing  in  Pablo  Creek ; and 
from  the  uumber  that  I saw  land  I was  convinced  that  unless  I made  a 
retreat  my  small  command  would  be  captured,  as  the  guns  from  the  bat- 


142 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


teries  afforded  no  protection  to  tlie  rear.  In  regard  to  not  spiking  the 
guns  and  destroying  the  ammunition,  I did  save  as  much  of  the  ammu- 
nition as  I could  get  transportation  for,  which  was  only  one  wagon  load. 
I did  not  break  the  trunnions  of  the  guns  because  the  noise  made  in 
doing  so  would  have  exposed  our  designs  to  the  enemy.  I did  not  spike 
them  because  I had  nothing  to  do  it  with  and  did  not  consider  it  impor- 
tant, as  they  did  not  bear  upon  the  rear  or  the  direction  which  we  re- 
treated. 

Hoping  that  this  short  explanation  may  meet  with  your  approbation, 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  F.  HOPKINS, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff , Dept.  S.  (7.,  Ga .,  and  Fla. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Camp  Finegan,  October  8,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  Comdg.  Dept.  Fast,  and  Mid.  Florida: 

General  : As  there  have  been  expressions  of  opinion,  and  reports 
put  iu  circulation  based  upon  them,  prejudicial  to  myself  and  the  vol- 
unteers under  my  command  in  the  evacuation  of  Saint  John’s  Bluff 
on  the  night  of  October  2,  I respectfully  demand  that  a court  of  in- 
quiry be  called  at  the  earliest  day  practicable,  to  examine  into  the  facts 
of  the  case  and  the  policy  of  the  course  pursued  by  myself  upon  that 
occasion. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  F.  HOPKINS, 
Lieutenent-  Colonel , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

General  Orders,  1 Headquarters  Proyisional  Forces, 

> Dept.  East  and  Middle  Florida, 

No.  — . ) Camp  Finegan , October  8,  1862. 

At  the  request  of  Lieut.  Col.  C.  F.  Hopkins,  late  commander  at  Saint 
John’s  Bluff,  a court  of  inquiry  is  hereby  ordered,  to  convene  at  this 
post  at  10  a.  m.  on  to-morrow,  to  take  evidence  of  the  facts  relating  to 
the  evacuation  of  post  at  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  with  its  armament  and 
stores.  The  court  will  be  composed  of  the  following  officers : Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Mitchell,  Twenty-ninth  Georgia  Regiment ; Lieutenant- 
Colonel  [T.  W.]  Mangham,  Thirtieth  Georgia  Regiment,  and  Lieuten- 
ant [II.  F.]  Abell,  Milton  Artillery,  as  judge-ad #>cate. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan  : 

W.  CALL, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Camp  Finegan,  October  11,  1862. 

At  the  solicitation  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hopkins  the  court  con- 
vened by  Brigadier-General  Finegan  to  investigate  the  necessity  and 
policy  of  evacuating  the  batteries  on  Saint  John’s  Bluff  hereby  append 
its  decision,  inasmuch  as  it  was  contemplated  by  Colonel  Hopkins’  de- 
mand for  a court  to  investigate  the  circumstances  relating  to  the  said 
evacuation  that  the  court  should  give  an  expression  of  its  opinion : 

The  court,  after  patiently  hearing  the  testimony  adduced  by  tlie 
several  witnesses,  and  after  mature  deliberation,  give  it  as  their  opinion 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


143 


AFFAIR  AT  KIRK\s  BLUFF,  S.  C. 

that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hopkins,  with  the  effective  force  at  his  corn- 
niaod,  could  not,  under  the  existing  circumstances,  have  made  a suc- 
cessful defense  of  the  batteries;  and,  further,  from  the  evidence  the 
court  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  evacuation  of  the  batteries  was  posi- 
tively necessary  for  the  safety  of  the  men  under  his  command,  as  an 
attempt  to  have  held  it  against  the  greatly  [superior]  land  force  of  the 
enemy  would  have  inevitably  resulted  in  the  complete  reduction  of  the 
batteries  and  the  capture  of  the  command.  We  therefore  consider 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Hopkins  wholly  justifiable  in  the  course  be  pur- 
sued in  abandoning  the  batteries  on  the  Saint  John’s. 

WILLIAM  D.  MITCHELL, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  Twenty -ninth  Georgia , President  of  the  Court . 


OCTOBER  18,  1862. — Affair  at  Kirk’s  Bluff,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  William  B.  Barton , Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces  on  the  Savannah  Eiver, 

Fort  Pulaski , Ga .,  October  19,  1862. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding,  that  in  compliance  with  his  instructions  I yesterdav 
went  up  May  Eiver  with  steamer  Planter,  having  on  board  one"  company 
Forty-eighth  New  York  State  Volunteers,  Lieutenant  Elfwing,  and  a 
detachment  of  the  Third  Ehode  Island  Artillery,  Captain  Gould  to 
Crowell’s  plantation,  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  the  scout  who  had  been 
sent  up  to  New  Bridge.  Owing  to  the  head  wind  and  adverse  tide,  and 
the  fact  that  the  steamer  did  not  reach  the  fort  the  night  before  until 
long  after  midnight,  I did  not  arrive  at  Crowell’s  until  2.30  p.  m. 
After  taking  the  scout  on  board  we  started  on  our  return,  stopping  for 
a few  moments  at  Bluffton  to  secure  a boat  and  to  learn  what  we  could 
as  to  the  recent  presence  of  the  enemy  there. 

We  found  indications  that  a company  of  cavalry  had  been  in  the  town 
during  the  day  On  our  way  doyn,  after  leaving  Bluffton,  while  pass- 
es Ivirk  s Bluff,  where  the  channel  is  within  half  musket-range  of  the 
shore,  a considerable  force  of  the  enemy,  concealed  in  the  dense  thicket 
on  tne  bluff,  opened  a musketry  fire  upon  the  Planter.  The  fire  was  in- 
stantly returned  by  both  infantry  and  artillery  on  board  the  steamer, 
and  I judge  effectively  also,  as  we  fired  a number  of  rounds  of  shell  with 
one-second  fuses  (which  exploded  directly  among  them)  and  of  grace 
and  canister.  • h 1 

Meanwhile  (as  the  boat,  having  been  under  full  headway  when  the  fir- 
ing first  commenced,  had  passed  beyond  the  bluff)  I directed  her  to  be 
put  about,  and  running  back  took  a favorable  position  and  continued 
shelling  the  enemy,  who  were  now  retreating  in  great  confusion,  grad- 
ually increasing  the  fuses  as  the  distance  widened,  until  they  were 
entirely  out  of  range.  By  this  time  night  had  come  on,  and  as  the  tide 
was  falling  I returned  to  this  post.  The  enemy’s  fire  at  times  was  very 
heavy,  shots  striking  the  steamer  in  almost  every  part,  and  two  passing 
through  and  through  her.  It  is  very  remarkable,  considering  the  advan  - 
tage the  enemy  possessed  in  being  in  a great  measure  concealed  and 
above  us  and  the  exposure  of  our  men,  that  not  more  injury  was  inflicted 
upon  us. 

It  affords  me  pleasure  to  state  all  the  troops  on  board  the  Planter,  as 
* Nominal  list  shows  4 men  wounded. 


144  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXVI. 

well  as  the  officers  and  crew  of  the  boat,  behaved  in  the  most  commend- 
able manner  during  this  little  affair. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  B.  BARTON, 

Colonel  Forty -eighth  New  Yorh  State  Yols .,  Comdg.  Post. 
Lieut.  Col.  W.  P.  Prentice,  A.  A.  G.  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


OCTOBER  22-23,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Coosa whatchie  and  engagements  at 
the  Caston  and  Frampton  Plantations,  near  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 

REPORTS,  ETC.* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the  South. 
No.  2. — Return  of  Casualtiesjh  the  Union  forces. 

No.  3. — First  Lieut.  Edward  J.  Keenan,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Reserves  (Infantry), 
Acting  Chief  Signal  Officer  Department  of  the  South. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Brannan,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  5. — Col.  Edward  W.  Serrell,  First  New  York  Engineers. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Hall,  First  New  York  Engineers. 

No.  7. — Col.  Tilghman  H.  Good,  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  commanding 
First  Brigade,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  8. — Maj.  Lorenzo  Meeker,  Sixth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  9. — Col.  Louis  Bell,  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

No.  10. — Col.  Tilghman  H.  Good,  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  11. — Col.  Richard  White,  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  12. — Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  H.  Terry,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  Tenth 
Army  Corps. 

No.  13. — Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley,  Seventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  14. — Col.  John  H.  Jackson,  Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

No.  15. — Col.  De  Witt  C.  Strawbridge,  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  16. — Col.  William  B.  Barton,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  17. — Capt.  Samuel  C.  Eaton,  First  New  York  Engineers. 

No.  18. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida.  $ 

No.  19. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces. 

No.  20. — Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

No.  21. — Capt.  W.  W.  Elliott,  C.  S.  Army,  Ordnance  Officer,  Third  Military  District 
of  South  Carolina. 

No.  22. — Col.  C.  J.  Colcock,  C.  S.  Army,  Third  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

No.  23. — Col.  Claudius  C.  Wilson,  C.  S.  Army,  Twenty-fifth  Georgia  Infantry. 

No.  24.— Lieut.  E.  E.  Jefferson,  C.  S.  Army,  Nelson  Light  Artillery,  Virginia. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Ormsby  M.  Mitchel , U.  S.  Army , commanding  De- 
partment of  the  South. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  October  24,  1862. 
General  : My  third  expedition  to  the  main-land  returned  last  night. 
The  expedition  was  designed  to  aceomplish  the  following  objects : 

* For  reports  of  Commander  Steedmau  and  Lieutenant  Phoenix,  U.  S,  Navy,  see 
Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  1,  1862. 


145 


Ciiap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 

First,  to  make  a complete  reconnaissance  of  the  Broad  River  and  its 
three  tributaries,  Coosawhatchie,  Tulifiny,  and  Pocotaligo ; second,  to 
test  practically  the  rapidity  and  safety  with  which  a landing  could  be 
effected;  third,  to  learn  the  strength  of  the  enemy  on  the  main-land, 
now  guarding  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad ; and,  fourth,  to 
accomplish  the  destruction  of  so  much  of  the  road  as  could  be  effected 
in  one  day.  At  this  season  of  the  year  I did  not  deem  it  prudent  to 
expose  the  troops  upon  the  main-land  for  a longer  period. 

The  troops  composing  the  expedition  were  the  following : Forty-sev- 
enth Pennsylvania,  600  men  ; Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania,  400  men ; Fourth 
New  Hampshire,  600  men ; Seventh  Connecticut,  500  men ; Third  New 
Hampshire,  480  men ; Sixth  Connecticut,  500  men  ; Third  Rhode  Island, 
300  men ; Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania,  430  men  ; New  York  Mechanics 
and  Engineers,  250  men ; Forty-eighth  New  York,  300  men ; one  sec- 
tion of  Hamilton’s  battery  and  40  men ; one  section  of  the  First  Regi- 
ment Artillery,  Company  M,  battery  and  40  men,  and  the  First  Massa- 
chusetts Cavalry,  100  men.  Making  an  entire  force  of  4,500  men. 

Every  pains  had  been  taken  to  secure  as  far  as  possible  success  for 
the  expedition.  Scouts  and  spies  had  been  sent  to  the  main  land  to  all 
the  most  important  points  between  the  Savannah  River  railroad  bridge 
and  the  bridge  across  the  Salkehatchie.  A small  party  was  sent  out 
to  cut,  if  possible,  the  telegraph  wires.  Scouts  had  been  sent  in  boats 
up  the  tributaries  of  the  Broad  River.  All  the  landings  had  been 
examined,  and  the  depth  of  water  in  the  several  rivers  ascertained  as 
far  as  practicable.  Two  of  our  light-draught  transports  have  been  con- 
verted into  formidable  gunboats  and  are  now  heavily  armed,  to  wit, 
The  Planter  and  the  George  Washing  ton.  By  my  orders  the  New 
York  Mechanics  and  Engineers,  Colonel  Serrell,  had  constructed  two 
very  large  flat-boats,  or  scows,  each  capable  of  transporting  half  a 
battery  of  artillery,  exclusive  of  the  caissons,  with  the  horses.  They 
were  provided  with  hinged  aprons,  to  facilitate  the  landing  not  only 
of  artillery  but  of  troops  from  the  transports. 

Owing  to  an  accident  which  occurred  to  the  transport  Cosmopolitan 
during  the  expedition  to  the  Saint  John’s  River  I found  myself  defi- 
cient in  transportation,  and  applied  to  the  commanding  officer,  Com- 
modore Godon,  of  the  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron,  who 
promptly  placed  under  my  orders  a number  of  light-draught  gunboats 
I for  the  double  purpose  of  transportation  and  military  protection. 

On  the  evening  of  the  21st,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Steedman, 

! U.  S.  Navy,  the  gunboats  and  transports  were  arranged  in  the  following 
order  for  sailing:  The  Paul  Jones,  Captain  Steedman,  without  troops  ; 
the  Ben  DeFord,  Conemaugh,  Wissahickon,  Boston,  Patroon,  Darling- 
ton, steam-tug  Relief,  with  schooner  in  tow;  Marblehead,  Yixen,  Flora, 
Water  Witch,  George  Washington,  and  Planter.  The  flat-boats,  with 
artillery,  were  towed  by  the  Ben  De  Ford  and  Boston.  The  best  negro 
pilots  which  could  be  found  were  placed  on  the  principal  vessels,  as  well 
as  signal  officers,  for  the  purpose  of  intercommunication.  The  night 
proved  to  be  smoky  and  hazy,  which  produced  some  confusion  in  the 
sailing  of  the  vessels,  as  signal  lights  could  not  be  seen  by  those  most 
remote  from  the  leading  ship.  The  larger  vessels,  however,  got  under 
way  about  12  o’clock  at  night. 

After  a careful  examination  of  the  map  I ordered  a landing  to  be 
effected  at  the  mouth  of  the  Pocotaligo  River,  at  a place  known  as 
Mackay’s  Point.  This  is  really  a narrow  neck  of  land  made  by  the 
Broad  River  and  the  Pocotaligo,  in  both  of  which  ri  vers  gunboats  could 
lie  and  furnish  a perfect  protection  for  the  debarkation  and  embar- 
go r r— vol  yiv 


146 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA,  [Chap.  XXVI. 

kation  of  the  troops.  There  is  a good  country  road  leading  from  the 
Point  to  the  old  town  of  Pocotaligo,  then  entering  a turnpike,  which 
leads  from  the  town  of  Coosawhatchie  to  the  principal  ferry  on  the 
Salkehatchie  Eiver.  The  distance  to  the  railroad  was  only"  about  7 
or  8 miles,  thus  rendering  it  possible  to  effect  a landing,  cut  the  rail- 
road and  telegraph  wires,  and  return  to  the  boats  in  the  same  day.  I 
saw  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  the  troops  to  be  attacked  by  the 
enemy  either  in  flank  or  rear,  as  the  two  flanks  were  protected  by  the 
Pocotaligo  Eiver  on  the  one  hand  and  by  the  Broad  and  by  the  Tuli- 
finy,  its  tributary,  on  the  other.  Presuming  that  the  enemy  would 
make  his  principal  defense  at  or  near  Pocotaligo,  I directed  that  a 
detachment  of  the  Forty- eighth  New  York,  under  command  of  Colonel 
Barton,  with  the  armed  transport  Planter,  accompanied  by  one  or  two 
light-draught  gunboats,  should  ascend  the  Coosawhatchie  Eiver,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  a diversion ; and,  in  case  no  considerable  force  of 
the  enemy  was  met,  to  destroy  the  railroad  at  and  near  the  town  of 
Coosawhatchie. 

In  addition  to  our  land  forces  we  were  furnished  by  the  Navy  with 
several  transports,  armed  with  howitzers,  three  of  which  were  landed 
with  the  artillery,  and  thus  gave  us  a battery  of  seven  pieces.  All  the 
troops  were  furnished  with  100  rounds  of  ammunition.  Two  light  am- 
bulances and  one  wagon,  with  its  team,  accompanied  the  expedition. 

I have  no  official  report  from  Brigadier-General  Brannan,  the  officer 
in  command,  but,  having  had  an  interview  with  Generals  Brannan  and 
Terry  and  with  several  regimental  commanders,  I am  enabled  to  give 
you  a general  outline  of  the  facts  and  of  the  results  obtained. 

First,  we  have  learned  the  navigation  of  the  Broad  Eiver,  and  have 
also  ascended  the  Pocotaligo  and  Coosawhatchie  Eivers,  so  as  to  obtain 
a complete  knowledge  of  these  two  streams ; second,  a landing  was 
effected  rapidly  and  in  perfect  safety,  but,  owing  to  the  ignorance  of  our 
pilots  one  of  the  large  transports  ran  aground  not  far  from  Mackay’s 
Point,  Avhich  delayed  the  moving  of  the  expedition  three  or  four  hours 
and  gave  the  enemy  full  opportunity7  to  make  every  disposition  of  his 
available  troops  for  defensive  purposes,  and  also  to  telegraph  to  Charles- 
ton and  Savannah  for  re-enforcements;  and,  third,  we  encountered  the 
enemy,  as  I anticipated,  about  3 miles  from  Pocotaligo,  and  in  two  suc- 
cessive engagements  drove  him  from  his  strong  positions,  and  finallv 
compelled  his  retreat  across  the  Pocotaligo  Eiver,  destroying  the  bridge 
behind  him. 

The  march  and  fight  continued  from  about  1 o’clock  until  between 
o and  6 o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  The  officers  and  troops  behaved  in 
the  most  gallant  manner.  One  bayonet  charge  was  made  over  cause- 
ways with  the  most  determined  courage  and  with  veteran  firmness. 
The  advance  was  made  with  caution,  but  with  persistent  steadiness, 
driving  the  enemy  over  a distance  of  more  than  3 miles,  and  finally 
compelling  him  to  seek  safety  by  crossing  the  Pocotaligo  Eiver  and  the 
destruction  of  its  bridge.  The  fight  was  continued  on  the  banks  of  the 
Pocotaligo,  but  the  coming  on  of  night  and  the  exhaustion  of  our  am- 
munition, as  well  as  the  impossibility  of  crossing  the  river,  rendered  it 
necessary  for  the  troops  to  return  to  their  boats.  This  was  done  in 
perfect  order  and  with  great  deliberation.  It  was  impossible  for  the 
enemy  to  harass  our  troops,  as  they  were  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river  and  the  bridge  was  destroyed. 

So  far  as  I know  all  the  dead  and  wounded  were  brought  off. 

Nothing  Whatever  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy7,  while  they  were 
compelled  to  abandon  two  of  their  caissons,  with  ammunition,  which 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIKMISH  AT  COOSA  WHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC.  147 

was  returned  to  them  (the  ammunition)  on  the  banks  of  the  Pocotaligo 
from  our  naval  howitzers. 

While  these  events  were  in  progress  the  detachment  under  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Barton,  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers, 
ascended  the  Coosawhatchie  Biver  to  within  1J  miles  of  the  village! 
A landing  was  effected,  and  the  troops  of  Colonel  Barton,  accompanfed 
by  a detachment  of  Engineers  and  Mechanics,  marched  upon  the  village. 
When  within  about  100  yards  of  the  railroad  a train  of  eight  or  ten  cars 
came  up  at  high  speed,  and  was  received  by  a volley  from  our  infantry 
and  a discharge  from  one  of  the  naval  howitzers.  As  the  troops  were 
mostly  upon  platform  cars,  and  very  much  crowded,  this  fire  must 
have  been  very  destructive.  The  engineer  was  killed,  but  the  train  was 
stopped  in  the  village,  and  these  troops  were  added  to  those  already 
guarding  the  bridge,  and  this  force  made  it  necessary  to  draw  off  the 
Engineers,  who  were  engaged  in  tearing  up  the  track,  having  taken  with 
them  the  tools  required  for  this  purpose,  and  the  entire  detachment  fell 
back,  under  the  protection  of  the  armed  transport  and  the  gupboat. 
The  enemy  pursued,  supposing  the  Planter  to  be  an  unarmed  transport, 
but  her  heavy  guns  soon  drove  them  back  in  disorder,  and  Colonel  Bar- 
ton, having  determined,  in  his  dash  upon  the  village,  the  position  of 
the  bridge  and  of  the  depot,  shelled  them  both  with  his  30-pounder 
Parrotts  for  nearly  two  hours  during  the  afternoon.  Before  dark  he 
returned  to  Mackay’s  Point,  with  no  loss  except  the  wounding  of  Lieu- 
tenant Blanding,  of  the  Third  Bhode  Island,  whose  arm  was  shattered 
and  his  side  pierced  by  a Minie  ball. 

1 regret  to  say  that  the  main  body,  under  the  command  of  Brigadier- 
General  Brannan,  suffered  severely  in  killed  and  wounded  in  the  three 
fights,  which  constituted  almost  one  continuous  battle  during  the  entire 
afternoon. 

I desire  to  acknowledge  the  deep  obligations  I am  under  to  Commo- 
dore Godon,  as  well  as  to  Captain  Steedman  and  the  other  officers  and 
sailors  of  the  Navy,  who  accompanied  the  expedition,  and  to  the  officers 
and  soldiers  composing  the  expedition,  who  fought  with  distinguished 
gallantry  and  with  signal  success,  and  have  earned  the  thanks  of  the 
Government  and  of  the  country. 

I inclose  a list  of  casualties,  which  I think  is  nearly  complete,  and 
from  which  it  appears  that  our  loss  amounts  to  about  50  killed  and  300 
wounded*  The  loss  of  the  enemy  it  was  of  course  impossible  for  us 
to  ascertain. 

A few  prisoners  have  fallen  into  our  hands,  and  we  have  every  reason 
to  believe  that  the  enemy  suffered  severely. 

The  greatest  activity  prevailed  on  the  railroad,  and  trains  of  cars 
with  troops  appear  to  have  been  sent  from  both  Charleston  and  Sa- 
vannah. 

I have  planned  three  other  expeditions,  but  am  so  deficient  in  troops 
that  I am  compelled  to  recruit  my  forces  after  each  expedition,  and 
this  delay  is  disastrous.  I most  earnestly  beg  for  re-enforcements,  that 
our  blows  may  fall  with  far  greater  rapffiity,  and  thus  secure  more  per- 
iect  success. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 

servant, 

O.  M.  MITCHEL, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Haeleck,  General-in-Chief, \ Washington , I).  G. 


* But  see  rerised  statement,  p.  148. 


148 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


No.  2. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  in  the  skirmish  at  Coosawhatchie 
and  engagements  at  the  Caston  and  Fr  amp  ton  Plantations , near  Poco- 
taligo , S.  C.,  October  22,  1862. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  <fcc.] 


Command. 


6th  Connecticut 

7th  Connecticut 

1st  Massachusetts  Cav- 
alry (detachment) . 
3d  New  Hampshire  . . . 

4th  Hew  Hampshire 

47th  Pennsylvania 


Hilled. 


55th  Pennsylvania 
76th  Pennsylvania 


3d  Rhode  Island  Heavy 
Artillery  (detach- 
ment).- 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Bat- 
tery M (detach- 
ment). 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Bat- 
tery E (detach- 
ment). 


17 


39 


Wounded. 


13 


281 


Captured 
or  missing. 


34 

29 

2 

3 

27 

112 


340 


Remarks. 


Capt.  Charles  Mickley  killed , 
Capt.  George  Junker  died  of 
wounds  October  23. 

Capt.  Horace  C. Bennett  killed. 
Capts.  Arthur  Hamilton  and 
Henry  Wayne  killed. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  First  Lieut.  Edward  J.  Keenan , Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Reserves 
(Infantry),  Acting  Chief  Signal  Officer  Department  of  the  South. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  C .,  October  — , 1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  18th  instant  I was 
iuiormed  by  Major-General  Mitchel,  commanding  Department  of  the 
South,  that  an  expedition  was  being  prepared  to  undertake  offensive 
operations  upon  the  main  land  of  South  Carolina,  and  was  directed  to 
have  a sufficient  number  of  signal  officers  prepared  to  accompany  it.  1 

On  the  20th  instant,  after  another  consultation  with  General  Mitchel, 
I made  the  following  assignments  of  signal  officers  and  directed  them 
to  report  accordingly : 

First  Lieut.  G.  H.  Hill  to  report  on  board  steamer  Ben  De  Ford  to 
Geueral  Brannan. 

First  Lieut.  J.  R.  Findley  to  report  on  board  gunboat  Water  Witch. 

Second  Lieut.  F.  E.  Town  to  report  on  board  gunboat  Paul  Jones. 

Second  Lieut.  T.  L.  Hatfield  to  report  on  board  gunboat  Marblehead. 

Second  Lieut.  W.  H.  Hamner  to  report  on  board  gunboat  Cone* 
maugh. 

Second  Lieut.  T.  G.  Vidal  to  report  on  board  steamer  Planter. 

Second  Lieut.  G.  F.  Gross  to  report  on  board  steamer  Boston, 


149 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 

At  midnight  of  the  21st  instant  the  expedition  got  under  way  and 
proceeded  up  Broad  and  Ooosawhatchie  Rivers.  At  daylight  on  the 
morning  of  22d  the  vessels  anchored  in  the  Coosawhatchie  River,  off 
the  mouth  of  Pocotaligo,  and  the  troops  were  ordered  to  disembark, 
which  having  been  accomplished,  they  were  pushed  forward  toward  the 
railroad  running  between  Charleston  and  Savannah,  without,  until  they 
had  marched  6 miles,  encountering  any  opposition  ; here,  however,  the 
enemy  made  a stand ; fire  was  opened  by  our  artillery  and  briskly  replied 
to  by  that  of  the  enemy,  who  were  posted  in  a thick  wood.  After  an  en- 
gagement of  nearly  an  hour  the  enemy  fell  back  to  the  north  side  of  the 
creek,  destroying  the  bridge  in  their  retreat.  Here  they  made  another 
stand  at  a place  called  Frampton,  but  after  a resistance  of  about  two 
hours  retreated  to  the  east  side  of  Pocotaligo,  10  miles  from  where  our 
forces  had  landed,  destroying  also  this  bridge.  At  this  point  they  had 
prepared  rifle  pits  and  were  heavily  re- enforced,  and  the  engagement 
was  renewed  with  great  energy  upon  both  sides.  Night  coming  on  our 
troops  were  ordered  to  retire,  reaching  the  landing  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Pocotaligo  at  about  4 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  23d.  The  nature 
of  the  ground,  thickly  wooded,  prevented  any  use  of  signals  in  the  bat- 
tles, but  they  were  extensively  and  with  much  advantage  used  in  the 
debarkation  and  embarkation  of  the  troops  and  while  on  the  way  be- 
tween the  gunboats.  Lieutenants  Hill  and  Cross  accompanied  the  col- 
umn upon  shore,  the  former  in  the  action  acting  as  aide  to  Brigadier- 
General  Brannan,  who  acknowledges  Lieutenant  Hill’s  services  in  his 
official  report ; the  latter  to  Brigadier-General  Terry.  Lieutenant 
Vidal  accompanied  Col.  W.  B.  Barton,  with  the  Forty-eighth  Regi- 
ment New  York  Volunteers  and  a detachment  of  the  Third  Rhode  Isl- 
and Artillery,  up  the  Coosawhatchie  on  board  the  Planter,  and  when 
that  force  landed  accompanied  it  on  shore.  Near  the  railroad  they  were 
met  and  fired  upon  by  a heavy  force  of  the  enemy,  when  they  fell  back 
and  embarked  again  upon  the  Planter.  The  other  signal  officers  re- 
mained under  orders  upon  the  gunboats.  Our  loss  in  killed,  wounded 
and  missing  was  419.*  Lieuts.  G.  H.  Hill  and  J.  R.  Findley,  acting  sig- 
nal officers,  have  received  communications  from  the  commanding  officers 
of  their  respective  regiments  informing  them  that  their  names  have 
been  presented  to  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania  for  promotion  to  cap- 
taincies, their  former  captains  having  both  been  killed  in  the  engage- 
ment ; they  have  made  application  to  be  relieved  from  signal  dutv.  Bv 
the  death  of  Major-General  Mitchel,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan  is  now 
in  command  of  this  department.  By  his  direction  I have  placed  a signal 
officer,  Lieut.  Paul  Brodie,  upon  the  flag-ship  Wabash  for  the  purpose 
of  facilitating  communication  between  Admiral  DuPont  and  General 
Brannan.  By  Special  Orders,  No.  345,  Private  Charles  D.  Chamberlain, 
Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  was  relieved  from  signal  duty 
and  has  rejoined  his  company,  and  Private  William  Morford,  of  Com- 
pany G,  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  has  been  detailed  iu 
his  stead.  Lieut.  T.  P.  Rushby  is  in  general  hospital,  and  Lieut.  Gus- 
tavus  Dana  has  been  assigned  to  duty  at  Kane  Island. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  ve^y  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  J.  KEENAN, 

1st  Lieut.,  11th  P.  R.  (7.,  and  Actg.  Chief  Signal  Officer  I).  S. 

Maj.  A.  J.  Myer, 

Signal  Officer , TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , I).  C. 


* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  148. 


150  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  TChap.  XXVL 

no.  4. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Brannan , TJ.  S.  Army , commanding  expe- 
dition. 

Headquarters  Expeditionary  Forces, 

TJ.  8.  Transport  Ben  Be  Ford , October  24,  1862. 

Colonel  : In  accordance  with  instructions  received  from  Headquar- 
ters Department  of  the  South,  I assumed  command  of  the  following- 
forces,  ordered  to  destroy  the  railroad  and  railroad  bridges  on  the 
Charleston  and  Savannah  line : 

A portion  of  the  First  Brigade  (Brannan’s),  Col.  J.  L.  Ohatfield,  Sixth 
Begiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  commanding,  effective  strength  2,000; 
a portion  of  Second  Brigade,  Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry  commanding,  effect- 
ive strength  1,410;  detachment  of  Third  Begiment  Bhode  Island  Vol- 
unteers, Colonel  Brown  commanding,  effective  strength  300 ; detach- 
ment of  Forty-eighth  Begiment  New  York  State  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Barton  commanding,  effective  strength  300 ; detachment  of  First  Massa- 
chusetts Cavalry,  Capt.  L.  Bichmond -commanding,  effective  strength 
108 ; section  of  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  Lieut.  G.  V.  Henry  commanding, 
effective  strength  40 ; section  of  Third  TJ.  S.  Artillery,  Lieut.  E.  Git- 
tings  commanding,  effective  strength  40 ; detachment  of  New  York 
Volunteer  Engineers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hall  commanding,  effective 
strength  250.  Total  effective  strength,  4,448  men. 

With  this  command  I left  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  on  the  evening  of 
October  21,  and,  proceeding  up  Broad  Biver,  arrived  off  Pocotaligo 
Creek  at  4.30  a.  m.  with  the  transport  Ben  De  Ford  and  the  gunboat 
Paul  Jones.  Col.  William  B.  Barton,  Forty-eighth  Begiment  New  York 
State  Volunteers,  50  men  of  the  Volunteer  Engineer  Corps,  and  50  men 
of  the  Third  Bhode  Island  Volunteers,  in  accordance  with  my  order, 
delivered  early  that  morning,  proceeded  direct  to  the  Coosa whatchie 
Biver,  to  destroy  the  railroad  and  railroad  bridges  in  that  vicinity. 
The  other  gunboats  and  transports  did  not  all  arrive  until  about  8 a.  m. 
on  October  22.  I immediately  effected  a landing  of  my  artillery  and 
infantry  at  Mackay’s  Point,  at  the  junction  of  Pocotaligo  and  Tulifiny- 
Bivers.  I advanced  without  delay  in  the  direction  of  Pocotaligo 
Bridge,  sending  back  the  transports  Flora  and  Darlington  to  Port  Boyal 
Island  for  the  cavalry,  the  First  Brigade  being  in  advance,  with  a sec- 
tion from  the  First  C.  S.  Artillery,  followed  by  the  Second  Brigade,  with 
Colonel  Brown’s  command,  the  section  of  the  Third  IJ.  S.  Artillery  and 
three  boat  howitzers,  which  Captain  Steedman,  commanding  the  naval 
forces,  kindly  furnished  for  this  occasion,  and  a detachment  of  45  men 
from  the  Third  Bhode  Island  Volunteer  Artillery,  under  Captain  Corn- 
stock,  of  that  regiment. 

On  advancing  about  5J  miles  and  debouching  upon  an  open  rolling 
country  the  rebels  opened  upon  us  with  a field  battery  from  a position 
on  the  plantation  known  as  Caston’s.  I immediately  caused  the  First 
Brigade  to  deploy,  and,  bringing  my  artillery  to  the  front,  drove  the 
rebels  from  this  position.  They,  however,  destroyed  all  small  bridges 
in  the  vicinity,  causing  much  delay  in  my  advance.  These,  with  the 
aid  of  the  Engineer  Corps,  were  reconstructed  as  we  advanced,  and  I 
followed  up  the. retreat  of  the  rebels  with  all  the  haste  practicable.  I 
had  advanced  about  IJ  miles  farther,  when  a battery  again  opened  on 
us  from  a position  on  the  plantation  called  Frampton.  The  rebels  here 
had  every  advantage  of  ground,  being  ensconced  in  a wood,  with  a deep 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSA WHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC.  15l 

swamp  in  front,  passable  only  by  a narrow  causeway,  on  which  the 
bridge  had  been  destroyed,  while,  on  our  side  of  the  swamp  and  along 
the  entire  front  and  flanks  of  the  enemy  (extending  to  the  swamps),  was 
an  impervious  thicket,  intersected  by  a deep  water-ditch,  and  passable 
only  by  a narrow  road.  Into  this  wood  the  rebels  threw  a most  terrific 
fire  of  grape,  shot,  shell,  canister,  and  musket  balls,  killing  and  wound- 
ing great  numbers  of  my  command.  Here  the  ammunition  for  the  field 
pieces  fell  short,  and,  though  the  infantry  acted  with  great  courage  and 
determination,  they  were  twice  driven  out  of  the  woods  with  great 
slaughter  by  the  overwhelming  fire  of  the  enemy,  whose  missiles  tore 
through  the  woods  like  hail.  I had  warmly  responded  to  this  fire  with 
the  sections  of  First  and  Third  U.  S.  Artillery  and  the  boat  howitzers 
until,  finding  my  ammunition  about  to  fail,  and  seeing  that  any  flank 
movement  was  impossible,  I pressed  the  First  Brigade  forward  through 
the  thicket  to  the  verge  of  the  swamp,  and  sent  the  section  of  First  U. 
S.  Artillery,  well  supported,  to  the  causeway  of  the  wood  on  the  farther 
side,  leaving  the  Second  Brigade,  with  Colonel  Brown’s  command,  the 
section  of  Third  U.  S.  Artillery,  and  the  boat  howitzers  as  a line  of  de- 
fense in  my  rear.  The  effect  of  this  bold  movement  was  immediately 
evident  in  the  precipitate  retreat  of  the  rebels,  who  disappeared  in  the 
woods  with  amazing  rapidity.  The  infantry  of  the  First  Brigade  im- 
mediately plunged  through  the  swamp  (parts  of  which  were  nearly  up 
to  their  arm  pits)  and  started  in  pursuit.  Some  delay  was  caused  by  the 
bridge  having  been  destroyed,  impeding  the  passage  of  the  artillery. 
This  difficulty  was  overcome,  aud  with  my  full  force  I pressed  forward 
on  the  retreating  rebels.  At  this  point  (apprehending,  from  the  facility 
which  the  rebels  possessed  of  heading  Pocotaligo  Creek,  that  they  would 
attempt  to  turn  my  left  flank)  I sent  an  infantry  regiment,  with  a boat 
howitzer,  to  my  left,  to  strike  the  Coosawhatchie  road. 

The  position  which  I had  found  proved,  as  I had  supposed,  to  be  one 
of  great  natural  advantage  to  the  rebels,  the  ground  being  higher  on 
that  side  of  the  swamp,  and  having  a firm,  open  field  for  the  working 
of  their  artillery,  which  latter  they  formed  in  a half  circle,  throwing  a 
concentrated  fire  on  the  entrance  to  the  wood  we  had  first  passed. 

The  rebels  left  in  their  retreat  a caisson  full  of  ammunition,  which 
latter,  fortunately,  fitting  the  boat  howitzers,  enabled  us,  at  a later 
period  of  the  day,  to  keep  up  our  fire  when  all  other  ammunition  had 
failed. 

Still  pursuing  the  flying  rebels,  I arrived  at  that  point  where  the 
Coosawhatchie  road  (joining  that  from  Mackay’s  Landing)  runs  through 
a swamp  to  Pocotaligo  Bridge.  Here  the  rebels  opened  a murderous 
fire  upon  us  from  batteries  of  siege  guns  and  field  pieces  on  the  farther 
side  of  the  creek.  Our  skirmishers,  however,  advanced  boldly  to  the 
edge  of  the  swamp,  and,  from  what  cover  they  could  obtain,  did  con- 
siderable execution  among  the  enemy.  The  rebels,  as  I had  antici- 
pated, attempted  a flank  movement  on  our  left,  but  for  some  reason 
abandoned  it:  The  ammunition  of  the  artillery  here  entirely  failed, 
owing  to  the  caissons  not  having  been  brought  on,  for  the  want  of 
transportation  from  Port  Royal,  and  the  pieces  had  to  be  sent  back  to 
Mackay’s  Point,  a distance  of  10  miles,  to  renew  it. 

The  bridge  across  the  Pocotaligo  was  destroyed,  and  the  rebels  from 
behind  their  earthworks  continued  on  the  only  approach  to  it,  through 
the  swamp.  Night  was  now  closing  fast,  and  seeing  the  utter  hope- 
lessness of  attempting  anything  further  against  the  force  which  the 
enemy  had  concentrated  at  this  point  from  Savannah  and  Charleston, 
with  an  army  of  much  inferior  force,  unprovided  with  ammunition,  and 


152 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  ELA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

not  having  even  sufficient  transportation  to  remove  the  wounded,  who 
were  lying  writhing  along  our  entire  route,  I deemed  it  expedient  to 
retire  to  Mackay’s  Point,  which  I did  in  successive  lines  of  defenses, 
burying  my  dead  and  carrying  our  wounded  with  us  on  such  stretchers 
as  we  could  manufacture  from  branches  of  trees,  blankets,  &c.,  and 
receiving  no  molestation  from  the  rebels,  embarked  and  returned  to 
Hilton  Head  on  the  23d  instant. 

Facts  tend  to  show  that  the  rebels  were  perfectly  acquainted  with  all 
our  plans,  as  they  had  evidently  studied  our  purpose  with  care,  and 
had  two  lines  of  defense,  Caston  and  Frampton,  before  falling  back  on 
Pocotaligo,  where,  aided  by  their  field  works  and  favored  by  the  nature 
of  the  ground  and  the  facility  of  concentrating  troops,  they  evidently 
purposed  making  a determined  stand  j and  indeed  the  accounts  gath- 
ered from  prisoners  leave  no  doubt  but  that  the  rebels  had  very  accu- 
rate-information of  our  movements. 

I greatly  felt  the  want  of  the  cavalry,  which,  in  consequence  of  the 
transports  having  grounded  in  the  Broad  Fiver,  did  not  arrive  till 
nearly  4 p.  m.,  and  which  in  the  early  part  of  the  day  would  perhaps 
have  captured  some  field  pieces  in  the  open  country  we  were  then  in, 
and  would  at  all  events  have  prevented  the  destruction  of  the  bridge 
in  the  rear  of  the  rebels.  Great  praise  is  due  to  the  brigade  and  regi- 
mental commanders  for  their  calm  and  determined  courage  during  the 
entire  day  and  for  the  able  manner  in  which  they  handled  their  several 
commands.  Colonel  Barton,  Forty-eighth  Begiment  Hew  York  State 
Volunteers,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  accompanying  copy  of  his  report, 
partially  effected  the  object  of  his  movement  on  Coosawhatchie;  but, 
meeting  with  too  strong  a force  of  the  rebels,  was  obliged  to  re-embark. 

I desire  to  call  the  attention  of  the  major-general  commanding  the 
department  to  the  gallant  and  distinguished  conduct  of  First  Lieut. 
Guy  Y.  Henry,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  a section  of  light 
artillery.  His  pieces  were  served  admirably  throughout  the  entire  en- 
gagement. He  had  two  horses  shot.  The  section  of  Third  U.  S.  Artil- 
lery, commanded  by  First  Lieut.  E.  Gittings,  was  also  well  served. 
He  being  wounded  in  the  latter  part  of  the  day,  his  section  was  com- 
manded by  Lieutenant  Henry. 

The  three  boat  howitzers  furnished  by  Captain  Steedman,  IJ.  S.  Havy, 
commanding  the  naval  forces,  were  served  well,  and  the  officers  com- 
manding them,  with  the  crews,  as  also  the  detachment  of  the  Third 
Rhode  Island  Yolunteers,  deserve  great  credit  for  their  coolness,  skill, 
and  gallantry.  The  officers  commanding  these  guns  are  as  follows : 
Lieut.  Lloyd  Phcenix  and  Ensigns  James  Wallace,  La  Bue  P.  Adams, 
and  Frederick  Pearson. 

The  conduct  of  my  entire  staff — Capt.  Louis  J.  Lambert,  assistant 
adjutant-general ; Capt.  1.  Coryell,  assistant  quartermaster,  and  Lieuts. 
Ira  Y.  Germain  and  George  W.  Bacon,  aides-de-camp — gave  me  great 
pleasure  and  satisfaction.  My  orders  were  transmitted  by  them  in  the 
hottest  of  the  battle  with  great  rapidity  and  correctness.  To  Col.  E. 
W.  Serrell,  Hew  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  who  acted  as  an  addi- 
tional aide-de-camp,  I am  much  indebted.  His  energy,  perfect  coolness, 
and  bravery  were  a source  of  gratification  to  me.  Orders  from  me  were 
executed  by  him  in  a very  satisfactory  manner.  Lieut  G.  H.  Hill, 
signal  officer,  performed  his  duties  with  great  promptness.  He  acted 
also  as  additional  aide-de-camp,  and  gave  me  much  assistance  in  car- 
rying my  orders  during  the  entire  day.  Col.  T.  H.  Good,  Forty-seventh 
Begiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  (Colonel  Chatfield  being  wounded 
early  in  the  day),  commanded  the  First  Brigade  during  the  latter 


153 


Chap.  XXvI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C , ETC. 

part  of  the  engagement  with  much  ability.  Nothing  could  be  more 
satisfactory  than  the  promptness  and  skill  with  which  the  wounded 
were  attended  to  by  Surg.  E.  W.  Bailey,  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers,  medical  director,  and  the  entire  medical  staff  of  the  com- 
mand. 

The  troops  of  the  command  behaved  with  great  gallantry,  advancing 
against  a remarkably  heavy  fire  of  musketry,  canister,  grape,  round 
shot,  and  shell,  driving  the  enemy  before  them  with  much  determina- 
tion. I was  perfectly  satisfied  with  their  conduct. 

It  affords  me  much  pleasure  again  to  report  the  perfect  cordiality 
existing  between  the  two  branches  of  the  service,  and  I was  much  in- 
debted to  Capt.  Charles  Steedman,  TJ.  S.  Navy,  for  his  valuable  aid  and 
assistance  in  disembarking  and  re-embarking  the  troops ; also  in  send- 
ing launches,  with  howitzers,  to  prevent  an  attack  on  our  pickets  while 
we  were  embarking  to  return  to  Hilton  Head. 

The  fitting  out  of  the  expedition,  as  relates  to  its  organization,  sup- 
plies, transportation,  and  ammunition,  was  done  entirely  by  the  major- 
general  commanding  the  department,  who  at  first  purposed  to  com- 
mand it.  I was  not  assigned  to  the  command  till  a few  hours  previous 
to  the  sailing  of  the  expedition  from  Hilton  Head. 

.The  reports  of  the  brigade  and  other  commanders,  together  with  a 
list  of  the  officers  and  men  who  rendered  themselves  personally  worthy 
of  notice  during  the  engagement,  I will  forward  as  soon  as  received. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

J.  M.  BRANNAN, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  P.  Prentice, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  South,  Hilton  Head,  S.  G. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal , S.  C.,  November  6,  1862. 

General:  I herewith  transmit  the  reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  H. 
Terry  and  Col.  T.  H.  Good,  Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers,  who  commanded  brigades  during  the  late  expedition, 
under  my  command,  to  Pocotaligo,  S.  C.,  and  would  beg  respectfully 
to  bring  them  to  the  favorable  notice  of  the  department  for  their  gal- 
lant and  meritorious  conduct  during  the  engagement  of  October  22;  as 
also  Col.  J.  L.  Cliatfield,  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  who 
commanded  the  First  Brigade  until  severely  wounded,  in  the  early 
part  of  the  engagement,  while  gallantly  leading  it  to  the  charge.  Great 
praise  is  also  due  to  General  Terry  for  his  care  and  unremitting  exer- 
tions during  the  night  of  the  22d  in  superintending  the  removal  of  the 
wounded  to  the  transports. 

I also  forward  the  report  of  Col.  E.  W.  Serrell,  First  New  York  Vol- 
unteer Engineers,  chief  engineer  of  the  department,  of  the  part  taken 
by  their  several  commands. 

Accompanying  General  Terry’s  report  is  the  report  of  the  success  of 
Lieut.  S.  M.  Smith,  Third  Regiment  Rhode  Island  Volunteer  Artillery,* 
who  was  sent  up  before  daylight  on  the  22d  to  Cuthbert’s  Island,  on 
the  Pocotaligo  Creek,  to  capture  the  rebel  pickets  there  stationed. 

In  addition  to  those  officers  mentioned  in  my  report  of  the  expedi- 
tion I have  great  pleasure,  on  the  recommendation  of  their  respective 

* General  Terry’s  reports  say  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers. 


154  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

commanders,  in  bringing  to  the  favorable  consideration  of  the  depart- 
ment the  following  officers  and  men,  who  rendered  themselves  specially 
worthy  of  notice  by  their  bravery  and  praiseworthy  conduct  during  the 
entire  expedition  and  the  engagements  attending  it:  First  Lieut.  E. 
Gittings,  wounded,  lieutenant  Company  E,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery,  com- 
manding section,  who  served  his  pieces  with  great  coolness  and  judg- 
ment under  the  heavy  fire  of  a rebel  battery;  Lieut.  Col.  G.  W.  Alex- 
ander, Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  Maj.  J.  H. 
Filler,  Fifty-fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  Capt.  Theodore 
Bacon,  Seventh  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  acting  assistant 
adjutant-general  Second  Brigade;  First  Lieut.  Adrian  Terry,  Seventh 
Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  Second  Lieut.  Martin  S.  James,  Third 
Regiment  Rhode  Island  Volunteer  Artillery,  staff  of  Brigadier-General 
Terry;  Capt.  J.  P.  Shindel  Gobin,  Company  C,  Forty-seventh  Regi- 
ment Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  Capt.  George  Junker,  killed,  Company 
K,  Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  Captain  Mickley, 
killed.  Company  G, Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers; 
First  Lieut.  W.  H.  R.  Hangen,  adjutant,  wounded,  Forty-seventh  Regi- 
ment Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  First  Lieutenant  Minnich,  Company 
B,  Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  First  Lieut.  W. 
W.  Geety,  severely  wounded,  commanding  Company  H,  Forty-seventh 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  Second  Lieutenant  Breneman,  Company  H, 
Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  Private  Michael 
Larkins,  wounded,  Company  C,  Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers;  Captain  Bennett,  Company  E,  Fifty-fifth  Regiment  Penn- 
sylvania Volunteers;  First  Lieut.  D.  W.  Fox,  commanding  Company 

A,  Fifty-fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  First  Lieutenant 
Metzger,  adjutant  Fifty-fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers;  First 
Sergt.  H.  W.  Fox,  Company  K,  Fifty-fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Vol- 
unteers ; Private  Peter  McGuire,  Company  A,  Fifty-fifth  Regiment  Penn- 
sylvania Volunteers;  Lieut.  S.  S.  Stevens,  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut 
Volunteers,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general  First  Brigade;  Commis- 
sary Sergt  William  IT.  Johnson,  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volun- 
teers; Sergeant  [Charles  H.]  Grogan,  Private  G.  Platt,  and  Private  A. 

B.  Beers,  Company  I,  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers;  Private 
R.  Wilson,  Company  I),  Sixth  Connecticut  Volunteers;  First  Lieut. 
Edward  S.  Perry  and  Private  William  Crabbe,  Company  H,  Seventh 
Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers;  Artificer  Patrick  Walsh,  Company 
B,  First  U.  S.  Artillery;  Sergt.  Michael  Mannon,  Light  Company  E, 
Third  U.  S.  Artillery;  Sergt.  N.  M.  Edwards,  First  New  York  Volun- 
teer Engineers,  and  Sergts.  Henry  Mehles,  Lionel  Auyan,  and  Fisher, 
First  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers. 

I would  also  mention  that  I am  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Cooley,  sutler 
of  the  Sixth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  for  his  care  and  attention  to  the 
wounded  and  his  exertions  in  carrying  them  off  the  field  and  placing 
them  on  the  transports. 

I inclose  a complete  and  accurate  list*  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing  during  the  entire’  expedition,  giving  their  names,  rank,  com- 
panies, and  regiments,  with  a description  of  the  nature  of  their  wounds. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  M.  BRANNAN, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Department. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas,  Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army. 


* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  148. 


<5h>p.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHlE,  S.  C.,  ETC.  155 

No.  5. 

Reports  of  Col.  Edward  W.  Serrell , First  New  York  Engineers. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Broad  River , 8.  C.,  October  22,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding  the  forces,  that,  agreeably  to  the  orders  of  the  major- 
general  commanding  the  department,  I reported  to  Brigadier-General 
Brannan  this  morning  at  8 o’clock  with  250  enlisted  men  of  the  Volun- 
teer Engineers  and  15  officers,  constituting  the  engineer  force.  Fifty- 
four  men  and  two  officers  were  assigned  to  duty  with  Colonel  Barton, 
of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  furnished  with  tools 
and  the  proper  appliances  for  destroying  railroad  structures.  This 
detachment  was  placed  under  the  orders  of  Capt.  Samuel  C.  Eaton,  of 
the  Volunteer  Engineers,  and  has  not  yet  been  heard  from.  The  re- 
maining forces  of  the  Engineers  were  placed  under  the  immediate 
orders  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Hall,  of  the  Volunteer  Engineers.  I 
was  assigned  to  duty  on  the  commanding  general’s  staff. 

The  line  of  march  was  from  Mackay’s  Point,  on  Broad  Biver,  on  the 
direct  road  toward  Old  Pocotaligo.  The  general  direction  is  about 
north  from  the  Point,  and  the  road  is  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Poco- 
taligo Biver,  and  begins  at  the  confluence  of  the  Pocotaligo  and  Broad 
Bivers,  and  lies  from  one  to  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  this  stream. 
The  country  through  which  the  road  runs  is  a rolling  sandy  plain, 
except  at  two  points,  where  it  crosses  marshes  and  small  streams,  the 
first  of  which  is  about  5J  miles  from  the  Point,  and  is  on  Caston’s 
plantation  j the  second  is  about  6J  miles,  and  the  plantation  is  called 
Frampton.  At  both  of  these  points  serious  engagements  took  place 
with  the  rebels.  The  Engineer  troops  were  engaged  from  about  10 
o’clock  until  after  sunset  in  making  and  repairing  several  small  bridges 
and  keeping  the  road  in  order. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Hall  reports  Sergt.  N.  M.  Edwards,  acting  lieu- 
tenant, as  especially  worthy  of  notice  for  his  efforts  in  repairing  the 
bridge  at  Frampton  under  heavy  fire  and  for  his  general  efficiency. 

The  point  reached  by  the  troops  was  within  a few  yards  of  the  road 
bridge  over  the  Pocotaligo,  on  the  road  leading  from  Old  Pocotaligo  to 
Coosawhatchie.  This  bridge  was  destroyed  by  the  rebels  as  they  re- 
treated over  it  into  their  earthworks  on  the  easterly  side.  Timber  for 
the  purpose  of  rebuilding  this  bridge  was  prepared  by  the  Engineers, 
and  was  ready  to  be  put  together  when  the  retreat  was  ordered.  This 
point  is  within  about  1J  miles  of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Bail- 
road.  Officers  in  the  advance  report  having  seen  the  cars  passing.  A 
small  lunette,  that  had  been  abandoned,  was  observed  on  the  southerly 
side  of  the  marsh  on  the  high  ground  near  Caston’s. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

EDWABD  W.  SEBBELL, 

Col.  of  Vol.  Engineers , and  Chief  Engineer  Dept,  of  the  8outh. 
Capt.  Louis  J.  Lambert, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  U.  8.  Forces , Broad  River , 8.  C. 


October  23,  1862. 

I cannot  too  highly  compliment  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hall  for  his  zeal 
and  efficiency  in  caring  for  the  wounded  of  the  whole  army  during  the 

night. 


156 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Captain  Eaton  has  just  reported  that  the  detachment  commanded 
by  him,  under  the  orders  of  Colonel  Barton,  of  the  Forty-eighth  New 
York  Volunteers,  destroyed  a portion  of  the  railroad  at  Coosawhatchie, 
and  covered  the  return  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York  by  tearing  up 
and  destroying  the  bridge  on  the  road  back. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

EDWABD  W.  SEBBELL, 

Colonel  Volunteer  Engineers, 

Capt.  Louis  J.  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  6. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Rail , First  Few  York  Engineers. 

New  York  Begiment  Volunteer  Engineers, 

Hilton  Read , 8.  0.,  October  23,  1862. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  General  Terry  concerning 
the  part  taken  by  the  battalion  under  my  command  in  the  late  fight  at 
Pocotaligo,  a copy  of  which  has  been  forwarded  to  your  headquarters. 
In  addition  to  this  report  I would  respectfully  call  your  attention  to 
the  inclosed  letter  from  Acting  Adjutant  Dalrymple  and  my  indorse- 
ment thereon.*  Lieutenant  Dalrymple’s  services  were  most  valuable, 
and  he  has  proved  himself  worthy  of  the  advancement  he  has  received. 
It  would  perhaps  be  unjust  to  others  to  speak  of  any  officer  in  par- 
ticular where  all  did  their  duty  so  well. 

In  addition  to  the  duties  in  the  field  I would  call  your  attention  to 
the  voluntary  labors  in  caring  for  the  wounded.  This  duty  was  per- 
formed almost  entirely  by  the  men  of  our  regiment.  Sergeant  Collins, 
of  Company  A,  had  the  immediate  charge  of  the  men,  and  was  untir- 
ing in  his  labors  until  the  last  wounded  man  was  cared  for.  This  work 
was  done  in  an  orderly  and  proper  manner. 

I know  that  many  a blessing  has  been  asked  for  the  Engineers,  who, 
notwithstanding  the  extreme  fatigue  of  the  day,  gave  the  whole  night 
to  assisting  their  wounded  fellow-soldiers.  In  this  labor  Acting  Adju- 
tant Dalrymple  was  ever  present  and  most  efficient. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  F.  HALL, 

Lieutenant - Colonel. 

E.  W.  Serrell, 

Colonel  of  Volunteer  Engineers. 


New  York  Begiment  Volunteer  Engineers, 

Hilton  Read , 8.  0.,  October  24,  1862. 
General,:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  safe  arrival  of  the  bat- 
talion under  my  command. 

The  missing  man  was  found  in  the  detachment  under  command  of 
Captain  Eaton.  One  man  was  slightly  hurt  by  splinters,  not,  however, 
unfitting  him  for  duty. 

I would  respectfully  report  that  my  battalion  repaired  the  roads, 


Not  found. 


157 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSA  WHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 

bridges,  &c.,  and  pressed  forward  with  all  the  dispatch  that  was  pos- 
sible with  the  engineering  tools  and  implements,  which,  in  addition  to 
their  arms  and  equipments,  had  to  be  carried  by  the  men.  The  bridges 
at  the  several  points  where  they  had  been  destroyed  by  the  enemy 
were  rebuilt  and  made  passable.  The  putting  down  of  the  bridge  at 
Frampton’s  plantation  by  Actg.  Lieut.  N.  M.  Edwards  was  done  under 
heavy  fire.  By  direction  of  Colonel  Serrell,  chief  engineer,  I prepared 
materials  for  rebuilding  the  Pocotaligo  Bridge,  the  preparations  for 
which  were  complete. 

I have  to  report  that  the  officers  and  men  did  their  duty  well,  and 
after  the  arrival  in  camp  they  assisted  during  the  entire  night  in  caring 
for  the  dead  and  wounded. 

f he  necessity  of  leaving  detachments  at  various  points  for  road  re- 
pairs necessarily  kept  our  force  separated ; but  both  in  the  advance 
and  retreat  these  detachments  rapidly  closed  up  to  the  main  body. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  E.  HALL, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Comdg.  Battalion  of  N.  Y.  Yol.  Engineers. 

Brigadier-General  Terry. 


]*o.  7. 

Report  of  Got.  Tilghman  H.  Good , Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Infantry 
commanding  First  Brigade , Tenth  Army  Corps. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-seventh  Regt.  Pa.  Vols., 
Beaufort , 8.  0.,  October  25,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade  in  the  battles  of  October  22 : 

After  meeting  the  enemy  in  his  first  position  he  was  driven  back  by 
the  skirmishing  line,  consisting  of  two  companies  of  the  Sixth  Connect- 
icut, one  of  the  Forty  seventh  Pennsylvania,  and  one  of  the  Fifty-fifth 
Pennsylvania,  under  my  command.  Here  the  enemy  only  fired  a few 
rounds  of  shot  and  shell.  He  then  retreated  and  assumed  another 
position,  and  immediately  opened  fire.  Colonel  Chatfield,  then  in  com- 
mand of  the  brigade,  ordered  the  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  forward 
to  me,  with  orders  to  charge.  I immediately  charged  and  drove  the 
enemy  from  the  second  position.  The  Sixth  Connecticut  was  deployed 
in  my  rear  and  left;  the  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  on  my  right,  and  the 
Fourth  New  Hampshire  in  the  rear  of  the  Fifty-fifth,  both  in  close  col- 
umn by  divisions,  all  under  a heavy  fire  of  shell  and  canister.  These 
regiments  then  crossed  the  causeway  by  the  flank  and  moved  close  up 
to  the  woods.  Here  they  were  halted,  with  orders  to  support  the  artil- 
lery. After  the  enemy  had  ceased  firing  the  Fourth  New  Hampshire 
was  ordered  to  move  up  the  road  in  the  rear  of  the  artillery  and  two 
companies  of  the  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  to  follow  this  regiment. 
The  Sixth  Connecticut  followed  up,  and  the  Fifty-fifth  moved  up 
through  the  woods.  At  this  juncture  Colonel  Chatfield  fell,  seriously 
wounded,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Speidel  was  also  wounded. 

The  casualties  in  the  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  amounted  to  96 
men.  As  yet  I am  unable  to  learn  the  loss  of  the  entire  brigade. 

The  enemy  having  fled,  the  Fourth  New  Hampshire  and  the  Fifty- 
fifth  Pennsylvania  followed  in  close  pursuit,  During  this  time  the 


158  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Forty- seventh  Pennsylvania  and  the  Sixth  Connecticut  halted  and 
again  organized,  after  which  they  followed.  On  coming  up  to  the  en- 
gagement I assumed  command  of  the  brigade,  and  found  the  forces 
arranged  in  the  following  order:  The  Fourth  New  Hampshire  was  de- 
ployed as  skirmishers  along  the  entire  front,  and  the  Fifty -fifth  deployed 
in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  side  of  the  road,  immediately  in  the  rear  of 
the  Fourth  New  Hampshire.  I then  ordered  the  Sixth  Connecticut  to 
deploy  in  the  rear  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  and  the  Forty-seventh 
Pennsylvania  to  deploy  on  the  right  side  of  the  road  in  line  of  battle 
and  relieve  the  Seventh  Connecticut.  I then  ordered  the  Fourth  New 
Hampshire,  which  had  spent  all  its  ammunition,  back  under  cover  on 
the  road  in  the  woods.  The  enemy  meantime  kept  up  a terrific  fire  of 
grape  and  musketry,  to  which  we  replied  with  terrible  effect.  At  this 
point  the  orders  were  given  to  retire,  and  the  Forty-seventh  Pennsyl- 
vania and  Seventh  Connecticut  formed  the  rear  guard.  1 then  ordered 
the  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  to  keep  its  position  and  the  Sixth 
Connecticut  to  march  by  the  flank  into  the  road  and  to  the  rear,  the 
Fourth  New  Hampshire  and  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  to  follow.  The 
troops  of  the  Second  Brigade  were  meanwhile  retiring.  After  the  whole 
column  was  in  motion  and  a line  of  battle  established  by  the  Seventh 
Connecticut  about  1,000  yards  in  the  rear  of  the  Forty-seventh  Penn- 
sylvania I ordered  the  Forty-seventh  to  retire  by  the  flank  and  estab- 
lish a line  of  battle  1,000  yards  in  the  rear  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut; 
after  which  the  Seventh  Connecticut  moved  by  the  flank  to  the  rear 
and  established  a line  of  battle  1,000  yards  in  the  rear  of  the  Forty- 
seventh,  and  thus  retiring,  alternately  establishing  lines,  until  we 
reached  Frampton  Creek,  where  we  were  relieved  from  this  duty  by 
the  Fourth  New  Hampshire.  We  arrived  at  the  landing  at  3 o’clock 
on  the  morning  of  the  23d  instant. 

The  casualties  of  the  Sixth  Connecticut  are  34  in  killed  and  wounded 
and  the  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  112  in  killed  and  wounded.  As  to 
the  remaining  regiments  I have  as  yet  received  no  report. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  GOOD, 

Colonel  Forty -seventh  Pennsylvania  Volunteers , Commanding. 

Captain  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Maj.  Lorenzo  Meeher , Sixth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Sixth  Begt.  Connecticut  Volunteers, 
Beaufort , S.  C .,  October  24,  1862. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  pre- 
vious orders,  the  Sixth  Begiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  about  450 
strong,  embarked  from  Beaufort  at  1.30  p.  m.  October  21,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  Mackay’s  Point,  where  a landing  was  effected  early  on  the 
morning  of  October  22,  and  the  regiment  placed  under  the  command  of 
Lieut.  Col.  John  Speidel,  Colonel  Chatfield  being  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  brigade.  We  marched  several  miles  into  the  interior,  with 
Companies  D and  H in  advance  as  skirmishers,  until  the  enemy  were 
met  and  the  first  engagement  commenced. 

The  regiment,  within  a few  minutes  of  the  opening  of  the  battle,  was 


Chai>.  XXVI,]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


150 


ordered  to  the  front  on  the  left  of  the  line,  and  soon  after  deployed,  and 
advanced  in  line  of  battle  into  the  woods  to  support  a skirmishing 
party,  where  we  were  met  by  a terrific  shower  of  shell,  grape,  and  can- 
ister. The  greatest  portion  of  the  casualties  sustained  by  the  regiment 
throughout  the  day  was  occasioned  here.  At  this  point  Colonel  Chat- 
field  was  severely  wounded,  and  almost  at  the  same  moment  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Speidel,  while  bravely  leading  the  regiment  forward,  was  also 
severely  wounded,  and  consequently  obliged  to  retire  from  the  field. 
The  regiment,  shortly  before  the  enemy  abandoned  his  position,  was 
ordered  to  move  back  arid  reformed  in  line  of  battle  in  the  cotton  field 
to  the  rear,  when  it  again  moved  forward  with  the  column  to  the  front. 
On  reaching  the  second  battle  ground  we  were  ordered  into  line  in  the 
woods  to  support  the  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  and  remained 
in  this  position  until  the  order  was  given  to  the  command  to  retire, 
when  we  gradually  fell  back  in  line  until  withdrawn. 

The  casualties  sustained  were  5 enlisted  men  killed,  4 commissioned 
officers  wounded,  and  25  enlisted  men  wounded,  several  mortally. 

All,  both  officers  and  men,  performed  their  duty  coolly,  faithfully, 
and  bravely,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  and  where  all  did  so  well  it 
were  invidious  to  mention  individual  instances. 

The  whole  strength  of  the  regiment  was  not  engaged,  owing  to  a 
jmrtion  being  on  picket  duty  on  Ladies  Island  and  at  Capers7  planta- 
tion, Port  Royal  Island,  and  not  relieved  in  season  to  embark  on  the 
expedition. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LORENZO  MEEKER, 

Major , Commandinq  Reqiment. 

Col.  T.  H.  Good, 

Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Volunteers , Gomdg.  Brigade. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  Louis  Bell , Fourth  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

Camp  op  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers, 

October  24,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  the  part  taken  by  the 
Fourth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  in  the  action  of  the  22d : 

On  coming  under  fire  I was  ordered  to  form  close  column  by  divis- 
ion, which  I did,  and  the  regiment  remained  in  close  column  for  some 
fifteen  minutes,  exposed  to  a very  annoying  fire  of  spherical-case  shot. 
We  then  deployed  on  the  left  of  the  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Regi- 
ment. The  enemy  having  been  driven  from  his  first  position,  I was 
ordered  to  form  column  by  company  in  the  wood  on  the  right  of  the 
causeway  and  be  ready  to  charge.  The  wood  proved  so  thick  that  we 
could  not  move  in  it,  and  the  ground  in  front  being  utterly  impassable 
I deployed  my  regiment  on  the  edge  of  the  woods. 

At  about  2 o’clock  I received  an  order  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the 
position  he  then  occupied.  I deployed  five  companies  on  the  left  of  the 
road  and  four  on  the  right  and  advanced  in  line  of  battle.  After 
sharp  firing  on  the  left  for  a few  minutes  the  enemy  retired.  Finding 
the  ground  impassable  in  front,  I moved  across  the  causeway  by  the 
flank.  Three  companies  passed  and  formed  in  line  on  the  solid  ground, 


1G0  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

while  the  fourth  company  (G)  was  ordered  to  halt  and  repair  the  bridge 
(which  the  enemy  had  partially  destroyed),  so  that  it  should  be  passa- 
ble for  artillery.  The  artillery  having  passed  over  I deployed  the  whole 
regiment  as  skirmishers,  and  we  acted  as  the  support  of  the  artillery 
from  this  place  to  the  place  where  the  artillery  finally  halted.  After 
firing  as  skirmishers  for  a few  minutes  at  the  most  advanced  post  oc- 
cupied by  the  forces  we  were  relieved  by  some  other  regiment,  and  I 
sent  orders  to  have  the  regiment  reformed  in  line.  At  this  time  I was 
temporarily  disabled.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sleeper  moved  the  regiment 
to  the  front  on  the  left  of  the  Sixth  Connecticut  Eegiment,  where  it 
remained  for  some  half  an  hour,  when  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sleeper  was 
ordered  to  move  the  regiment  into  the  road,  where  it  remained  a few 
minutes  and  was  again  ordered  into  the  wood  at  the  left. 

At  about  5 o’clock  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sleeper  received  the  order  to 
retire.  I rejoined  and  resumed  command  of  the  regiment  at  the  cause- 
way. My  regiment  passed  the  causeway  and  took  up  a position  in 
the  wood  on  the  right.  Being  ordered  to  act  as  rear  guard,  we  moved 
(after  the  other  troops  had  passed)  to  the  ground  used  as  a hospital.  I 
caused  all  the  scattered  arms  and  accouterments  to  be  collected  as  we 
retired  and  all  other  property  I destroyed. 

Owing  to  the  large  number  of  wounded  in  front  our  march  was  very 
slow.  Before  we  reached  the  shore  more  than  half  of  my  regiment 
were  at  work  conveying  the  wounded.  I cannot  refrain  from  mention- 
ing that  in  many  instances  we  found  wounded  men  by  the  road-side 
with  only  one  or  two  men  with  them,  the  rest  of  the  men  detailed  to 
carry  them  having  deserted  them.  No  wounded  man  was  left  behind. 
My  regiment  arrived  in  camp  at  4 o’clock  in  the  morning. 

I am  proud  to  be  able  to  say  that  I had  no  stragglers  from  my  regi- 
ment and  that  no  officer  or  soldier  flinched. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a list*  of  the  killed  and  wounded  in  the 
Fourth  New  Hampshire  Eegiment,  and  also  a list  of  arms  and  accouter- 
ments left  on  the  field  and  now  in  our  possession. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

LOUIS  BELL, 

Colonel  Fourth  Regiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers . 

Capt.  Louis  J.  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Col.  Tilghman  H.  Good , Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 

Beaufort , S.  C.,  October  24,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Forty-seventh  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  in  the 
action  of  October  22: 

Eight  companies,  comprising  480  men,  embarked  on  the  steamship 
Ben  De  Ford,  and  two  companies,  of  120  men,  on  the  Marblehead,  at  2 
p.  m.  October  21.  With  this  force  I arrived  at  Mackay’s  Landing  be- 
fore daylight  the  following  morning.  At  daylight  I was  ordered  to  dis- 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  148, 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCIIIE,  S.  C.,  ETC.  16i 

embark  my  regiment  and  move  forward  across  the  first  causeway  and 
take  a position,  and  there  await  the  arrival  of  the  other  forces.  The 
two  companies  of  my  regiment  on  board  of  the  Marblehead  had  not  vet 
arrived,  consequently  I had  but  eight  companies  of  my  regiment  with 
me  at  this  juncture. 

^ was  or(^ere(l  take  the  advance  with  four  companies,  one 
of  the  Forty-seventh  and  one  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
and  two  of  the  Sixth  Connecticut,  and  to  deplov  two  of  them  as  skir- 
mishers and  move  forward.  After  moving  forward  about  2 miles  I dis- 
cerned some  30  or  40  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  ahead,  but  they  fled  as  we 
advanced.  About  2 miles  farther  on  I discovered  two  pieces  of  artillery 
and  some  cavalry,  occupying  a position  about  three-quarters  of  a mile 
ahead  m the  road.  I immediately  called  for  a regiment,  but  seeing 
that  the  position  was  not  a strong  one  I made  a charge  with  the  skir- 
mishing line.  The  enemy,  after  firing  a few  rounds  of  shell,  fled.  I 
followed  up  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  within  about  1 mile  of  Frampton 
Creek.  In  front  of  this  stream  is  a strip  of  woods  about  500  yards  wide, 
aud  m front  of  the  woods  a marsh  of  about  200  yards,  with  a small 
stream  running  through  it  parallel  with  the  woods.  A causeway  also 
extends  across  the  swamp,  to  the  right  of  which  the  swamp  is  impassa- 
ble. Here  the  enemy  opened  a terrible  fire  of  shell  from  the  rear  of  the 
woods.  I again  called  for  a regiment,  and  my  regiment  came  forward 
very  promptly.  I immediately  deployed  in  line  of  battle  and  charged 
forward  to  the  woods,  three  companies  on  the  right  and  the  other  five 
on  the  left  of  the  road.  I moved  forward  in  quick-time,  and  when 
withm  about  500  yards  of  the  woods  the  enemy  opened  a galling  fire 
of  infantry  from  it.  I ordered  double-quick  and  raised  a cheer,  and 
with  a grand  yell  the  officers  and  men  moved  forward  in  splendid  order 
and  glorious  determination,  driving  the  enemy  from  this  position. 

On  reaching  the  woods  I halted  and  reorganized  my  line.  The  three 
companies  on  the  right  of  the  road  (in  consequence  of  not  being  able  to 
get  through  the  marsh)  did  not  reach  the  woods,  and  were  moved  by 
Lieutenant  -Colonel  Alexander  by  the  flank  on  the  causeway.  During 
this  time  a terrible  fire  of  grape  and  canister  was  opened  by  the  enemy 
through  the  woods,  hence  I did  not  wait  for  the  three  companies,  but 
immediately  charged  with  the  five  at  hand  directly  through  the  woods* 
but  in  consequence  of  the  denseness  of  the  woods,  which  was  a perfect 
matting  of  vines  and  brush,  it  was  almost  impossible  to  get  through,  but 
by  dint  of  untiring  assiduity  the  men  worked  thei^  way  through  nobly. 
At  this  point  I was  called  out  of  the  woods  by  Lieutenant  Bacon,  aide-de- 
camp,  who  gave  the  order,  “The  general  wants  you  to  charge  through 
the  woods.  I replied  that  I was  then  charging,  and  that  the  men  were 
working  their  way  through  as  fast  as  possible.  Just  then  I saw  the 
two  companies  of  my  regiment  which  embarked  on  the  Marblehead 
coming  up  to  one  of  the  companies  that  was  unable  to  get  through  the 
swamp  on  the  right.  I went  out  to  meet  them,  hastening  them  forward 
with  a view  of  re-enforcing  the  five  already  engaged  on  the  left  of  the 
road  in  the  woods;  but  the  latter  having  worked  their  way  successfullv 
through  and  driven  the  enemy  from  his  position,  I moved  the  two  com- 
panies up  the  road  through  the  woods  until  1 came  up  with  the  ad- 
vance. The  two  companies  on  the  right  side  of  the  road,  under  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Alexander,  had  also  worked  their  way  up  through  the 
woods  and  opened  fire  on  the  retreating  enemy.  At  this  point  I halted 
and  reorganized  my  regiment,  by  forming  close  column  by  companies. 

1 then  detailed  Lieutenant  Minnieh,  of  Company  B,  and  Lieutenant 
11  r r — VOL  xxv 


162 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Breneman,  of  Company  H,  with  a squad  of  men,  to  collect  the  killed 
and  wounded.  They  promptly  and  faithfully  attended  to  this  important 
duty,  deserving  much  praise  for  the  efficiency  and  coolness  they  dis- 
played during  the  fight  and  in  the  discharge  of  this  humane  and  worthy 
trust. 

The  casualties  in  this  engagement  were  96.  Captain  Junker,  of  Com- 
pany K;  Captain  Mickley,  of  Company  G,  and  Lieutenant  Geety,  of 
Company  H,  fell  mortally  wounded  while  gallantly  leading  their  re- 
spective companies  on. 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men. 
They  all  performed  deeds  of  valor,  and  rushed  forward  to  duty  and 
danger  with  a spirit  and  energy  worthy  of  veterans. 

The  rear  forces  coming  up  passed  ray  regiment  and  pursued  the 
enemy.  When  I had  my  regiment  again  placed  in  order,  and  hearing 
the  boom  of  cannon,  I immediately  followed  up,  and,  upon  reaching  the 
scene  of  action,  I was  ordered  to  deploy  my  regiment  on  the  right  side 
of  the  wood,  move  forward  along  the  edge  of  it,  ana  relieve  the  Seventh 
Connecticut  Regiment.  This  I promptly  obeyed.  The  position  here 
occupied  by  the  enemy  was  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Pocotaligo  Creek, 
with  a marsh  on  either  side  of  it,  and  about  800  yards  distant  from  the 
opposite  wood,  where  the  enemy  had  thrown  up  rifle  pits  all  along  its 
edge. 

On  my  arrival  the  enemy  had  ceased  firing;  but  after  the  lapse  of  a 
few  minutes  they  commenced  to  cheer  and  hurrah  for  the  Twenty-sixth 
South  Carolina.  We  distinctly  saw  this  regiment  come  up  in  double- 
quick  and  the  men  rapidly  jumping  into  the  pits.  We  immediately 
opened  fire  upon  them  with  terrible  effect,  and  saw  their  men  falling 
by  scores.  In  return  they  opened  a galling  fire  upon  us.  I ordered  the 
men  under  cover  and  to  keep  up  the  fire.  During  this  time  our  forces 
commenced  to  retire.  I kept  my  position  until  all  our  forces  were  on 
the  march,  and  then  gave  one  volley  and  retired  by  flank  in  the  road 
at  double-quick  about  1,000  yards  in  the  rear  of  the  Seventh  Connecti- 
cut. This  regiment  was  formed  about  1,000  yards  in  the  rear  of  my 
former  position.  We  jointly  formed  the  rear  guard  of  our  forces  and 
alternately  retired  in  the  above  manner. 

My  casualties  here  amounted  to  15  men. 

We  arrived  at  Frampton  (our  first  battle  ground)  at  8 p.  m.  Here 
my  regiment  was  relieved  from  further  rear- guard  duty  by  the  Fourth 
New  Hampshire  Regiment.  This  gave  me  the  desired  opportunity  to 
carry  my  dead  and  wounded  from  the  field  and  convey  them  back  to 
the  landing.  I arrived  at  the  above  place  at  3 o’clock  the  following 
morning. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  GOOD, 

Colonel. 


Captain  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Col.  Richard  White , Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Camp  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
Beaufort , S.  (7.,  October  26,  1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  orders  from  your  headquarters,  in  regard  to  thq 


163 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 

action  of  my  command  in  the  battles  of  October  22,  I would  respect- 
fully report  that  after  disembarking’  at  Mackay’s  Landing  my  com- 
mand was  assigned  its  place,  being  on  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade, 
Colonel  Chatfield  in  command.  In  this  order  it  marched  for  some  miles, 
companies  being  detailed  from  time  to  time,  with  orders  to  report  to 
Colonel  Good,  commanding  the  advance.  Near  Frampton  the  command 
was  ordered  up  on  double-quick,  which  was  promptly  obeyed.  At  this 
point  it  came  under  a very  heavy  and  destructive  fire  of  shell  and  can- 
ister from  the  enemy’s  batteries.  The  order  was  received  to  form  in 
column  and  advance  j and,  although  the  most  of  the  command  had 
never  been  exposed  to  a cannonade  so  severe  and  so  sustained  and 
men  were  falling  rapidly  from  its  effects,  yet  the  order  was  executed 
with  admirable  promptitude  and  precision,  the  officers,  with  one  excep- 
tion, setting  a noble  example,  which  was  imitated  bv  the  rank  and  file. 
The  order  was  then  received  to  get  under  cover  for  a time,  while  our 
artillery  operated  against  the  enemy’s  guns.  Then  the  order  was  sent 
to  charge.  Together  with  the  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  Volunteers 
and  Sixth  Connecticut  my  command  rushed  in,  and  although  the  ground 
was  exceedingly  difficult,  covered  with  a dense  thicket,  with  a swamp 
m front,  our  men,  with  remarkable  energy,  at  once  overcame  these  obsta- 
cles, swept  over  the  hostile  position,  and  rapidly  pursued  the  fleeing 
enemy.  The  pursuit  was  continued  to  Pocotaligo,  where  the  enemy  had 
again  taken  up  a strong  position,  broken  the  bridge  over  the  creek  in 
his  front,  and  while  re-enforcements  were  arriving  to  his  support  opened 
a heavy  fire  of  cannon  and  musketry.  My  command,  having  come  up 
at  the  double-quick,  was  ordered  into  position  on  our  left.  In  obedi- 
ence to  an  order  for  two  companies  of  sharpshooters  to  operate  against 
the  enemy’s  batteries,  Company  A,  under  command  of  Lieut.  D.  W. 
Fox,  and  Company  B,  Captgin  Shearer,  were  thrown  forward.  These 
companies,  well  armed  with  good  weapons,  went  in  with  the  greatest 
enthusiasm  and  their  deadly  fire  soon  caused  the  enemy’s  cannonade 
to  slacken,  and  more  than  held  their  own  in  the  contest  with  the  enemy’s 
sharpshooters.  This,  being  carried  on  at  short  range,  was  quite  bloody. 

Company  A lost  among  others  Sergeant  [Samuel]  Herter,  who  was 
shot  dead  while  taking  aim,  and  its  remaining  sergeants,  [Abraml 
Alstead,  [Patrick  F.]  Hodge,  and  [Harry]  Marlett,  were  wounded. 
These  companies,  having  exhausted  their  ammunition,  had  to  be  re- 
lieved. First  Lieut.  D.  W.  Fox  distinguished  himself  by  the  efficient 
manner  in  which  he  fought  his  men. 

Company  K,  armed  with  the  Springfield  musket,  was  sent  up  to 
relieve.  It  was  well  led  by  Lieutenant  Saupp  and  Acting  Second  Lieut. 
H.  W.  Fox.  The  latter  in  particular  behaved  well.  The  loss  in  this 
company  is  one  that  will  be  felt.  It  includes  First  Sergt.  William  L. 
Martin,  who  was  shot  dead,  and  Sergt.  [G.  E.]  Leech,  who  was  severely 
wounded. 

Company  D,  Captain  Lyons,  and  Company  E,  Captain  Bennett,  were 
also  ordered  forward  to  support  our  battery,  but  being  armed  with 
altered  smooth-bore  muskets  their  fire  could  not  compete  with  that  of 
the  enemy’s  splendidly  armed  sharpshooters.  They  were  brought  off'. 
These  gallant  men  fulfilled  every  duty  practicable  to  men  in  their  situa- 
tion. Company  D fired  as  long  as  they  could  load  their  muskets,  which 
after  a few  rounds  became  so  foul  that  a cartridge  could  hardly  be 
rammed  down,  and  even  then  many  of  the  cones  were  blown  out  of  the 
seats.  The  experience  of  Company  E in  the  matter  of  arms  is  the  same 
as  that  of  Company  D.  In  the  latter  company  the  captain  received  a 
ball  through  his  sleeve  and  four  of  his  men  were  wounded.  Captain 


164  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FDA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

Bennett,  of  Company  E,  a noble,  chivalric  young  officer,  beloved  by 
his  men,  was  killed  on  the  spot,  and  two  of  his  sergeants,  W.  Bense- 
man  and  [George  P.]  Parry,  were  severely  wounded. 

I trust  that  I am  within  the  line  of  duty  in  respectfully  claiming  the 
attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  the  tact  that  the  usefulness  of 
my  command  was  limited  by  its  armament.  So  far  as  it  was  equipped 
with  rifles  and  Springfield  muskets  so  far  was  it  of  account.  I was 
compelled  to  withdraw  gallant  men  and  capital  marksmen  because  the 
weapons  they  carried  were  worse  than  useless.  True  our  bayonets 
might  have  counted  for  something,  but  that  was  the  fault  of  the  enemy, 
not  ours.  He  did  not  wait  to  give  us  an  opportunity  to  handle  them. 

Late  in  the  evening  I was  ordered  to  withdraw  my  command  beyond 
the  second  line  of  defense  and  from  there  to  Mackay’s  Landing.  This 
was  accomplished  in  the  best  of  order.  My  command  remained  there 
until  all  the  troops  had  embarked,  being  the  last  to  quit  the  spot. 

I think  I would  fail  in  my  duty  did  I not  express  the  gratitude  of 
the  command  to  the  general  commanding  the  whole  expedition  for  the 
gentle  and  provident  care  exercised  by  him  toward  the  wounded.  The 
hardy  soldiers  have  found  a new  tie  of  attachment  to  their  leader. 

My  second  in  command,  Major  Filler,  manifested  much  bravery.  Ad- 
jutant Metzger  and  Lieutenant  George,  regimental  quartermaster,  were 
of  much  use  to  me  during  the  action.  Adjutant  Metzger  manifested 
the  qualities  which  should  characterize  the  accomplished  field  officer, 
and  both  he  and  Lieutenant  George  were  especially  active  in  the  trans- 
mission of  orders  and  bringing  off  the  wounded. 

With  much  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  your  most  obe- 
dient servant, 

BICHAKD  WHITE, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Col.  T.  H.  Good,  * 

Commanding  First  Brigade , Tenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  R Terry,  U.  8.  Army , commanding  Second 
Brigade,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 

Headquarters  IT.  S.  Forces, 

Hilton  Read,  8.  C.,  November  3,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
part  taken  by  the  troops  under  my  command  in  the  expedition  to  Poco- 
taligo  on  the  21st,  22d,  and  23d  ultimo : 

My  force  consisted  of  514  officers  and  men  of  the  Seventh  Regiment 
Connecticut  Volunteers,  under  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley,  temporarily  or 
ganized  as  six  conqianies  ; 480  officers  and  men  of  the  Third  Regiment 
New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  under  Col.  John  H.  Jackson,  organized 
as  six  companies;  420  officers  and  men  of  the  Seventy-sixth  Regiment 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  under  Col.  D.  C.  Strawbridge,  also  organ- 
ized as  six  companies ; four  companies  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Ar- 
tillery, under  Maj.  LI.  Rogers,  jr.,  and  a section  of  Hamilton’s  battery 
(E),  of  the  Third  Artillery,  U.  S.  Army.  A detachment  of  the  Volun- 
teer Engineer  Regiment,  250  strong,  under  the  command  of  Col.  E.  W. 
Serrell,  also  accompanied  the  troops  from  this  post.  On  arriving  at 


CiiAr.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


165 


Mackay’s  Point  Colonel  Serrell  was  attached  to  the  staff  of  the  general 
commanding,  and  Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Hall,  upon  whom  the  command 
of  the  detachment  devolved,  was  ordered  to  report  to  me. 

The  embarkation  from  this  point  was  effected  during  the  afternoon 
of  the  21st  and  was  completed  at  dusk,  the  troops  being  distributed  on 
the  transports  as  follows : The  Seventh  Connecticut  on  the  transport 
Boston  ; the  Third  New  Hampshire  on  the  Boston  and  the  gunboats 
Patroou  and  Uncas ; the  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  on 
the  transport  Flora  and  the  gunboat  Water  Witch ; the  Third  Rhode 
Island  Artillery  on  the  gunboats  Marblehead  and  Vixen;  the  Volunteer 
Engineers  on  the  armed  transport  George  Washington,  and  the  section 
of  artillery  on  one  of  the  flats  constructed  for  that  purpose.  After  the 
embarkation  the  vessels  of  the  expedition  moved  in  their  places  pre- 
scribed by  the  order  of  sailing. 

Between  9 and  10  o’clock  in  the  evening  I received  a verbal  order 
from  the  brigadier-general  commanding  to  detail  107  officers  and  men 
to  embark  in  the  boats  of  the  men-of-war,  and  proceed  to  and  beyond 
Mackay’s  Point  and  endeavor  to  capture  the  enemy’s  outposts  in  that 
vicinity.  In  accordance  with  this  order  I detailed  for  this  service  2 
officers  and  75  men  from  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers  and  2 
officers  and  32  men  of  the  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers.  Captain 
Gray,  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut,  with  95  men,  was  directed  to  pro- 
ceed up  Broad  River,  beyond  Mackay’s  Point,  and  land  in  the  rear  of 
the  pickets  and  cut  off  their  retreat  in  the  direction  of  Pocotaligo. 
The  remaining  12  men,  under  command  of  Lieut.  S.  M.  Smith,  of  the 
Third  Regiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  were  directed  to  proceed 
rtp  the  Pocotaligo  River  and  capture  the  pickets  upon  Cuthbert’s  Island. 
I have  received  no  written  report  from  Captain  Gray,  but  I learned 
from  him  verbally  that,  under  the  guidance  of  the  negro  guide  fur- 
nished to  him,  he  ascended  Broad  River  some  3 miles  above  Mackay’s 
Point,  a distance  much  beyond  the  proper  point  for  a landing,  and  when 
the  error  was  discovered  it  was  too  late  to  effect  his  object.  Lieuten- 
ant Smith  was  more  fortunate;  he  landed  undiscovered,  and  by  a judi- 
cious disposition  of  his  men  succeeded  in  capturing  1 lieutenant  and  3 
men  of  the  enemy,  together  with  their  horses.  I inclose  you  Lieutenant 
Smith’s  report.* 

Owing  to  the  sailing  signal  being  unobserved  or  misunderstood  much 
confusion  and  delay  occurred  in  the  movements  of  the  vessels  on  which 
my  command  was  embarked,  aud  they  did  not  arrive  at  the  point  of  de- 
barkation until  long  after  the  anticipated  time.  The  Boston,  on  which 
were  my  own  headquarters,  did  not  arrive  until  nearly  8 a.  m.  of  the 
22d,  and  the  gunboats  Marblehead  and  Water  Witch  were  delayed 
until  a very  late  period  of  the  day. 

Upon  my  arrival  I found  that  the  debarkation  of  the  troops  already 
arrived  was  proceeding,  and  I immediately  commenced  landing  the  men 
upon  my  own  vessel. 

I here  received  orders  from  the  general  commanding  to  form  my  own 
brigade  in  columns,  right  in  front,  immediately  in  rear  of  the  First 
Brigade,  and  to  put  the  whole  force  in  motion  toward  Pocotaligo.  On 
landing  I found  that  the  First  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Chatfield,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Fourth  Regiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  had 
already  moved  forward,  and  that  the  battery  of  my  brigade  and  the  one 
company  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  which  had  arrived,  had 
accompanied  them.  Lieutenant  Henry,  with  the  battery  of  the  First 


Not  found. 


166 


COASTS  OF  S.  C,  GA,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Brigade,  and  Lieut.  Lloyd  Phoenix,  U.  S.  Navy,  with  three  boat  howit- 
zers, here  reported  to  me. 

I immediately  directed  Colonel  Bell,  of  the  Fourth  xsew  Hampshire 
Volunteers,  to  move  his  regiment  forward,  and,  as  soon  as  my  own 
brigade  was  formed,  put  them  in  march,  the  battery  and  boat  howit- 
zers leading,  followed  by  the  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania,  the  Seventh 
Connecticut,  the  Third  New  Hampshire,  and  the  Engineers  Finding 
that  the  First  Brigade  was  some  distance  in  advance,  I sent  orders  to 
Colonel  Chatfield  to  halt  his  command  until  my  own  men  should  come 
up.  The  whole  force  being  united,  Lieutenant  Henry’s  section  of  artil- 
lery joined  the  First  Brigade  ; Lieutenant’s  Gittings’  section  joined  my 
own,  and  the  company  of  Bhode  Island  Artillery,  under  Capt.  J.  J. 
Comstock,  was  assigned  to  duty  with  the  battery  of  boat  howitzers.  The 
column  was  then  put  in  motion,  but  immediately  thereafter  I received 
orders  from  the  general  commanding  to  halt,  throw  out  pickets,  and 
await  his  arrival.  The  point  at  which  this  halt  was  made  was  some 
2A  or  3 miles  from  the  landing.  On  the  general’s  arrival  the  whole  force 
advanced,  marching  by  the  flank.  Approaching  Frampton’s,  the  sound 
of  artillery  was  heard  at  the  front,  and  I soon  received  orders  to  form 
column  and  move  forward  at  the  double-quick  to  support  the  First 
Brigade,  then  engaged  with  the  enemy.  I here  detailed  half  a company 
of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers  as  a hospital  guard,  and  the 
remainder  of  the  same  company,  under  Captain  Tourtellotte,  to  assist 
the  boat  howitzers. 

In  obedience  to  further  orders  from  the  commanding  general  my 
leading  regiment  (the  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania)  was  thrown  into  the 
woods,  200  yards  to  the  left  of  the  road,  to  protect  the  left  flank  of  the 
first  line,  and  the  Seventh  Connecticut  and  Third  New  Hampshire  were 
deployed  on  the  right  and  left,  immediately  in  the  rear  of  the  batteries, 
which  were  maintaining  a rdpid  fire.  The  brigade  remained  in  this 
position  for  some  time,  the  men  lying  down  and  thus  escaping  serious 
damage  from  the  enemy’s  fire.  Having  received  orders  to  that  effect, 
I moved  forward  a short  distance  beyond  the  guns,  while  a charge 
upon  the  battery  in  our  front  was  executed  by  troops  ol  the  First  Bri- 
gade. The  enemy  being  driven  from  their  position,  I was  ordered  to 
again  advance,  and  I attempted  to  do  so  in  line ; but  finding  the  ground 
in  front  densely  wooded,  and  intersected  by  a marsh  that  could  onl^  be 
crossed  by  a causeway,  the  regiments  were  brought  into  the  road  by 
the  flank.  After  passing  the  causeway  and  reaching  the  firm  and  open 
ground  beyond  I threw  them  again  into  column,  the  Third  New  Hamp- 
shire and  Seventh  Connecticut  on  the  right  of  the  road  and  the  Seventy- 
sixth  Pennsylvania  on  the  left. 

Having  advanced  some  distance  in  this  formation  the  ground  again 
became  broken  by  woods  and  marshes,  and  I was  again  obliged  to  bring 
my  men  into  the  road  and  advance  by  the  jflank.  Soon  alter  coming 
into  the  road  I received  orders  from  the  general  commanding  to  send 
one  regiment  to  the  front  on  the  double-quick,  and  to  post  another 
regiment,  with  one  piece  of  artillery,  on  an  obscure  road,  running  into 
the  Pocotaligo  road  from  the  Coosawhatchie  road,  so  as  to  protect  the 
left  of  our  forces  from  any  attack  from  that  direction.  I sent  forward 
the  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania,  and  went  personally  to  post  the  Tliiid 
New  H am xi shire  and  one  boat  howitzer  in  the  directed  position.  Hav- 
ing accomplished  this  and  coming  to  the  front,  I found  the  Seventy- 
sixth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  and  Seventh  Connecticut  already  de- 
ployed on  the  left  and  right  of  the  road,  just  within  the  edge  of  the 
wood  which  borders  the  marshy  banks  of  the  P ocotaligo  Biver,  beyond 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


167 


which  the  enemy  had  taken  position,  the  batteries  being  on  the  road  a 
little  in  advance  of  the  line.  Soon  after  my  arrival  our  artillery  tire  was 
much  diminished,  owing  to  the  exhaustion  of  the  ammunition,  and  the 
fire  of  the  enemy  correspondingly  increased.  I therefore  ordered  for- 
ward the  flank  companies  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut,  armed  with 
Sharps  breech-loading  rifles,  to  open  upon  them.  This  order  was  obeyed 
with  alacrity,  and  such  was  the  accuracy  and  tremendous  rapidity  of 
their  fire  that  the  opposing  battery  was  completely  silenced  and  the 
enemy’s  infantry  were  able  to  make  only  a feeble  reply.  At  about  this 
time  the  two  companies  of  the  Seventy- sixth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
under  command  of  Captain  Hicks,  which  were  embarked  on  the  gun- 
boat Water  Witch,  came  up,  and  were  formed  on  the  left  of  the  artil- 
lery, between  it  and  their  own  regiment,  where  they  did  good  service. 
When  the  enemy’s  fire  slackened  I gave  the  order  to  cease  firing.  As 
soon  as  this  was  dope  the  enemy’s  again  sprang  up.  I then  commenced 
firing  from  the  whole  line,  ceasing  from  time  to  time  as  theirs  was  con- 
trolled and  again  renewing  it  as  theirs  revived  in  consequence  of  the 
cessation  of  ours  or  of  the  arrival  of  their  re-enforcements.  During  this 
time  a considerable  body  of  cavalry  appeared  on  this  side  of  .the  river, 
threatening  our  left  flank.  Colonel  Strawbridge,  whose  regiment  formed 
our  left,  promptly  wheeled  up  two  companies,  opened  fire,  and  drove 
them  back.  They  did  not  again  advance  during  the  day. 

Shortly  after  the  fire  was  first  opened  I endeavored  to  ascertain 
whether  the  river  was  fordable,  and  for  this  purpose  directed  Colonel 
Hawley,  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut,  to  call  for  volunteers  to  examine 
it,  and  First  Lieut.  E.  S.  Perry  and  Private  Crabbe,  of  Company  H, 
gallantly  offered  to  perform  this  duty.  Advancing  under  the  fire  of 
both  parties  they  reached  the  banks,  and  ascertained  that  it  is  one  of 
the  narrow,  but  deep  and  muddy,  streams  common  in  this  region,  and 
that  there  was  no  possibility  of  fording  it. 

At  about  5 o’clock  I learned  from  the  general  commanding  that,  in 
consequence  of  the  breaking  down  of  the  bridge  and  the  resulting  im- 
possibility of  effecting  a passage  across  the  stream  behind  which  the 
enemy  had  retreated,  he  had  determined  to  withdraw  his  forces,  and  I 
received  directions  from  him  to  cover  the  movement,  maintaining  my 
position  until  dusk  and  until  all  the  wounded  should  be, carried  to  the 
rear.  The  general  at  the  same  time  directed  the  Fourth  New  Hamp- 
shire Eegiment,  then  in  the  road,  somewhat  in  the  rear  of  the  front,  to 
form  a line  on  the  left  and  retire  slowly.  In  pursuance  of  these  orders 
I remained  in  position  till  quite  dark,  and  until  the  wounded  were 
brought  in  and  I received  orders  to  retire. 

Prior  to  the  reception  of  these  orders  I had  relieved  the  Seventh  Con; 
nectieut,  whose  ammunition  was  nearly  exhausted,  by  the  Forty-seventh 
Pennsylvania;  and  the  Third  New  Hampshire,  which  was  stiil  at  some 
distance  to  the  left  and  rear,  in  the  position  where  I had  posted  it,  was 
brought  back  to  the  road,  its  right  resting  upon  it;  and  the  boat  how- 
itzer, under  command  of  Midshipman  Wallace,  was  brought  to  the  front, 
when  it  fired  the  last  discharge  of  artillery  of  the  day.  The  regiments 
were  withdrawn  one  after  the  other,  successively  forming  lines  to  the 
rear  to  cover  the  withdrawal  of  each  other,  the  cavalry  occupying  the 
road  at  charging  distance  behind  the  lines  thus  formed.  On  arriving 
at  the  first  causeway  1 found  the  general  commanding  with  the  troops 
first  withdrawn,  and  received  from  him  orders  to  proceed  at  once  with 
my  brigade  to  Mackay’s  Point  and  put  the  regiments  in  bivouac  as  they 
should  arrive.  On  my  way  to  this  place,  while  still  between  2 and  3 
miles  from  it,  I met  coming  up  that  portion  of  the  Third  Khode  Island 


168 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Artillery,  under  Major  Rogers,  which  had  been  on  the  gunboat  Marble- 
head, and  directed  him  to  halt  his  command  and  report  his  arrival  to 
the  general  commanding.  As  fast  as  the  regiments  came  in  at  the  point 
they  were  placed  in  bivouac,  in  brigade  lines,  at  right  angles  to  the  road, 
and  a fresh  supply  of  ammunition  was  served  out.  At  midnight,  in  ac- 
cordance with  directions  received  from  the  general  commanding,  Major 
Rogers’ detachment  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  and  the  cavalry  were 
thrown  forward  as  pickets,  with  instructions  to  fire  rockets  as  signals 
to  the  gunboats  whose  guns  bore  upon  the  approaches  to  our  position, 
in  case  of  the  appearance  of  the  enemy. 

After  my  arrival  I made  details  from  the  regiments  of  my  own  bri- 
gade to  aid  similar  details  from  the  First  Brigade,  who,  under  the  im- 
mediate direction  of  the  general  commanding,  were  bringing  in  the 
wounded.  As  fast  as  they  were  brought  in  they  were  placed  upon  the 
transports,  both  officers  and  men,  although  very  weary,  working  with 
great  zeal  and  cheerfulness  to  succor  their  disabled 'comrades.  The  re- 
embarkation  of  the  troops  commenced  at  about  8 a.  m.  of  the  23d  and 
was  completed  at  sunset,  the  Fifty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
three  companies  of  which  had  been  substituted  for  the  Rhode  Island 
detachment  as  pickets  in  the  afternoon,  being  the  last  to  leave  the 
point. 

In  the  afternoon  several  pickets  and  vedettes  of  the  enemy  were  seen 
by  our  outposts,  but  they  remained  at  a respectful  distance  and  made 
no  effort  to  annoy  them. 

During  the  whole  of  the  22d  nothing  could  surpass  the  coolness  and 
firmness  of  both  officers  and  men  of  my  command.  Where  all  have 
done  their  duty  so  manfully  it  is  difficult  to  single  out  individuals  for 
special  commendation,  but  I desire  to  express  my  thanks  to  Colonels 
Hawley,  Jackson,  and  Strawbridge,  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hall,  and  to 
Lieut.  E.  Gittings,  wounded,  of  the  battery.  The  courage  and  good 
conduct  of  all  these  gentlemen  deserve  the  highest  approbation  of  the 
commanding  general. 

The  Forty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  was  for  a short 
time  under  my  immediate  command,  and,  although  they  are  not  a por- 
tion of  my  brigade,  I cannot  forbear  mentioning  the  steadiness  and  disci- 
pline displayed  by  this  admirable  regiment  during  our  movements  to 
the  rear. 

I desire  also  to  bring  to  the  notice  of  the  commanding  general  the 
gallant  manner  in  which  Lieutenant  Phoenix,  U.  S.  Ravy,  and  the  offi- 
cers and  men  under  his  command,  and  the  officers  and  men  detailed  to 
assist  them,  served  the  boat  howitzers  during  the  day. 

My  thanks  are  due  also  to  a civilian,  Mr.  S.  A.  Cooley,  the  sutler  of 
the  Sixth  Connecticut  Regiment,  who,  under  no  obligations  of  duty,  but 
prompted  solely  by  motives  of  humanity,  labored  most  energetically  and 
effectively  throughout  the  night,  superintending  the  boats  used  in  carry- 
ing the  wounded  on  board  the  transports. 

I am  under  great  obligations  to  Dr.  D.  J.  McKibbin,  surgeon  of  vol- 
unteers, acting  as  brigade  surgeon  to  the  Second  Brigade,  for  his 
unwearied  efforts  in  behalf  of  the  wounded,  and  to  the  members  of 
my  personal  staff,  Capt.  Theodore  Bacon,  Seventh  Connecticut  Volun- 
teers, acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieuts.  Adrian  Terry, 
Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  Martin  S.  James,  Third  Rhode 
Island  Artillery,  aides-de-camp,  who  conveyed  my  orders  under  the 
heaviest  fire  with  a zeal,  activity,  and  courage  that  left  nothing  to  bp 
desired. 


169 


Chap  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 

I inclose  the  reports  of  the  commanders  of  the  regiments  of  mv  bri- 
gade. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

ALFRED  H.  TEBRY, 
Brigadier -General , Volunteers. 

Capt,  Louis  J.  Lambert,  Asst  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hilton  Head , 8.  G. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley , Seventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers 

Camp  Hitchcock , Hilton  Head , 8.  (7.,  October  25,  1862. 

C API  Ain  . I submit,  for  the  consideration  of  the  brigadier-general 
commanding,  a report  ot  the  part  taken  by  this  regiment  in  the  late 
expedition  and  the  actions  which  took  place  near  Pocotaligo  on  the  22d 
instant : 

General  Terry  ordered  me  to  furnish  a force  of  500  men,  including 
officers,  and,  id  accordance  with  verbal  instructions,  I organized  them 
into  six  companies,  commanded  by  Captains  Chamberlain  (first  com- 
pany), Skinner  (second  company),  Gray  (third  company),  Dennis  (fourth 
company),  Tourtellotte  (fifth  company),  and  Burdick  (sixth  company). 
Captain  Dennis  being  unable  to  walk,  the  command  of  his  company  fell 
to  Lieut.  E.  S.  Perry.  Capt.  O.  S.  Sanford  acted  as  major,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Gardiner  being  ill  and  Major  Rodman  absent  on  recruiting  serv- 
ice. Capt.  James  A.  Burns,  acting  quartermaster,  and  Capt.  C.  C.  Mills 
who  returned  from  recruiting  service  after  the  force  was  organized’ 
both  waived  all  questions  of  etiquette  and  went  upon  my  staff,  the  lat- 
ter as  adjutant,  and  rendered  indispensable  and  constant  aid  in  the  field 
and  elsewhere.  Assist.  Surg.  Horace  P.  Porter,  acting  surgeon,  accom- 
panied us,  Dr.  Hine  remaining  in  charge  of  the  sick  in  camp.  The 
other  officers  were  Chaplain  H.  L.  Wayland,  First  Lieuts.  John  Thomp- 
son,  William  E.  Phillips,  Edward  S.  Perry,  and  S.  S.  Atwell,  and  Sec- 
ond  Lieutenants  Wilson,  Wildman,  Hutchinson,  Van  Keuren,  Barker, 
and  Marble.  ’ 

The  entire  force  that  left  Hilton  Head  was  : Field  and  acting  staff  offi- 
cers,  6;  non-commissioned  staff,  3;  company  officers,  Pi;  musicians  and 
others  (hospital  attendants),  17  ; color  bearers,  2;  enlisted  men  bearing 
aims,  4/0.  Aggregate,  514.  This  excludes  a corporal  and  5 men  with- 
out  arms,  put  in  charge  of  our  stores  on  the  Boston. 

V\  e embarked  on  the  Boston  on  the  afternoon  of  the  21st  At  11  p 
m.,  on  the  passage  up  Broad  River,  by  General  Terry’s  order,  I detailed 
Captain  Gray , Lieutenant  Hutchinson,  and  74  men,  to  whom  were  added 
about  A)  men  of  the  Third  New  Hampshire,  under  Lieutenant  Head,  to 
proceed  up  the  river  in  boats,  manned  by  the  Navy  and  guided  by  two 
negroes,  past  Mackay’s  Point,  and  then  landing  on  the  main-land  to  cut 
on  and  capture  the  rebel  picket,  said  to  number  about  60,  on  duty  at 
tliat  point.  A £arge  with  a howitzer  from  the  Paul  Jones  accompanied 
w^i  1 -Y  safely  Passed  the  point  apparently  without  being  noticed  ; 
but  the  negro  in  the  leading  boat  with  Captain  Gray  conducted  them  2 
or  .3  miles  beyond  the  proper  landing  place,  where  a causeway  might 
r.eabeKen.reache(i  a?tl  the  rebels  intercepted.  This  fact  was  ascer- 
tained by  inquiring  of  the  other  negro  in  Lieutenant  Hutchinson’s  boat 


170  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

and  the  party  turned  about,  but  the  favorable  moment  had  passed. 
Daylight  appeared  before  they  got  back  to  the  spot  and  they  kept  on 
to  Mack  ay’s  Point,  where  they  found  our  troops  debarking,  the  enemy 
of  course  having  fled. 

Lieutenant  Smith,  of  the  Third  New  Hampshire,  who  accompanied 
Captain  Gray  as  far  as  the  tug  boat  Belief  towed  the  party,  and  then 
went  up  the  Pocotaligo  with  12  men,  is  reported  to  have  been  more  suc- 
cessful, and  to  have  captured  several  of  the  enemy. 

The  Boston  reached  Mackay’s  Point  about  8 a.  m.  on  the  22d,  and  the 
regiment  promptly  debarked  and  formed  line.  The  Seventy-sixth  Penn- 
sylvania, Colonel  Strawbridge,  of  this  brigade,  being  already  on  shore, 
took  the  lead,  following  the  First  Brigade,  Colonel  Chatfield  command- 
ing. After  the  delays  and  halts,  arising  from  causes  of  which  I know 
nothing,  the  two  brigades  marched  on.  At  about  12.30  o’clock  we 
heard  artillery  firing  in  advance  of  the  column,  and  moving  on  rapidly 
at  double-quick  we  passed  evidences  of  the  commencing  conflict,  and  by 
General  Terry’s  order  I detailed  half  of  my  fifth  company,  under  Lieuten- 
ant Greene,  as  a guard  for  the  field  hospital  being  established.  They  did 
their  duty  faithfully  for  fifteen  hours,  and  rendered  great  aid  to  the 
wounded,  constructing  temporary  litters  with  saplings  and  strips  of 
their  own  blankets,  bringing  off  the  disabled,  &c.,  there  being  no  occasion 
to  resist  the  enemy.  A few  minutes  after,  by  the  general’s  order,  I de- 
tailed the  remainder  of  the  fifth  company,  under  Captain  Tourtellotte 
and  Lieutenant  Phillips,  to  guard  and  help  to  draw  the  three  boat  how- 
itzers. They  did  not  fail  in  their  duty  for  a moment.  The  remaining 
five  companies,  by  the  general’s  order,  formed  column  by  company  and 
continued  advancing.  Approaching  the  two  strips  of  thick  wood, 
divided  by  a marsh  and  crossed  by  the  road  nearly  at  right  angles, 
General  Terry  ordered  us  into  line  on  the  right  of  the  brigade,  and  we 
halted.  Advancing  a few  paces  the  brigade  again  halted  (see  A on 
sketch),  and  the  men  lay  down,  the  enemy’s  artillery  and  infantry  keep- 
ing up  a lively  fire,  which  more  particularly  endangered  the  regiments 
(Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  and  Third  New  Hampshire)  on  our  left. 
Some  minutes  passed,  our  artillery  working  fiercely,  and  the  First  Bri- 
gade, which  had  been  hotly  engaged,  reforming  its  lines.  A general  ad- 
vance followed,  there  being  one  brief  halt  (B)  after  jumping  the  ditch. 


The  thick  and  almost  impassable  wood  was  entered  and  the  marsh 
soon  reached  (C),  but  the  enemy  had  left  the  opposite  bank.  As  the 
general  ordered,  we  moved  by  the  left  flank  until  we  touched  the  road, 
tlieD  counter-marched  to  bring  my  right  to  cross  the  causeway,  which 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


171 


after  a halt  we  did  at  a lively  pace,  following  the  Sixth  Regiment  of 
Connecticut  Volunteers.  A rapid  march  of  2 or  3 miles  followed,  much 
of  it  at  double-quick ; but  the  men  endured  it  remarkably  well.  The 
sounds  of  a renewed  fight  reached  us,  and  we  hurried  along  the  narrow 
road  through*  a heavy  wood  toward  the  front,  where  I was  ordered  to  file 
to  the  right  into  the  wood.  I obeyed,  changing  direction  a little  to  the 
right  to  go  behind  the  reserve  of  the  Fourth  New  Hampshire  (A,  sec- 
ond sketch),  halted  (B),  reported,  and  was  instructed  that  my  duty  was 
to  hold  the  position  and  the  marsh  in  front  at  all  hazards.  Moving  by 
the  left  flank  a little,  and  throwing  forward  my  right,  so  as  to  bring  my 
line  more  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  road,  I dressed  the  line,  halted 


(C),  and  ordered  the  men  to  lie  down,  the  artillery  of  the  enemy  send- 
ing occasional  missiles  in  our  direction,  one  of  •which  instantly  killed 
Private  James  Cook,  of  Company  I,  and  wounded  one  or  two  others. 
I found  near  me  a small  reserve  of  the  Fourth  New  Hampshire,  and  send- 
ing forward  to  the  edge  of  the  wood  skirting  the  marsh  I learned  that 
more  of  that  regiment  were  there  deployed  as  skirmishers  and  main- 
taining a dropping  fire.  They  returned  word  that  they  could  hold  their 
position  if  well  supported.  I informed  their  commanding  officer,  Colonel 
Bell,  and  rested,  having  no  instructions  to  transmit  to  any  other  regi- 
ment. 

General  Terry  soon  ordered  me  to  send  forward  our  Sharps  riflemen 
to  the  edge  of  the  wood  to  work  upon  the  enemy’s  battery  across  the 
marsh.  I ordered  forward  Companies  A and  B,  Captains  Chamberlain 
and  Burdick  (Captain  Sanford,  acting  major,  superintending  the  move- 
ment), the  men  to  be  deployed  at  short  intervals  (E  and  E).  There 
were  nearly  100  of  them,  and  they  opened  a fire  of  astonishing  rapidity, 
with  sights  ranging  from  400  to  600  yards,  and  I must  believe  with 
accuracy,  for  the  enemy’s  field  pieces,  and  even  his  infantry  fire,  were 
silenoed  in  a very  few  moments.  Again  receiving  General  Terry’s  in- 
structions the  regiment  rose  up  and  moved  in  good  line  to  join  Com- 
panies A and  B at  the  edge  of  the  wood  (F),  and  commenced  firing 


172 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,.AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


by  file  with  the  greatest  satisfaction  to  the  men.  The  officers  cautioned 
them  to  elevate  the  sights  properly  and  to  fire  deliberately.  The  Sharps 
riflemen  were  ordered  to  cease  firing,  that  they  might  reserve  some  am- 
munition. After  a time  (the  enemy  being  nearly  quiet)  I caused  the 
bugle  to  sound  “Cease  firing,”  and  the  men  promptly  obeyed  and  were 
ordered  to  lie  down.  The  moment  any  groups  of  the  enemy  appeared  on 
the  edge  of  the  not  very  thick  woods  opposite  or  about  the  buildings 
or  near  the  one  field  piece  which  we  could  see  (the  other  had  been 
drawn  out  of  sight)  our  fire  was  opened  for  a short  time  and  the  Sharps 
riflemen  were  permitted  to  work  at  intervals.  At  one  time  I had  6 men 
from  each  company  detailed  to  maintain  such  a fire  as  would  keep  down 
the  enemy.  Again  and  again  the  regiment  opened  and  ceased  firing, 
obeying  the  bugle  calls  as  promptly  as  if  simply  on  drill. 

General  Terry  at  one  time  desired  us  to  charge  across  the  marsh  if 
it  was  practicable,  and  to  send  some  one  to  examine  the  ground.  I 
called  for  half  a dozen  volunteers,  and  thrice  the  number  sprang  up 
immediately.  I selected  5,  and  after  exploring  they  reported  that  as 
far  as  I ordered  them  to  go  (150  or  200  yards)  the  footing  was  very  fair 
and  they  could  see  no  creek.  Satisfied  that  there  was  one  I called 
again  for  volunteers,  and  Lieutenant  Perry  and  Private  Crabbe,  eagerly 
offering,  were  accepted,  and  ordered  to  keep  low  and  find  the  creek. 
Our  men  were  notified  and  cautioned  not  to  hit  them.  They  went, 
stooping  under  the  fire  of  both  parties,  two-thirds  of  the  way  across,  and 
reported  a deep  creek,  of  the  character  common  here,  with  muddy  banks 
and  low  water.  I sent  the  lieutenant  to  General  Terry. 

Though  we  prolonged  the  expenditure  of  ammunition  as  much  as  pos- 
sible, I was  obliged  to  report  that  (if  any  was  to  be  reserved  for  future 
contingencies)  it  would  soon  be  necessary  to  relieve  us.  We  had  some 
time  previously  heard  a locomotive  whistle  during  a lull,  and  there 
was  repeatedly  great  cheering  among  the  rebels,  for  which  (their  fire 
having  been  repeatedly  silenced)  there  was  no  apparent  cause,  unless 
their  re- enforcements  had  come  up  through  the  woods  in  their  rear. 
Such  must  have  been  the  case,  for  it  required  more  constant  work  to 
keep  their  fire  quiet  and  their  rifles  were  getting  a better  range  of  our 
position;  but  they  never  showed  any  disposition  to  cross  to  us.  The 
Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  was  ordered  to  take  our  places  after  a time, 
and  as  we  moved,  by  the  right  of  companies  to  the  rear  they  promptly 
advanced  and  opened  a hot  fire. 

By  General  Terry’s  order  we  again  formed  in  line  a few  hundred 
yards  back,  and  when  the  Forty-seventh  Pennsylvania  had  taken  a 
position  back  of  us  we  filed  into  the  road,  and  perhaps  1,000  yards 
to  the  rear  filed  to  the  left,  and  again  formed  a line  perpendicular  to 
the  road,  faced  by  the  rear  rank,  our  right  resting  on  the  road,  while 
the  Third  New  Hampshire,  Colonel  Jackson,  occupied  a corresponding 
position  across  the  way. 

After  all  the  wounded  and  stragglers  had  passed,  by  tbe  general’s 
orders  we  took  the  road  and  proceeded  to  Mackay’s  Point,  5 or  6 miles 
distant,  reaching  it  in  about  seven  hours  from  the  time  we  ceased  tiring. 
Our  frequent  halts  were  owing  to  regiments  ahead  and  to  the  necessity 
of  caring  for  the  wounded.  Upon  reaching  the  field  hospital  all  our 
wounded  were  attended  to,  and,  weary  as  our  men  were,  about  20  cheer- 
fully volunteered  to  go  back  and  assist  in  bringing  along  others. 

We  bivouacked  at  the  Point,  and  during  the  night  obtained  a fresh 
supply  of  ammunition.  In  the  morning  (October  23)  we  embarked  on 
the  Boston,  on  which  were  also  about  120  dead  and  wounded  of  various 
regiments,  and  returned  to  Hilton  Head, 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHTE,  S.  C.,  ETC.  173 

General  Terry  has  already  received  a substantially  accurate  state- 
ment of  our  losses;  but  I append  the  official  report  of  Dr.  Porter.*  A 
number  of  slight  contusions  and  grazes  were  not  entered  on  the  list. 

For  every  officer  and  non-commissioned  officer  (save  possibly  one  of 
the  latter)  I have  none  but  words  of  unqualified  praise.  The  captains 
have  made  written  reports  by  name  of  all  privates  who  failed  to  keep 
the  ranks  throughout.  The  list  is  very  small,  and  those  against  whom 
the  suspicion  of  cowardice  or  desertion  arises  are  very  few  indeed.  Of 
the  regiment  as  a body  it  is  precisely  true  that  it  was  regular,  steady, 
promptly  obedient,  and  fully  under  control  every  moment.  1 do  not 
know  what  more  I could  have  asked  of  it  or  asking  could  have  ob- 
tained. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  K.  HAWLEY, 

Colonel  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Theodore  Bacon, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brigade , Tenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Col.  John  H.  Jackson , Third  New  Hampshire  Infantry.  * 

Hdqrs.  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers, 

Hilton  Head , S.  C .,  October  26,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  present  the  following  report: 

Agreeably  to  Special  Orders,  No.  5,  from  Headquarters  Second  Bri- 
gade, dated  October  *21,  1862,  1 reported  with  480  men  at  the  head  ot 
the  wharf  at  1 p.  m.,  and  received  orders  to  embark  100  men  on  board 
the  Patroon  and  Uncas.  The  remainder  of  my  command  embarked  on 
board  the  steamer  Boston. 

Between  10  and  11  o’clock  at  night  I was  ordered  to  detail  2 officers 
and  32  men  to  cut  off  some  pickets  of  the  enemy.  One  of  the  officers, 
with  20  men,  reported  to  Captain  Gray,  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Vol- 
unteers. The  remaining  officer,  with  12  men,  with  an  officer  and  boat’s 
crew  from  the  Paul  Jones,  went  in  another  direction  and  captured  a 
picket.  The  report  of  Lieutenant  Smith,  commanding  this  detachment, 
please  find  inclosed,  marked  A.f 

In  the  morning  about  8 o’clock  I disembarked,  and  soon  after  received 
orders  to  advance.  A short  time  after  our  advance  had  engaged  the 
enemy  I received  orders  to  form  in  line  of  battle  in  the  rear  of  and  a 
little  to  the  left  of  one  of  our  batteries,  which  position  I took  under  a 
severe  fire  of  the  enemy.  Most  of  their  fire,  however,  was  too  high,  and 
passed  over  our  heads. 

I soon  received  orders  to  again  advance,  and  after  advancing  some  dis- 
tance was  ordered  to  position  on  the  left  of  our  forces,  with  one  piece  of 
marine  artillery,  to  guard  against  any  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  turn  our 

left  flank. 

I remained  in  this  position  some  time,  and  received  orders  to  send  for- 
ward the  piece  of  artillery  then  with  me.  About  dark  I received  orders 
to  draw  in  my  advance  and  retire  from  my  position  and  take  a new 
position,  with  my  right  resting  on  the  main  road,  and  remain  there  till 
our  forces  had  all  passed  me. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  148. 


tNot  found. 


174  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

After  all  Lad  passed  me  and  a company  of  cavalry,  with  one  piece  of 
artillery,  had  taken  position  in  the  road  I had  orders  to  retire.  After 
retiring  and  taking  a new  position  near  the  river  I sent  out,  by  order,  a 
number  of  details,  one  of  100  men,  to  assist  in  removing  the  wounded. 
During  the  day  3 of  my  command  were  wounded.* 

During  the  forenoon  of  Thursday,  the  23d,  the  men  of  my  command 
were  embarked,  according  to  orders  received,  and  arrived  at  this  camp 
during  that  night  and  Friday  morning,  when  the  last  were  landed. 

During  the  expedition  the  officers  and  the  men  generally  did  their 
duty  faithfully.  I returned  with  three  companies  of  my  regiment  on 
the  Paul  Jones;  and  would  take  this  opportunity  to  present  my  thanks 
and  those  of  my  officers  and  men  who  were  with  me  to  the  commander 
of  the  Paul  Jones,  also  to  his  officers  and  men,  for  the  kind  treatment 
we  all  received  while  on  board.  All  my  officers  and  men  who  were  in 
this  expedition  speak  highly  of  the  treatment  they  received  while  on 
board  the  gunboats. 

Dr.  Buzzed,  of  my  regiment,  was  untiring  in  his  efforts  to  make  the 
wounded  as  comfortable  as  possible.  My  command  is  now  all  in  camp, 
and  ready  and  willing  to  move  again  at  short  notice. 

The  property  captured  by  Lieutenant  Smith  is  mentioned  in  his  report. 
One  of  the  fowling-pieces  was  taken  by  Serg.  Nathaniel  J.  Campbell, 
of  his  company,  who  expressed  a strong  desire  to  have  the  piece.  If 
it  can  be  done,  I hope  his  wish  will  be  gratified. 

With  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  H.  JACKSON, 

Colonel  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers. 

Captain  Bacon, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Second  Brigade. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Col.  De  Witt  C.  Strawbridge , Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  In- 
fantry. 

Headquarters  Seventy-sixth  Regt.  Pa.  Vols., 

Hilton  Heady  S.  C .,  October  — , 1862. 

Captain:  In  accordance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  5,  received  from 
Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Tenth  Army  Corps,  I embarked  on  board 
of  the  steamer  Flora  and  Water  Witch  (gunboat)  on  the  21st  instant, 
with  420  men  and  the  proper  number  of  officers,  and  proceeded  up 
Broad  River  to  Mackay’s  Point,  where  we  disembarked,  with  about  280 
men,  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  and  thence  proceeded  toward  Poco- 
taligo  Creek,  and  about  5 or  6 miles  out. 

By  your  order  my  command  was  deployed  into  the  wood  on  the  left 
of  the  road  and  remained  there  until  ordered  forward,  when  I proceeded 
through  the  wood  in  line,  and,  crossing  quite  a swamp,  proceeded  for- 
ward, in  column  of  company,  until  ordered  into  the  road;  then  receiv- 
ing orders  to  push  forward  at  double-quick  to  support  the  First  Artil- 
lery, and  occupied  the  extreme  left,  where  my  regiment  was  properly 
formed  across  the  road  leading  to  Pocotaligo,  and  there  opened  up  a 
brisk  fire,  in  support  of  the  artillery,  and,  finding  a large  number  of  rebel 
cavalry  were  verging  around  on  my  left,  I immediately  prolonged  my 


Nominal  list  omitted.  See  p.  148. 


Chap.  XXVI.  1 SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC.  17.“) 

line  and  opened  up  a brisk  fire  on  them,  when  they  fell  back.  The  two 
other  companies  then  came  up  and  were  properly  formed  on  the  left  of 
the  artillery  and  commenced  firing  and  continued  doing  so  until  the 
ammunition  was  exhausted,  when  1 reported  the  case,  and  was  ordered 
to  fall  back  slowly  and  proceed  back  to  the  landing. 

The  officers  and  men  performed  their  parts  well,  obeying  promptly 
every  order ; our  loss  being  75  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  Of  this 
number  12  were  killed  (2  captains),  62  were  wounded,  and  1 missing. 

Upon  arriving  at  the  landing  I immediately  supplied  my  command 
with  ammunition  and  then  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

At  12  o’clock  on  the  23d  I re  embarked  on  board  of  the  gunboat 
Water  Witch,  and  arrived  at  Hilton  Head,  S.  0.,  at  6 p.  m.,  and  then 
disembarked  and  proceeded  to  camp.  The  men  were  considerably  worn- 
out,  but  were  feeling  well  in  consequence  of  the  victory. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

D.  C.  STRAWBRIDGE, 

Colonel , Commanding  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Theodore  Bacon, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brigade , Tenth  Army  Corps. 


Ho.  16. 

Report  of  Col.  William  B.  Barton , Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces  on  the  Savannah  River, 

Fort  Pulaski , Ga .,  October  23,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  share  in  the  recent  opera- 
tions against  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad : 

In  accordance  with  orders  from  General  Mitchel,  received  on  the 
evening  of  the  20th  instant,  I left  this  post  at  8 a.  m.  on  the  21st  instant 
with  300  men  of  the  Forty-eighth  Hew  York  Volunteers  and  50  men  of 
the  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery  (the  latter  under  command  of  Capt. 
John  H.  Gould),  with  three  days’  cooked  and  seven  days’  uncooked 
rations,  on  board  the  armed  transport  Planter. 

On  arriviug  at  Hilton  Head  I received  instructions  as  to  my  number 
in  the  line  of  the  fleet,  and  also  directions  to  report  to  Brigadier- Gen- 
eral Brannan,  who  commanded  the  expedition,  on  reaching  Mackay’s 
Point,  for  further  orders. 

Soon  after  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  I reported  to  General 
Brannan,  on  board  the  Ben  De  Ford,  and  was  directed  by  him  to  pro- 
ceed with  my  command  up  the  Coosawhatchie  River,  as  near  to  the 
town  of  that  name  as  I might  deem  practicable,  and,  disembarking 
under  cover  of  the  gunboats,  which  were  to  accompany  me,  to  move 
toward  the  town,  and,  if  possible,  reach  the  Charleston  and  Savannah 
Railroad,  and  destroy  it  at  that  point,  and  the  bridge  on  it,  over  the 
Coosawhatchie.  I was  fully  instructed,  however,  not  to  hazard  too 
much  in  order  to  accomplish  the  above ; but,  if  opposed  by  a force  at 
all  superior,  to  fall  back  under  cover  of  the  fleet. 

There  was  some  delay  in  starting,  arising  from  the  gunboats  being 
well  to  the  rear,  which  I improved  in  borrowing  from  Commander 
Steed  man,  on  board  the  flag-ship  Paul  Jones,  a 12-pounder  Dahlgren 
boat  howitzer  and  52  rounds  of  ammunition,  which  proved  of  great 


176 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  FAST  FLA.  [Cha?.  xxVl. 


service  to  me,  and  for  which  I desire  to  return  my  thanks.  I was  also 
furnished,  by  General  Brannan’s  order,  with  50  men  from  the  New 
York  State  Volunteer  Engineers,  under  command  of  Captain  Eaton, 
provided  with  the  necessary  implements  for  cutting  the  railroad,  &c. 
We  were  soon  under  way,  and  had  proceeded  some  3 miles  up  the  river 
when  the  gunboats  turned  around  and  came  back,  in  compliance,  as  I 
was  informed,  with  an  order  from  the  flag-ship.  I,  however,  continued 
on  my  course  in  the  Planter,  meanwhile  signaling  to  the  flag-officer 
for  at  least  one  gunboat,  in  reply  to  which  he  kindly  sent  two,  viz,  the 
Patroon  and  the  Marblehead,  which  followed  after  the  lapse  of  a few 
minutes.  The  river  at  this  point  was  very  narrow  and  winding,  but 
the  water  in  most  places  was  over  12  feet  in  depth  at  low  tide.  I found 
no  difficulty,  therefore,  in  reaching  a point  2 miles  distant  fromCoosaw- 
hatchie ; but,  it  now  being  almost  dead  low  tide,  farther  progress  by 
water  was  rendered  impossible  by  the  Planter  running  aground.  Throw- 
ing a few  shells  into  the  woods,  I disembarked  with  my  infantry  and 
engineers  as  expeditiously  as  possible,  taking  with  me  the  boat  howit- 
zer referred  to  above,  in  charge  ot  Captain  Gould,  Third  Rhode  Island 
Artillery,  and  a detachment  of  12  of  his  men.  The  swampy  nature  of 
the  ground  rendered  lauding  difficult;  but,  losing  no  time,  I advanced 
toward  the  main  road,  sending  a request  to  the  officer  in  command  of 
the  Patroon  (the  gunboat  nearest  to  me  and  about  miles  astern),  to 
cover  the  road  in  my  rear  as  I advanced.  I should  state  here  that  both 
gunboats  were  unfortunately  aground,  and  were  thus  prevented  from 
taking  a position  nearer  to  the  Planter. 

My  advance  reported  squads  of  cavalry  in  sight  as  the  main  body 
entered  the  road,  which  it  did  at  right  angles  to  the  point  of  disem- 
barkation. The  road  proved  to  be  an  excellent  one,  hard  and  firm, 
and  evidently  repaired  but  an  hour  or  two  before,  the  dirt  being  still 
fresh,  and  the  tracks  upon  it  showed  plainly  that  artillery,  infantry, 
and  cavalry  had  just  passed  over  it. 

I continued  my  advance  toward  the  town,  driving  in  the  enemy’s 
pickets  and  skirmishing  the  country  as  thoroughly  as  possible.  When 
about  1 mile  from  the  village  the  whistle  of  a locomotive  was  heard.  I 
was  informed  by  the  contraband  who  had  been  furnished  as  a guide 
that  it  was  the  dirt  train,  which  always  passed  at  that  hour,  and  which, 
he  said,  was  well  on  its  way  to  Savannah.  A few  moments,  however, 
proved  that  he  had  misinformed  me ; for  when  the  main  body  had 
arrived  at  a point  within  a few  hundred  yards  of  the  town,  and  when 
the  skirmishers  had  already  reached  the  railroad  track  and  telegraph 
line,  the  train  was  heard  and  seen  rapidly  coming  down  the  road.  I 
quickly  placed  my  battalion  in  position,  and  as  the  train  approached 
1 directed  a heavy  and  rapid  fire  upon  it  with  grape  and  canister  and 
musketry.  This  fire  was  very  destructive.  The  train  consisted  of 
eight  cars,  six  of  which  were  platform,  crowded  with  men,  and  two 
box  cars,  filled  with  officers.  There  were  also  two  light  field  pieces  on 
board.  Many  were  seen  to  fall  at  the  first  fire  (among  them  the  engi- 
neer) and  25  or  30  jumped  from  the  train.  Most  of  them  were  maimed 
or  killed,  and  the  rest  (with  one  exception)  betook  themselves  to  the 
woods  and  swamp  on  the  other  side  of  the  track.  We  carried  away  or 
destroyed  here  about  30  stand  of  arms,  mostly  rifles,  and  secured  one 
officer’s  sword  and  cap,  and  a stand  of  silk  colors,  belonging  to  the 
Whippy  Swamp  Guards.  We  left  a number  of  the  enemy’s  dead  and 
wounded  on  the  track. 


Cha p.XXVI.  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIB,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


1?? 

T have  since  learned,  from  the  Savannah  papers  of  the  24th  and 
25th,  that  among  the  killed  at  this  point  was  Major  Harrison,  of  the 
Eleventh  Georgia  [South  Carolina]  Regiment,  which  regiment,  with  the 
guards  named  above,  were  on  the  train. 

Immediately  after  the  train  had  passed  Captain  Eaton,  by  my  direc- 
tions, set  vigorously  at  work  tearing  up  the  railroad  track,  and  con- 
tinued thus  until  the  retreat  was  sounded.  After  this  occurrence  I con- 
cluded, if  possible,  to  push  rapidly  into  the  town  and  attack  the  troops 
while  in  the  confusion  of  disembarking,  and  marched  forward  for  that 
purpose.  I had  proceeded  but  a short  distance,  however,  before  I came 
in  full  view  of  the  enemy’s  forces  advantageously  posted  on  the  other 
side  of  the  public  road*  bridge,  between  that  and  the  railroad  bridge. 
They  were  flanked  on  their  left  by  the  river  and  on  their  right  by  a 
thick  swamp,  with  three  pieces  of  artillery  commanding  the  bridge. 
They  immediately  opened  fire  upon  us  with  their  artillery  and  in- 
fantry, fortunately,  however,  for  us,  firing  too  high.  I fired  a few 
rounds  in  return,  when  (as  it  was  now.nearly  night  and  the  enemy’s 
re-enforcements  alone  were  double  my  entire  force)  I marched  slowly 
back  to  my  boats.  During  my  retreat  the  skirmishers  frequently  ob- 
served and  encountered  small  bodies  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  who  were, 
however,  easily  driven  off. 

I directed  Captain  Eaton,  of  the  Engineers,  to  destroy  the  bridges 
on  the  road  in  my  rear,  which  he  did  thoroughly,  thus,  in  a measure, 
hindering  the  pursuit.  The  enemy,  however,  made  his  appearance  and 
attacked  us  with  infantry  and  artillery  several  tinfes  during  our  em- 
barkation, but  in  each  instance  wa  drove  them  off  with  serious  loss,  as 
they  were  directly  under  the  guns  of  the  Planter  and  Patroon.  As 
soon  as  the  steamer  again  floated  we  returned  to  Mackay’s  Point  by 
order  of  General  Brannan,  and  thence  by  way  of  Hilton  Head  to  this 
post. 

I regret  to  report  that  during  the  last  attack  of  the  enemy  Lieut.  J. 
B.  Blanding,  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  at  that  time  in  charge 
of  the  Planter,  was  dangerously  wounded  in  the  left  arm  and  side. 
He  is,  however,  doing  well.  This  was  the  only  casualty  on  our  side 
during  the  day. 

It  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  state  that  every  officer  and  man  of 
my  command  behaved  during  the  entire  day  in  the  most  commendable 
manner,  evincing  only  a desire  to  meet  the  enemy  and  regret  at  the 
necessity  of  retreat. 

Major  Green,  acting  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York 
Volunteers,  and  Captain  Strickland,  acting  major  Forty-eighth  New 
York  Volunteers,  were  especially  useful.  Captain  Gould,  of  the  Third 
Rhode  Island  Artillery,  also  rendered  me  most  efficient  service,  as  did 
also  Captain  Eaton,  Serrell’s  Volunteer  Engineers,  all  of  whom  dis- 
played the  utmost  zeal,  energy,  and  ability  in  all  they  were  called  upon 
to  perform. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

WM.  B.  BARTON, 

Colonel  Forty-eighth  New  York  Vols .,  Commanding  Post . 

Capt.  Louis  J.  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


12  n r— vol  xiv 


178 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 
No.  17. 


Report  of  Capt.  Samuel  0.  Raton , First  New  Yorlc  Engineers. 

Headquarters  Camp  Volunteer  Engineers, 
Hilton  Head , S.  0.,  October  25,  1862. 

In  compliance  with  orders  from  Col.  E.  W.  Sorrell,  chief  engineer,  I 
have  the  honor  to  report  that,  by  your  orders,  I reported  to  Colonel 
Barton,  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  Ydrk  Volunteers,  on  board  the  Planter, 
at  Mackay’s  Point,  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  ^instant,  with  32  men  of 
my  company  (E)  and  13  men  of  Company  G,  Lieutenant  McKenna,  of 
Company  G,  and  Acting  Lieutenant  Browning,  of  my  company,  taking 
our  arms,  tools,  and  faggots,  for  destroying  railroads  and  bridges. 

My  detachment  was  taken  in  tow  by  the  Planter,  and  steamed  slowly 
up  the  Coosawhatchie  Biver,  accompanied  by  three  gunboats,  until 
within  about  2 miles  of  the  town,  where  two  negroes  were  taken  on 
board,  near  a large  plantation  house,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  stream. 
Within  about  500  yards  of  this  house  the  Planter  ran  aground  near 
the  middle  of  the  stream,  at  this  point  about  75  yards  wide.  The  last 
gunboat  had  stopped,  and  lay  about  one-half  to  three-quarters  ol  a 
mile  below.  The  tide  was  running  out,  and  our  boat  being  last  aground, 
we  were  ordered  to  land  at  about  2 p.  in.  The  infantry  were  first  landed 
and  skirmishers  thrown  out,  a boat  howitzer,  with  a detachment  of  the 
Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  under  Captain  Gould,  and  the  Engineers 
following.  The  landing  was  made  on  a miry  bank,  about  4 feet  above 
the  water  at  that  time,  and  covered  with  tall  sedge-grass,  about  100 
yards  of  which  lay  between  us  and  the  solid  ground. 

The  Engineers  were  ordered  to  the  front  to  open  a passage  to  the 
main  road,  which  was  about  500  ^ards  in  a direct  line  from  the  point 
of  our  landing,  and  we  followed  it  in  a northerly  direction  nearly  par- 
allel to  the  general  course  of  the  stream.  The  road  had  been  newly  re- 
paired that  morning ; low  bushes  and  trees  lined  it  on  either  side,  with 
occasional  open  fields  beyond.  After  marching  about  1J  miles  a loco- 
motive whistle  was  heard  immediately  on  our  left  and  front,  and  we 
were  halted  and  brought  to  the  front  in  line  of  battle  just  in  time  to 
see  the  engine  unmasked  from  the  trees  and  bushes  that  covered  its 
approach  from  the  south.  The  Engineers  were  on  the  right,  and,  at 
the  command,  delivered  their  fire  with  the  other  forces  as  the  train 
passed  loaded  with  troops. 

I was  immediately  ordered  forward  with  my  first  platoon  to  destroy 
the  railroad  and  telegraph  at  that  point.  The  remaining  portion  of  the 
Engineer  detachment  moved  on  up  the  road,  under  Lieutenant  Mc- 
Kenna, with  the  main  body,  a small  party  of  Skirmishers  remaining  at 
the  railroad  with  me.  As  we  reached  the  track  a rebel  jumped  up 
from  the  opposite  ditch  and  gave  himself  up.  We  had  succeeded  in 
tearing  out  two  rails  entirely  from  the  track  and  five  or  six  others 
partially,  kindled  a fire  for  burning  the  ties  and  warping  the  rails,  cut 
down  two  of  the  large  telegraph  poles  and  cut  the  wire  in  several 
places,  when  cavalry  was  reported  in  our  rear,  infantry  and  artillery 
in  our  front,  and  we  were  ordered  to  fall  back,  taking  our  tools  and 
arms,  besides  two  muskets  and  one  rifle  belonging  to  the  enemy.  We 
fell  back  onto  the  road,  and  as  the  column  filed  past,  marching  in  re- 
treat, fell  in  with  the  balance  of  the  Engineer  detachment,  and  were 
ordered  to  destroy  thq  bridges  in  the  rear  of  the  retreating  forces. 


179 


Crur.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWEtATCttlE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 

Four  bridges  were  destroyed  by  throwing  off  the  plank  and  cutting 
the  spans,  only  two  of  which  were  of  sufficient  width  to  detain  cavalry 
and  artillery.  The  largest  was  about  12  or  15  feet  in  width,  with  banks 
of  about  4 feet  in  height.  No  further  engineering  duties  were  per- 
formed except  to  assist  in  repelling  an  attack  made  by  the  enemy  as 
we  were  re-embarking. 

We  were  all  safely  back  at  the  Planter  about  5.30  p.  in.,  and  as  the 
tide  soon  floated  her,  got  under  way  for  Mackay’s  Point,  where  I re- 
ported on  board  the  steamer  George  Washington ; but  finding  that 
steamer  about  leaving  on  picket  duty  reported  back  to  the  Planter, 
and  remained  on  board  until  morning,  when  I reported  to  yourself  and 
Colonel  Serrell  on  shore,  receiving  orders  from  him  to  report  back  with 
my  detachment  on  board  the  George  Washington  if  she  should  arrive 
before  the  Planter  left  $ if  not,  to  remain  with  the  latter  and  be  towed 
back  to  this  post.  In  compliance  with  this  order  I arrived  here  at  or 
about  3 p.  m.  of  the  23d  instant. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  vonr  obedient  servant, 

S.  C.  EATON, 

Captain,  Commanding  Detachment  of  Volunteer  Engineers. 

Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Hall, 

Commanding  Volunteer  Engineers. 


No.  18. 

Deport  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department 
of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida. 

Savannah,  Ga.,  October  23,  1862 — 8 a.  m. 

The  Abolitionists  attacked  in  force  Pocotaligo  and  Coosa whatchie  yes- 
terday. They  were  gallantly  repulsed  to  their  gunboats  at  Mackay’s 
Point  and  Bee’s  Creek  Landing  by  Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  commanding 
district,  and  Col.  G.  P.  Harrison,  commanding  troops  sent  from  here. 
Enemy  had  come  in  thirteen  transports  and  gunboats.  Charleston 
Railroad  uninjured.  Abolitionists  left  dead  and  wounded  on  the  field. 
Our  cavalry  in  hot  pursuit. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

[General]  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. 


180  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


No.  19. 

* 


Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  October  22-23,  1862. 

[Compiled  from  the  reports.] 


Command. 


M 


rS 

0 

3 

o 


£ 


bfi 

P 

’£ 

GQ 

§ 


Remarks. 


Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen 

1st  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry: 

Company  A 

Company  B 1 

Company  C 

Company  D 1 

11th  South  Carolina  Infantry 4 

Company  B,  Is*  Battalion  South  Caro-  1 

lina  Sharpshooters  (Captain  Alls- 
ton’s). 

Nelson’s  Battalion  (Captain  Sligh) 4 

Beaufort  Light  Artillery 1 

Nelson  Light  Artillery  (Virginia,  4 

Captain  [J.  N.]  Lamkin). 

Charleston  Light  Dragoons 

Partisan  Rangers  (Kirk’s)  1 

7th  South  Carolina  Battalion  (In-  3 

fantry). 

3d  South  Carolina  Cavalry 

Company  B (Marion  Men  of  Comba-  1 

hee,  Captain  Heyward). 

Company  D (Captain  Howard) 


17  

13  

14  

8 

2 

22  

5 1 

4 1 

2 


2 

1 

10 

13 

3 

21 

10 


21 

14 

18 

8 

3 

25 


Total. 


21 


124 


18 


163 


Eleven  captured  on  picket. 

One  report  has  8 wounded. 
Strength,  42. 


One  report  has  14  wounded. 
One  report  has  15  wounded. 


(Whether  the  numbers  reported  in 
the  regiment  are  intended  to  cover 
casualties  of  Companies  B and  D 
does  not  appear  from  the  sheets 
on  file.)  Strength  Company  B,  55. 


No.  20. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  8.  Army , commanding  Third  Mili- 
tary District  of  South  Carolina. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Pocotaligo,  S.  C.,  November  4,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  about  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of 
October  22  I was  informed  by  my  pickets  that  the  enemy  were  landing 
in  force  at  Mackay’s  Point  from  twelve  gunboats  and  transports.  I was 
notified  at  the  same  time  that  they  were  ascending  the  Coosawhatchie 
River  with  four  transports.  The  command  was  immediately  ordered 
under  arms  to  march  to  Old  Pocotaligo.  I moved  in  advance  to  the  tele- 
graph office  and  made  the  following  disposition  of  my  forces:  The  La- 
fayette Artillery  (four  pieces),  under  Lieutenant  [L.  F.]  Le  Bleux,  and 
a section  of  the  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery,  under  Lieut.  H.  M. 
Stuart,  were  ordered  to  Coosawhatchie,  a town  lu  miles  distant  from  my 
headquarters  in  McPhersonville  and  5 from  Old  Pocotaligo.  Captain 
[B.  F.]  Wyman’s  company  [Company  T,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers], stationed  near  Coosawhatchie,  and  five  other  companies  of  the 
Eleventh  Regiment  Infantry,  from  Hardeeville,  were  ordered  to  support 
this  artillery.  Colonel  Colcock’s  command  of  five  companies  of  cavalry 
and  two  companies  of  sharpshooters  had  been  recently  notified  to  ex- 
pect an  attack  at  Coosawhatchie,  and  in  that  event  were  instructed  to 
move  to  its  support.  Major  [R.  J.]  Jeffords’  [of  Seventeenth  South 
Carolina  Cavalry  Battalion]  command  of  three  companies  of  cavalry 
was  ordered  from  Green  Pond  to  the  Salkehatchie  Bridge.  With  the 


181 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  8.  C.,  ETC. 

blessing  of  a good  Providence  these  combinations  of  my  forces,  scat- 
tered over  an  extent  of  60  miles,  were  effected  in  time  to  foil  the  enemy. 
I also  telegraphed  to  General  Beauregard’s  headquarters,  to  Brigadier- 
General  Hagood,  commanding  Second  Military  District,  and  to  Briga- 
dier-General Mercer,  at  Savannah,  for  re-enforcements,  requesting  those 
from  Charleston  to  disembark  at  Pocotaligo  and  those  from  Savannah 
at  Coosawhatchie.  Capt.  W.  L.  Trenholm,  who  was  in  command  of  the 
outposts,  consisting  of  two  companies  (his  Butledge  Mounted  Riflemen 
and  Captain  [M.  J.]  Kirk’s  Partisan  Rangers),  was  ordered  to  with- 
draw the  main  body  of  the  pickets,  only  leaving  a few  important  posts 
guarded.  The  force  with  which  I first  engaged  the  enemy  consisted  of 
two  sections  of  the  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery  and  the  Kelson  Light 
Artillery,  eight  pieces,  under  the  command  of  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott;  the 
Charleston  Light  Dragoons,  Capt.  B.  H.  Rutledge  First  [Fourteenth 
on  register]  Battalion  (cavalry),  Major  [J.  IL]  Morgan;  Capt.  D.  B. 
Heyward’s  company  of  cavalry;  Captain  Kirk’s  Partisan  Rangers;  Cap- 
tain [J.  B.]  Allston’s  company  of  sharpshooters,  and  Captain  [A.  C.] 
Izard’s  company  (I),  of  the  Eleventh  Regiment  Infantry,  Lieut.  W.  L. 
Campbell  commanding;  number,  in  all,  475.  As  one-fourth  of  the  cav- 
alry were  horse-holders,  the  force  actually  engaged  was  reduced  to  405 
men.  The  force  of  the  enemy  was  represented  by  prisoners  and  con- 
firmed by  the  statement  of  negroes  who  had  crossed  Port  Royal  Ferry 
to  the  main  land  on  that  day  and  been  captured,  to  be  seven  regiments, 
one  of  which,  I judge,  went  to  Coosawhatchie. 

I sent  in  advance  a section  of  the  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery,  sup- 
ported by  Captain  Allston’s  sharpshooters  and  two  companies  of  cavalry 
under  Major  Morgan,  to  skirmish  with  the  enemy,  while  I took  position 
on  the  Mackay’s  Point  road,  near  Dr.  Hutson’s  residence,  at  a salt  marsh 
skirted  by  woods  on  both  sides  and  crossed  by  a causeway.  After  a short 
encounter  with  the  enemy  (in  which  Major  Morgan,  while  at  the  head 
of  his  command,  was  severely  wounded  in  the  ankle)  my  advance  force 
retired  in  good  order  to  the  main  position.  The  Beaufort  Artillery  was 
posted  in  and  nefir  the  road  commanding  the  causeway,  and  the’ Nelson 
Artillery  in  an  open  field  in  the  rear  of  the  line  of  skirmishers,  and 
screened  from  the  enemy  by  the  trees  in  front.  A dropping  fire  of 
infantry  first  commenced,  which  was  soon  swelled  by  their  artillery. 
Owing  to  the  close  proximity  of  the  trees  fringing  the  other  side  of  the 
swamp  I found  that  my  artillery  was  suffering  severely  in  men  and 
horses,  and  accordingly,  after  holding  my  ground  for  three-quarters  of 
an  hour,  I determined  to  withdraw  to  a second  position  2J  miles  in  rear. 
This  was  done  in  good  order,  Captain  Allston’s  sharpshooters  and  part  of 
Company  I,  Eleventh  Infantry,  covering  our  retreat  and  behaving  for 
the  most  part  with  great  spirit.  At  the  head  of  the  road  I was  joined  by 
Captain  Trenholm  with  the  larger  portion  of  his  company  and  Captain 
Kirk’s.  I assigned  the  command  of  the  cavalry  to  him,  and  ordered  my 
whole  force  to  move  back  across  Pocotaligo  bridge  and  take  up  a position 
among  the  houses  andscattered  trees  of  the  hamlet.  The  artillery  was 
placed  in  position  to  command  the  bridge  and  causeway,  the  Charleston 
Light  Dragoons  being  held  in  reserve.  The  bridge  was  ordered  to  be 
torn  up,  and  this  was  scarcely  done  when  the  enemy  appeared  in  sight 
and  commenced  a continuous  and  rapid  fire  of  musketry  and  rifled  guns. 
Lieutenant  [F.  T.]  Massie,  of  the  Nelson  Artillery,  could  bring  only  one 
piece  of  his  battery  into  action,  owing  to  the  original  smallness  of  his 
company,  now  greatly  reduced  by  death  and  wounds.  Two  pieces  of 
the  Beaufort  Artillery  were  silenced  by  the  disabling  of  the  gunners; 
the  remaining  two  kept  up  a fire  to  the  close  of  the  fight.  The  enemy’s 


182  COASTS  OF  S.  C.5  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

artillery  was  entirely  silenced  and  withdrawn  early  in  the  action.  One 
piece  of  the  Beaufort  Artillery  was  most  judiciously  withdrawn  during 
the  battle  and  posted  300  yards  on  my  right,  under  Sergeant-Major 
Fuller.  It  was  retired  by  a cross-road,  unseen  by  the  enemy,  and  had 
all  the  effect  of  a re-enforcement  from  its  new  and  unexpected  position. 
It  fired  spherical  case  and  the  practice  was  excellent.  At  the  crisis  of 
the  fight  I ordered  up  the  Charleston  Light  Dragoons.  That  gallant 
corps  came  forward  with  an  inspiriting  shout  and  took  position  on  my 
left,  which  wanted  strengthening. 

I had  been  notified  by  telegraph  that  re-enforcements  were  on  the 
way  from  Charleston  and  Savannah  and  Adams  Bun.  The  Nelson 
Seventh  South  Carolina]  Battalion,  of  200  men,  Captain  [W.  H.]  Sligh 
Company  C]  commanding,  was  the  only  re-enforcement  that  arrived 
in  time  for  the  fight,  about  an  hour  and  a half  before  its  close.  As  soon 
as  this  corps  made  its  appearance  near  the  field  I ordered  one  half  to  a 
positiou  commanding  a causeway  some  600  yards  on  my  right  to  pro- 
tect my  flank  and  the  remainder  was  deployed  to  the  front  to  relieve 
my  exhausted  men.  The  arrival  of  this  battalion  gave  me  assurance 
of  victory.  I felt  perfectly  certain  of  success.  The  two  companies  sent 
to  my  right  under  Captain  [J.  H.]  Brooks  [Company  H,  Seventh  South 
Carolina  Battalion]  were  well  handled  ; one  was  deployed  as  skirmish- 
ers and  was  subjected  to  a scattering  fire.  Their  appearance  threatened 
the  enemy’s  flank  and  no  doubt  hastened  his  retreat.  The  enemy  con- 
tinued their  -fire  until  6 p.  m.,  when  it  slackened  and  ceased. 

I then  sent  a squad  of  6 men  of  the  Butledge  Mounted  Kiflemen  over 
the  bridge  to  ascertain  the  position  of  the  enemy.  The  bridge  was  in 
so  damaged  a condition  that  it  was  some  time  before  the  infantry  could 
cross.  The  cavalry  were  obliged  to  make  a circuit  of  5 miles-to  reach 
the  head  of  the  road  by  which  the  enemy  had  retreated.  This  enabled 
them  to  retire  unmolested.  As  sobn  as  the  cavalry  arrived  I sent  two 
companies — Second  Lieut.  L.  J.  Walker,  commanding  Rutledge  Mounted 
Riflemen,  and  Captain  Kirk’s  Partisan  Rangers — to  follow  up  the  re- 
treat. T was  reluctant  to  send  a larger  force,  as  I did  not  know  the 
result  of  the  contest  at  Coosawhatchie,  and,  from  the  telegraph  wire 
being  cut,  was  fearful  it  was  disastrous  to  our  arms.  A locomotive  was 
dispatched  from  Pocotaligo  Station  by  my  aide,  Mr.  R.  M.  Fuller,  and 
2 couriers  by  myself,  to  that  point  to  reconnoiter,  while  I held  my  force 
at  the  junction  of  the  Mackay’s  Point  and  Coosawhatchie  roads,  ready 
to  operate  either  way.  The  cavalry  companies  had  proceeded  but  5£ 
miles  in  pursuit  when  they  were  stopped  by  a bridge  completely  torn 
up  and  destroyed  by  the  enemy  in  their  flight.  This  could  not  be  re- 
paired until  morning.  There  were  abundant  evidences  that  the  retreat 
of  the  enemy  was  precipitate  and  disordered;  100  small-arms  were 
picked  up  and  a considerable  amount  of  stores  and  ammunition.  The 
road  was  strewn  with  the  debris  of  the  beaten  foe.  Forty-six  of  the 
enemy’s  dead  were  found  on  the  battle-field  and  road-side.  Seven  fresh 
graves  were  discovered  at  Mackay’s  Point.  I estimate  their  total  killed 
and  wounded  at  300. 

The  fight,  from  the  first  fire  of  our  advance  to  the  final  retreat  of  the 
enemy,  lasted  from  11.30  a.  m.  to  6 p.  m.  We  had  ample  reason  to 
believe  that  our  small  force  not  only  fought  against  great  odds,  but 
against  fresh  troops  brought  up  to  replace  those  first  engaged.  The 
entire  command  had  been  earnestly  warned  in  orders  not  to  waste  their 
fire.  This  caution  was  urged  upon  them  during  the  action  by  the  com- 
manding officer,  liis  aides,  and  the  company  officers.  I am  satisfied 
from  my  own  observation  they  fired  with  care  and  judgment,  and  yet 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


183 


some  of  our  men  expended  80  rounds  of  cartridges  in  the  battle.  The 
close  vicinity  of  the  ordnance  train,  under  its  energetic  chief,  Gapt.  W. 
W.  Elliott,  enabled  me  to  keep  up  the  supply. 

I beg  to  express  my  admiration  of  the  remarkable  courage  and  tenacity 
with  which  the  troops  held  their  ground.  The  announcement  of  my 
determination  to  maintain  my  position  until  re-enforcements  arrived 
seemed  to  fix  them  to  the  spot  with  unconquerable  resolution.  The  rapid 
and  continuous  volleys  of  the  enemy’s  musketry  were  only  intermitted 
while  fresh  troops  were  being  brought  up  and  while  those  engaged  were 
retired. 

The  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery  fought  with  great  courage  and  their 
pieces  were  admirably  served.  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  whose  name  is 
identified  with  the  history  of  the  defense  of  this  coast  by  many  a daring 
exploit,  behaved  with  his  accustomed  coolness,  skill,  and  determination. 

Captain  Trenholm,  in  command  of  the  cavalry,  again  exhibited  high 
qualities  as  a soldier  on  the  same  ground  where  he  had  won  his  first 
laurels. 

Captain  Edwards,  Company  B,  First  Battalion  (cavalry),  showed  good 
conduct  in  the  command  of  his  company. 

Lieutenant  Walker,  commanding  the  Butledge  Mounted  Riflemen, 
displayed  judgment  and  daring.  His  company  were  as  steady  as  vet- 
erans, using  their  rifles  with  great  precision  and  effect.  When  the 
battle  was  hottest  I ordered  Lieutenant  Walker  to  take  a squad  of  his 
men  and  assist  the  Beaufort  Artillery  to  remove  one  of  their  pieces 
farther  to  the  rear.  This  was  most  gallantly  done  under  a very  severe 
fire. 

Lieutenant  Massie,  of  the  Nelson  Light  Artillery,  was  active  and 
energetic  in  the  service  of  his  guns. 

Captain  Rutledge,  af  the  Charleston  Light  Dragoons,  was  cool  and 
collected  in  both  fights.  His  gallant  corps  was  held  in  reserve,  and 
when  they  took  up  their  position  came  with  a most  inspiriting  cheer, 
which  the  men  engaged  returned,  thus  giving  the  impression  to  the 
enemy  of  decided  re- enforcements. 

The  Government  is  greatly  indebted  to  Captain  Sligh  and  his  brave 
battalion  for  their  timely  aid.  Captain  Sligh  behaved  with  marked 
coolness  and  courage. 

Captain  and  Lieutenant ,*  who  came  immediately  under 

my  notice,  showed  zeal  and  bravery. 

I have  again  to  commend  the  conduct  of  Lieut.  R.  M..  Skinner,  acting 
adjutant  of  the  First  Battalion  (cavalry).  He  was  among  the  foremost 
on  the  field  until  disabled  by  a severe  wound  in  the  arm. 

Inclosed  is  Colonel  Colcock’s  report  of  the  engagement  of  Coosaw- 
hatchie.  It  will  be  seen  that  his  command  behaved  with  spirit  and 
success.  The  most  important  point  to  defend  was  the  railroad  bridge 
over  the  Coosawhatchie  River.  From  this  the  enemy  were  very  quickly 
driven  by  *our  artillery  fire,  but  they  succeeded  in  penetrating  to  a point 
on  the  railroad  west  of  the  bridge  before  the  cavalry  arrived,  one  or  two 
rails  only  being  torn  up  and  the  telegraph  wire  cut.  The  damage  was 
repaired  in  a very  few  minutes. 

After  the  enemy  had  retired  to  their  gunboats  the  cavalry,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [T.  H.]  Johnson,  fired  with  effect  upon  their  crowded 
decks. 

To  the  following  gentlemen,  acting  as  my  personal  staff,  I desire  to 

* The  names  of  these  officers,  though  repeatedly  requested,  have  not  yet  beon 
learned.  The  commanding  officer  of  the  battalion  has  received  instructions  to  for- 
ward them  to  department  headquarters. — W.  S.  W. 


184  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai>.  XXVI. 

express  my  thanks  for  their  zeal,  gallantry,  and  intelligent  discharge 
of  duty:  Captain  [H.  J.]  Hartstene,  C.  S.  Navy,  naval  aide;  Oapt.  W. 
W.  Elliott,  ordnance  officer;  Capts.  George  P.  Elliott  and  John  [H.] 
Screven,  Corpl.  D.  Walker,  and  Privates  Fripp  and  Martin,  of  the  Rut- 
ledge  Mounted  Riflemen,  and  E.  B.  Bell,  of  the  Seventeenth  Battalion 
(cavalry)  South  Caroliua  Volunteers. 

Privates  F.  F.  Davant  and  Ion.  Simons,  of  the  Charleston  Light 
Dragoons,  had  their  horses  shot  and  afterwards  fought  with  their  com- 
pany on  foot. 

My  aide,  Mr.  R.  M.  Fuller,  rendered  valuable  service  by  the  intelli- 
gent discharge  of  his  duty  at  the  telegraph  office.  The  Messrs.  Cuth- 
bert — father  and  son — gave  me  useful  assistance. 

Privates  Fripp  and  Bell  were  seriously  and  Private  Martin  slightly 
wounded.  Captain  Hartstene’s  horse  was  wounded  and  Corporal 
Walker’s  killed.  The  judgment,  coolness,  and  gallaiffry  displayed  by 
Captain  Hartstene  were  as  conspicuous  cn  laud  as  he  has  hitherto 
shown  on  sea. 

I must  express  my  indebtedness  to  Mr.  Buckhalter,  of  the  Charles- 
ton and  Savannah  Railroad,  for  valuable  services  and  for  the  resolu- 
tion and  courage  with  which  he  urged  a train  filled  with  troops,  after 
the  engineer  had  been  killed,  through  an  ambuscade  of  the  enemy  to 
Coosawhatchie. 

When  the  engagement  was  over  ample  re-enforcements  arrived  from 
Savannah  and  Charleston.  The  enemy’s  gunboats  remained  in  a com- 
manding position  off  Mackay’s  Point  on  the  23d,  covering  their  embar- 
kation. My  force  could  not  be  moved  nearer  than  2 miles  without  being 
exposed  to  a destructive  fire.  A detachment  of  cavalry,  under  Captain 
Trenholm,  closely  watched  their  operations,  occasionally  saluted  by 
their  shells. 

On  the  night  of  the  23d  Sergeant  Robinson,  of  the  Rutledge  Mounted 
Riflemen,  made  a reconnaissance  up  to  the  extreme  point,  and  discovered 
that  the  enemy  had  abandoned  the  main-land.  Early  on  the  morning 
of  the  24th  their  gunboats  had  disappeared. 

I inclose  a list  * of  the  casualties  and  a sketch  t of  the  positions  at 
which  the  different  conflicts  took  place. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Capt.  W.  W.  Elliott , C.  S.  Army , Ordnance  Officer  Third  Mili- 
tary District  of  South  Carolina. 

Ordnance  Office, 
Pocotaligo , S.  (7.,  November  17,  1862. 
General:  I respectfully  beg  leave  to  submit  a report  of  ammunition 
captured  from  the  enemy  on  October  22  at  the  battle  of  Yemassee  and 
Pocotaligo : 


Not  found,  but  see  Report  No.  19,  p.  180. 


+ Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.  C.,  ETC. 


185 


Nineteen  rifle  (3-inch)  shells,  loose;  5 boat-howitzer  cases,  of  which 
No.  1 contains  14  rifle  (3-inch)  shells  for  6-pounders;  No.  2 contains  14 
rounds  fixed  shot  for  6-pounders;  No.  3 contains  2 canisters  (12-pound), 
9 cartridges  [and]  1 12-pound  shot;  No.  4 contains  3 canisters  (12-pouud), 
2 6-pound  shell  and  l*6-pound  sho‘ ; No.  5 contains  4 canisters  (12-pound), 
2 12-pound  spherical- case,  [and]  1 6-pound  shell.  Also  46  rifles  and 
muskets  of  different  make  and  caliber,  some  of  which  have  been  issued 
in  the  place  of  those  injured  in  the  fight  by  our  own  men. 

I certify  the  above  to  be  a correct  statement. 

Very  respectfully, 

‘ . W.  W.  ELLIOTT, 

Ordnance  Officer  of  Third  Military  District . 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker.* 


No.  22. 

Reports  of  Col.  C.  J.  Colcock , C.  S.  Army , Third  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

Grahamville,  S.  0.,  November  4,  1862. 

Sir  : A little  after  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  October  22  it  was  re- 
ported to  me  unofficially  that  about  daylight  that  morning  the  Aboli- 
tion fleet,  consisting  of  fourteen  steamers,  with  numerous  barges  at- 
tached, had  proceeded  up  Broad  River.  Prostrated  by  a protracted 
spell  of  fever,  from  which  I had  just  begun  to  convalesce,  I was  too 
weak  to  take  the  field,  but  resumed  the  command  of  my  post.  I ordered 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  to  take  command  of  the  small  force  at  my 
disposal,  which  consisted,  as  you  are  aware,  of  five  companies  of  cav- 
alry and  two  companies  of  sharpshooters,  of  Major  [Joseph]  Abney’s 
battalion  [First  Battalion  South  Carolina  Sharpshooters],  who  was  in 
command,  and  to  proceed  with  the  least  possible  delay  toward  Coosaw- 
hatchie,  to  which  point  I was  informed  that  a portion  of  the  enemy’s 
fleet  was  advancing. 

On  arriving  at  Bee’s  Creek  Hill,  4 miles  from  Coosa whatchie,  Colonel 
Johnson  was  informed  that  a portion  of  the  Abolition  forces  was  land- 
ing at  Seabrook  Island,  in  his  rear,  a point  which  indicated  an  attack 
upon  this  place.  To  meet  this  he  had  to  divide  his  command  and  leave 
three  companies  in  the  vicinity  of  Bee’s  Creek  Hill.  This  information 
was  subsequently  ascertained  t > be  incorrect,  but  too  late  to  make  use 
of  these  forces  in  the  defense  of  Coosawhatchie.  Proceeding  with  three 
companies  of  cavalry  toward  that  point,  upon  arriving  within  2 miles 
of  it  he  ascertained  that  the  enemy  had  already  landed  from  a gunboat 
and  barges  lying  a little  below  the  ocean  landing,  and  was  advancing 
his  column  toward  the  direction  of  Bee’s  Creek  Hill.  He  immediately 
dismounted  his  men  and  formed  them  as  skirmishers  to  meet  the  ex- 
pected attack.  This  movement,  however,  was  only  a feint,  as  they 
soon  about-faced  and  advanced  toward  Coosawhatchie.  The  ground 
being  unfavorable  for  a charge — the  effect  of  which  would  have  neces- 
sarily been  attended  with  severe  loss  to  the  cavalry,  with  a prospect  of 
little  injury  to  the  enemy — Colonel  Johnson  very  judiciously  made  a 
detour  to  the  left,  hoping  to  cut  them  off  before  they  reached  Coosaw- 
hatchie. 

About  this  time  the  train,  with  a portion  of  Colonel  [D.  H.]  Ellis’ 
[Eleventh  South  Carolina]  regiment  and  Captain  [Robert]  Chisolm’s 


186 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.j  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 

company,  of  Major  Abney’s  battalion,  which  had  been  taken  up  within 
a short  distance  of  Ooosawhatchie  as  they  were  marching  along  the 
railroad  track  toward  that  point,  passed  by.  The  enemy  hearing  their 
approach  for  some  distance  (the  two  roads  here  running  parallel  and 
very  close  to  each  other)  availed  themselves  of  the  opportunity  to  am- 
buscade and  fire  into  the  train. 

The  particulars  of  this  disastrous  affair  I will  not  refer  to,  as  I sup- 
pose a full  report  of  all  the  circumstances  will  be  made  by  the  officer 
in  command  of  that  detachment,  who  succeeded  the  late  unfortuuate 
Major  [J.  J.l  Harrison. 

It  seems  that  on  arriving  near  Ooosawhatchie  the  enemy  divided  into 
two  detachments,  one  of  which  ambuscaded  the  train,  as  above  referred 
to,  and  the  other  advanced  to  the  river,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying 
the  railroad  and  turnpike  bridges.  With  timely  forethought  you  had 
fortunately  dispatched  at  an  early  hour  that  morning  for  their  protec- 
tion the  Lafayette  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Le  Bleux  commanding,  and  a 
section  of  Captain  Elliott’s  battery,  Lieutenant  Stuart  commanding. 
These,  supported  by  Captain  Wyman’s  company  of  infantry,  most  gal- 
lantly repulsed  the  enemy  in  their  attack  on  the  bridges  and  drove 
them  in  confusion  toward  their  other  detachment,  which,  beyond  the 
range  of  our  artillery,  had  succeeded  in  cutting  the  telegraph  wire  and 
displacing  a couple  of  rails  on  the  track. 

About  this  time  the  cavalry,  which  had  to  make  a considerable  de- 
tour over  very  unfavorable  ground,  made  its  appearance,  and  the  enemy 
beat  a hasty  retreat,  the  cavalry  pursuing.  Unfortunately  the  enemy 
had  taken  the  precaution  in  advancing  of  destroying  all  the  bridges, 
which  so  retarded  the  propress  of  the  cavalry  as  to  prevent  their  cut- 
ting off  their  retreat  to  their  gunboat  and  barges.  Disappointed  in  this 
object,  Colonel  Johnson  dismounted  his  men,  and  deploying  them  as 
skirmishers,  advanced  to  within  about  130  yards  of  the  gunboat,  where, 
under  the  protection  of  a few  trees,  they  poured  three  volleys  from  their 
rifles  into  the  crowded  decks  and  barges  of  the  enemy,  which  must  have 
done  considerable  execution.  The  companies  composing  this  detach- 
ment consisted  of  Capt.  J.  H.  Howard’s  [company,  D],  A.  B.  Estes 
[company,  E],  (under  the  immediate  command  of  Lieutenant  [W.  B.] 
Peeples),  and  Capt.  George  C.  Heyward’s  [company,  G].  Recovering 
from  their  surprise,  the  enemy  opened  a terrific  fire  of  grape,  shell,  and 
musketry,  in  which  they  were  assisted  by  two  of  their  gunboats  stationed 
half  a mile  lower  down  the  river,  under  whose  enfilading  fire  our  small 
force  had  to  fall  back. 

In  this  affair  I regret  to  inform  you  we  lost  Private  Thomas  B.  Fripp, 
of  Captain  Heyward’s  company,  who  fell  mortally  wounded,  shot  iu 
three  places;  as  gallant  a soldier  and  true-hearted  gentleman  as  ever 
fell  a martyr  in  defending  the  cause  of  liberty.  First  Lieut.  T.  G.  Buck- 
ner, of  Captain  Howard’s  company,  was  also  severely,  but  I hope  not 
mortally,  wounded  in  the  abdomen,  and  Corpl.  Thomas  Farr,  of  the 
same  company,  received  a flesh  wound  in  the  thigh,  from  which  I am 
happy  to  say  lie  is  rapidly  recovering.  That  the  casualties  were  not 
greater  I can  only  attribute  to  the  interposition  of  a merciful  Provi- 
dence, who  protects  those  fighting  in  a righteous  cause.  For  the  cas- 
ualties occurring  in  Major  Abney’s  command  I refer  you  to  that  officer’s 
report,  which  you  will  find  herewith  inclosed.* 

The  enemy’s  boats  retired  immediately  after  the  skirmish,  leaving  in 
their  hasty  retreat  one  of  their  splendid  barges,  capable  of  transporting 


*Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  COOSAWHATCHIE,  S.-C.,  ETC.  187 

70  or  80  men.  The  next  morning  not  a sign  of  the  Abolition  fleet  was 
to  be  seen  in  the  upper  waters  of  Broad  River. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  J.  COLCOCK, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  E.  H.  Barnwell, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant - General . 

Grahamville,  S.  C.,  November  11,  1862. 

Sir  : Two  hours  after  this  train  passed  Grahamville  another  train 
arrived  from  Savannah  with  the  Thirty-second  and Georgia  Regi- 

ments, under  the  command  of  the  gallant  Colonel  [George  P.]  Harrison 
[jr.].  Unfortunately  they  arrived  at  Coosawhatchie  after  the  enemy  had 
retired,  and  thus  were  denied  the  pleasure,  which  they  seemed  ear- 
nestly to  desire,  of  having  a brush  with  the  Abolitionists. 

In  making  my  official  report  of  the  incidents  of  October  22  last  I 
omitted  to  mention  the  arrival  of  the  re-enforcements  from  Georgia.  If 
not  too  late  to  be  embraced  in  General  Walker’s  official  report  I will 
thank  you  to  insert  the  above  paragraph  immediately  after  that  com- 
mencing, “The  particulars  of  this  disastrous  affair  I will  not  refer 
to,”  &c. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

C.  J.  COLCOCK, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

Lieut.  E.  H.  Barnwell, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  23. 

Report  of  Col.  Claudius  C.  Wilson , C.  S.  Army , Twenty-fifth  Georgia 

Infantry. 

Headquarters  Forces  near  Carston’s  Bluff, 

October  24,  1862. 

Captain:  In  accordance  with  orders  from  General  Mercer  the  Twenty- 
fifth  and  Thirtieth  Regiments  were  at  the  depot  of  the  Charleston  Rail- 
road at  12  o’clock  Wednesday  night.  We  were  detained  at  the  depot 
a little  time,  perhaps  two  hours,  waiting  for  the  train  to  be  prepared. 
The  superintendent  of  transportation  of  the  road  stated  that  he  had 
expected  the  train  which  had  carried  Colonel  Harrison’s  command  to 
carry  us.  This  train  having  been  detained  caused  the  delay. 

On  arriving  at  Grahamville  I received  a note  from  Colonel  Colcock, 
commanding  at  that  point,  stating  that  Colonel  Harrison  and  his  com- 
mand were  safe  at  Coosawhatchie  and  that  the  enemy’s  boats  were  retir- 
ing toward  Broad  River,  and  advising  me  to  proceed  to  Coosawhatchie, 
and  my  trains  to  be  prepared  to  move  to  any  point  where  the  attack 
might  be  renewed.  We  proceeded  to  Coosawhatchie  accordingly,  arriv- 
ing about  8 o’clock  a.  m.  on  Thursday.  The  forces  at  that  point  were 
Twenty-fifth,  Thirtieth,  Thirty-second,  and  Forty-seventh  Regiments; 
six  companies  of  South  Carolina  Infantry ; La  Fayette  Artillery,  four 
guns;  Terrell  Artillery,  four  guns,  and  a section  of  the  Beaufort  Artillery. 
From  the  best  information  1 could  obtain  but  a small  force  of  the  Abol- 
itionists approached  Coosawhatchie,  not  more  probably  than  a few 


188 


COASTS  Ol^S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

companies.  This  force  reached  the  railroad  about  half  a mile  this  side 
of  Ooosawhatchie  on  Wednesday,  about  4 o’clock  p.  m.,  just  as  the  train 
from  Hardeeville,  containing  the  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Regiment, 
came  along.  They  fired  into  this  train,  killing  Major  Harrison,  Elev- 
enth South  Carolina  Regiment,  the  fireman  on  the  train,  and  wounding 
the  engineer.  This  train  passed  on  rapidly,  and  the  Abolitionists  pro- 
ceeded to  cut  down  two  telegraph  posts  and  to  take  up  four  rails  of  the 
road.  Before  they  had  time  to  do  any  further  injury,  however,  they 
took  fright  either  at  the  noise  of  Colonel  Harrison’s  train  approaching 
or  of  a few  horsemen  on  the  road  in  their  rear,  and  left  for  their  boats, 
tearing  up  all  the  bridges  behind  them  on  the  road  leading  from  Bee’s 
Creek.  A negro  on  the  train  of  the  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Regiment 
jumped  off  at  the  time  it  was  fired  into,  and  going  back  on  the  railroad 
met  Colonel  Harrison’s  train  and  informed  Colonel  Harrison  of  the  at- 
tack. Being  advised  of  the  state  of  affairs,  Colonel  Harrison  advanced 
cautiously  to  the  point  where  the  rails  were  taken,  repaired  the  road,  and 
reached  Coosa whatchie  about  9 p.  m. 

On  arriving. at  Coosawhatchie*  being  the  senior  officer  present,  I as- 
sumed command  of  the  forces  assembled  there,  and  preceded  at  once 
to  reconnoiter  the  position,  to  strengthen  pickets  already  thrown  out, 
and  to  cover  all  the  approaches  with  small  outposts.  Orders  were  then 
issued  prescribing  the  order  of  formation  in  case  of  attack,  the  point  for 
assembling,  appointing  a field  officer  of  the  day,  and  making  such  disposi- 
tions as  seemed  necessary  to  prevent  confusion  in  case  of  an  alarm.  No 
further  demonstrations  were  made,  however,  by  the  Abolitionists,  and 
on  yesterday  morning  all  the  gunboats  had  retired  from  Coosawhatchie 
River.  On  receiving  orders  yesterday  to  return  I turned  the  command 
over  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry, 
and  have  now  the  honor  to  report  that  the  entire  Georgia  forces  re- 
turned yesterday  without  casualty,  and  are  now  in  their  several  camps. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  C.  WILSON, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Re-enforcements  from  Georgia  at  Coosawhatchie . 

Capt.  George  A.  Mercer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Lieut.  E.  E.  Jefferson , C.  8.  Army , Nelson  Light  Artillery 

( Virginia). 

Camp  Ashby,  S.  C.,  October  24,  1862. 
Captain  : Below  please  find  report  of  the  losses  of  Captain  Lamkin’s 
battery,  Nelson  Light  Artillery,  in  the  two  battles  of  the  22d  instant:* 
We  have  but  17  sound  horses  left.  We  lost  but  one  caisson,  from  the 
team  running  away  with  the  limber  early  in  the  action  and  breaking  it, 
the  Yankees  burning  the  rear  chests  and  axle.  One  of  our  pieces  and 
limber  was  struck  sixteen  times,  another  fourteen  times.  Splinter-bar  of 
one  caisson  nearly  broken  in  two  by  a shell,  a ball  through  the  chests, 


* Nominal  list  shows  4 men  killed  and  2 officers  (Lieutenants  Jefferson  and  F.  T. 
Massie)  and  14  men  wounded. 


Ci»ap.XXVX]  EXPEDITION  ALONG  COASTS  GA.  AND  E.  FLA.  189 

and  several  wheels  injured.  We  had  other  men  slightly  injured,  but  as 
they  are  on  duty  I did  not  think  it  necessary  to  report  them. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

E.  E.  JEFFERSON,  ' 

First  Lieutenant , Comdg.  Nelson  Light  Arty.,  Va.  Vols. 
Capt.  A.  G.  Talley,  Acting  Adjutant. 


OCTOBER  24,  1862. — Affair  on  Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Army. 

Beaufort,  S.  0.,  October  26,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Friday  last  two  boat 
loads  of  rebels  attempted  to  land  on  Saint  Helena  Island,  and  were 
fired  on  and  driven  off  by  the  negro  pickets.  The  people  there  are 
somewhat  alarmed.  I respectfully  request  that  a picket  guard  of  a 
non-commissioned  officer  and  12  men  be*sent  there  to  give  confidence  to 
the  people. 

* I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier- General,  Volunteers. 

Major-General  Mitchel. 


NOVEMBER  3-10,  1862. — Expedition  along  the  coasts  of  Georgia  and  East 

Elorida. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Army. 

No-  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Oliver  T.  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry,  commanding 
expedition. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  TJ.  S.  Army. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  November  12, 1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose,  for  your  information,  the  report  of 
an  expedition  which  I sent  on  the  steamer  Darlington  up  the  rivers  and 
lagoons  on  the  coasts  of  Georgia  and  Florida  between  Saint  Simon’s 
Island  and  Fernandina : 

The  expedition  was  composed  of  Col.  Oliver  T.  Beard,  Forty-eighth 
New  York  Volunteers;  Rev.  Mansfield  French,  chaplain,  IJ.  S.  Army, 
and  Captain  Trowbridge,  with  his  company  (A),  of  the  First  South  Car- 
olina Volunteers  (colored).  I had  two  objects  in  view  in  sending  this 
expedition.  The  first  was  to  prove  the  fighting  qualities  of  the  negroes 
(which  some  have  doubted),  and  the  other  was  to  bring  away  the  people 
irom  the  main-land,  destroy  all  rebel  salt-works,  and  to  break  up  the 
rebel  picket  stations  along  the  line  of  the  coast. 

I am  happy  to  report  that  in  every  point  of  view  the  expedition 


190  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

was  a perfect  success.  Rarely  in  the  progress  of  this  war  has  so  much 
mischief  been  done  by  so  small  a force  in  so  short  a space  of  time. 
Thirteen  different  landings  were  made.  The  pickets  in  every  case 
were  driven  in,  the  salt-works  destroyed,  and  all  the  work  finished  up 
before  the  enemy  could  collect  a sufficient  force  to  overpower  our  men. 

It  is  admitted  upon  all  hands  that  the  negroes  fought  with  a cool- 
ness and  bravery  that  would  have  done  credit  to  veteran  soldiers. 
There  was  no  excitement,  no  flinching,  no  attempt  at  cruelty  when 
successful.  They  seemed  like  men  who  were  fighting  to  vindicate  their 
manhood  and  they  did  it  well. 

I trust  that  you  will  appreciate  the  importance  of  this  little  effort  of 
the  First  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  It  seems  to  me  one  of  the  im- 
portant events  of  the  war — one  that  will  carry  terror  to  the  hearts  of 
the  rebels.  It  discloses  an  objective  point  where  the  hardest  blow  can 
be  dealt  against  this  rebellion.  This  whole  coast  is  intersected  by  bays, 
lagoons,  and  rivers,  which  are  navigable  by  light  draught  steamers,  in 
some  instances,  for  more  than  100  miles  up  into  the  heart  of  the  richest 
part  of  the  Southern  country.  I would  propose  to  have  a number  of 
light-draught  steamers  $ have  them  well  armed  and  barricaded  against 
rifle  shots,  and  place  upon  each  one  a company  of  100  black  soldiers. 
These  are  better  than  white  soldiers  for  this  service,  on  account  of  the 
greater  facility  with  which  they  can  effect  landings  through  the  marshes 
and  thick  woods  which  line  the  banks  of  the  streams.  Each  boat  should 
be  supplied  with  an  abundance  of  spare  muskets  and  ammunition,  to 
put  in  the  hands  of  the  recruits  as  they  come  in.  These  boats  should 
then  go  up  the  streams,  land  at  the  different  plantations,  drive  in  the 
pickets,  and  capture  them,  if  possible.  The  blowing  of  the  steamer’s 
whistle  the  negroes  all  understand  as  . a signal  to  come  in,  and  no  sooner 
do  they  hear  it  than  they  come  in  from  every  direction.  In  case  the 
enemy  arrives  in  force  at  any  landing  we  have  either  to  keep  him  at  a 
proper  distance  with  shells  or  quietly  move  to  some  other  point  and 
repeat  the  same  operation  long  before  he  can  arrive  with  his  forces  by 
land.  In  this  way  we  could  very  soon  have  complete  occupation  of 
the  whole  country.  Indeed  I can  see  no  limit  to  which  our  successes 
might  not  be  pushed  up  to  the  entire  occupation  of  States  or  their 
occupation  by  a large  portion  of  the  rebel  army.  I consider  that  your 
instructions  to  me  cover  this  whole  ground  5 but  in  my  present  posi- 
tion I am  utterly  powerless  to  do  anything.  It  was  with  extreme  diffi- 
culty that  I obtained  the  services  of  the  Darliugton  from  the  military 
department  for  this  one  expedition,  and  I know  not  when- 1 can  again 
procure  her  services.  I can  procure  no  supplies  of  ordnance  or  medical 
stores  without  an  order  from  the  commanding  general,  and  if  he  thinks 
differently,  or  does  not  choose  to  give  them  to  mer,  I am  helpless.  I 
make  no  complaint  of  this  5 it  is  proper  that  the  commanding  general 
should  control  the  supplies  ; but  all  this  routine,  nevertheless,  ties  my 
hands  and  renders  it  utterly  useless  for  me  to  attempt  to  carry  out 
this  great  plan.  I am  convinced  that  it  can  only  be  done  successfully 
by  the  one  who  has  absolute  control  of  the  means  of  transportation  and 
supplies. 

I therefore  beg  leave  to  recommend  that  this  duty  be  assigned  to 
the  military  commander  of  the  department,  and  that  he  be  instructed 
to  carry  out  a plan  which,  in  my  humble  opinion,  will,  if  carried  out 
properly,  save  the  country  a vast  amount  of  life  and  treasure  and  do 
much  to  break  down  this  rebellion. 

I have  also  to  report  that  the  First  Regiment  of  South  Carolina 
Volunteers  is  filling  up  rapidly — 550  are  already  enrolled.  More  than 


Ceav.XXVU  EXPEDITION  ALONG  COASTS  GA.  AND  E.  FLA. 


191 


1,000  able-bodied  negroes  are  now  in  the  employ  of  the  Engineer  and 
Quartermaster’s  Departments.  Were  I to  enlist  from  these  I could  fill 
up  the  regiment  in  one  day ; but  I have  thus  far  abstained  from  any 
interference  with  these  departments. 

The  steamer  Darlington  was  captured  from  the  rebels  by  the  Navy 
and  was  subsequently  transferred  to  the  Quartermaster’s  Department. 
She  returned  from  the  expedition  completely  riddled  with  rifle  balls. 
Fortunately  but  4 of  our  men  were  wounded. 

Great  credit  is  due  to  Colonel  Beard,  Mr.  French,  and  Captain  Trow- 
bridge for  their  bravery  and  skill  in  managing  the  expedition. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier - General. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Oliver  T.  Beard , Forty -eighth  New  York  Infantry , 
commanding  expedition. 

Beaufort,  S.  C«,  November  10, 1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  as  directed  by  you,  I 
have  tried  a portion  of  the  First  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (negro 
regiment). 

On  Monday,  November  3,  with  the  steamer  Darlington,  having  on 
board  Captain  Trowbridge’s  company  of  colored  troops  (62)  I proceeded 
up  Bell  Biver,  Florida,  drove  in  the  rebel  pickets  below  Cooper’s,  and 
destroyed  their  place  of  rendezvous ; thence  proceeded  and  destroyed 
the  salt-works,  and  all  the  salt,  corn,  and  wagons  which  we  could  not 
carry  away,  besides  killing  the  horses ; thence  we  proceeded  to  Jolly 
Biver,  and  destroyed  two  salt-works,  with  a large  amount  of  salt  and 
corn  j thence  proceeded  to  Saint  Mary’s,  and  brought  off  two  families  of 
contrabands,  after  driving  in  the  enemy’s  pickets. 

On  Tuesday,  November  4, 1 proceeded  to  King’s  Bay,  Georgia,  and 
destroyed  a large  salt- work  on  a creek  about  a mile  from  the  landing, 
together  with  all  the  property  on  the  place.  Here  we  were  attacked 
by  about  80  of  the  enemy,  of  whom  we  killed  2. 

On  Thursday,  November  6,  landed  on  Butler  Island  and  brought  off 
80  bushels  of  rice ; also  landed  at  Darien  and  captured  3 prisoners  and 
some  arms. 

Friday,  November  7,  accompanied  by  the  gunboat  Potomska,  Lieu- 
tenant Budd  commanding,  proceeded  up  Sapello  Bitfer.  The  gunboat 
could  proceed  no  farther  than  King’s.  Lieutenant  Budd  came  on  board 
the  Darlington  and  proceeded  up  the  river  with  us  to  Fairhope.  At 
Spaulding’s  we  were  attacked  by  80  or  90  of  the  enemy,  who  were  well 
posted  on  a bluff  behind  trees.  At  this  point  the  channel  runs  within 
50  yards  of  the  bluff.  We  killed  2 of  the  enemy  and  had  1 colored  man 
wounded.  At  Fairhope  we  destroyed  the  salt-works,  some  tan-vats, 
corn,  and  other  things  that  might  be  of  use  to  the  enemy. 

On  return  past  Spaulding’s  we  were  again  attacked  by  the  enemy  in 
greater  force.  We  effected  a landing  and. burned  all  the  buildings  on 
the  place  and  captured  some  arms,  &c.  Five  of  the  enemy  were  killed  j 


192  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AM)  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap  XXVI. 

we  lost  3 wounded.  We  were  greatly  aided  here  by  the  Potomska, 
which  from  a bend  below  shelled  the  woods.  Under  the  guns  of  the 
Potomska  we  landed  at  Colonel  Brailsford’s,  drove  in  a company  of 
pickets  from  his  regiment,  and  destroyed  all  the  property  on  the  place, 
together  with  the  most  important  buildings. 

I am  greatly  indebted  to  Lieutenant  Budd  for  the  success  of  this  day. 

The  colored  men  fought  with  astonishing  coolness  and  bravery.  Por 
alacrity  in  effecting  landings,  for  determination,  and  for  bush  lighting 
I found  them  all  1 could  desire — more  than  I had  hoped.  They  be- 
haved bravely,  gloriously,  and  deserve  all  praise. 

I started  from  Saint  Simon’s  with  62  colored  fighting  men  and  re- 
turned to  Beaufort  with  156  fighting  men  (all  colored).  As  soon  as  we 
took  a slave  from  his  claimant  we  placed  a musket  in  his  hand  and  he 
began  to  fight  for  the  freedom  of  others. 

Besides  these  men  we  brought  off  61  women  and  children.  We  de- 
stroyed nine  large  salt-works,  together  with  $20,000  worth  of  horses, 
salt,  corn,  rice,  &c.,  which  we  could  not  carry  away. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  T.  BEARD, 

Lieut.  Col.  Forty-eighth  New  York  Vols .,  Comdg.  Expedition. 

Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton, 

Military  Governor,  Department  of  the  South. 


NOVEMBER  13-18,  1862. — Expedition  from  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  to  Doboy 

River,  Ga. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Oliver  T.  Beard,  Forty-eightli  New  York  Infantry,  commanding 
expedition. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton , U.  S.  Army. 

Beaufort,  S.  0.,  November  25,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  for  your  information  the  report  of 
our  expedition  to  Doboy  River,  Georgia : 

The  expedition  was  composed  of  three  companies  of  the  First  South 
Carolina  Volunteers  (colored),  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  Oliver 
T.  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  was  in  every  respect 
a success. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  bear  witness  to  the  good  conduct  of  the  negro 
troops.  They  fought  with  the  most  determined  bravery.  Although 
scarcely  one  month  since  the  organization  of  this  regiment  was  com- 
menced, in  that  short  period  these  untrained  soldiers  have  captured 
from  the  enemy  an  amount  of  property  equal  in  value  to  the  cost  of  the 
regiment  for  a year.  They  have  driven  back  equal  numbers  of  rebel 
troops,  and  have  destroyed  the  salt-works  along  the  whole  line  of  this 
coast. 


Chap.  XXVI.  1 EXPEDITION  TO  DOBOY  RIVER,  GA.  193 


Great  credit  is  due  to  Lieutenant- Colonel  Beard  for  liis  energy  and 
skill  in  the  management  of  this  expedition. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier- General. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Oliver  T.  Beard , Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry , 
commanding  expedition. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  November  22, 1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  as  directed  by  you,  I pro- 
ceeded on  the  13th  instant,  on  the  II.  S.  steamer  Darlington,  with  160 
of  the  First  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (colored  regiment),  in  jquest  of 
lumber  and  other  articles  needed  for  the  department.  The  steamer 
Ben  De  Ford,  ordered  by  you  to  report  to  me  at  Doboy  Sound,  did  not, 
owiug  to  the  heavy  fogs  and  adverse  winds,  reach  that  point  until  the 
19th  instant. 

On  the  18th,  accompanied  by  the  U.  S.  gunboat  Madgie,  I proceeded 
to  the  mills  located  on  Doboy  River,  Georgia.  On  reaching  the  mills 
I found  it  necessary  to  reconnoiter  the  land  adjacent  thereto.  To  do 
this  it  was  necessary  to  cross  a narrow  causeway,  leading  from  the  mill 
through  a swamp  to  the  main  highland,  a distance  of  about  450  yards. 
This  highland  was  heavily  wooded,  except  on  the  summit,  which  was 
cleared  and  occupied  with  houses.  My  men  (34  in  number)  had  no 
sooner  passed  across  the  causeway  and  through  the  wood  to  the  clear- 
ing beyond  than  they  were  fired  on  by  the  enemy,  who  were  posted  in 
the  thicket  in  front  and  on  both  sides.  At  the  first  fire  one  man  was  dan- 
gerously wounded  and  a momentary  panic  seized  the  men;  but  it  was 
only  momentary.  They  speedily  rallied  and  opened  a brisk  fire  on  the 
places  occupied  by  the  concealed  enemy.  This  fire  they  kept  up  with 
great  regularity  and  coolness  until  ordered  by  me  to  retire  to  the  end 
of  the  causeway.  They  retired,  firing  as  they  went  with  a slowness  and 
deliberateness  that  could  not  have  been  surpassed  by  veteran  troops. 
Three  others  were  severely  wounded  while  they  were  retiring.  When 
my  men  reached  the  end  of  the  causeway  I had  the  bow  gnu  of  the 
Darlington  directed  on  the  wood,  alter  which  the  fire  of  the  enemy 
ceased,  though  numbers  of  them  were  seen  during  the  two  days  and 
nights  we  remained. 

I succeeded  in  loading  the  steamers  Ben  De  Ford  and  Darlington 
with  from  200,000  to  300,000  feet  of  superior  boards  and  planks,  besides 
securing  a number  of  circular  and  other  saws,  belting,  corn-mills,  and 
other  property,  which  I was  directed  by  you  to  obtain  for  the  use  of 
your  department. 

When  it  is  remembered  that  these  men  never  had  arms  in  their  hands 
until  four  days  before  they  started  on  the  expedition  I think  you  can- 
not fail  to  give  them  great  x>raisefor  standing  a galling  fire  from  a con- 
cealed enemy  so  bravely  and  for  holding  the  causeway  referred  to  dur- 
ing the  two  days  and  nights  required  for  loading  two  large  steamers 
with  valuable  property  in  the  face  of  an  enemy.  To  do  this,  my  men 

13  R R— VOL  xiv 


11)4  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [0 hap.  XXVI. 

worked  day  and  night  without  intermission ; and,  though  short  of  pro- 
visions, I heard  not  a murmur. 

On  the  last  expedition  the  fact  was  developed  that  colored  men  would 
fight  behind  barricades ; this  time  they  have  proved,  by  their  heroism, 
that  they  will  fight  in  the  open  field. 

Captain  Trowbridge  aided  me  greatly.  Captain  Crandel,  of  the  Dar- 
lington, I found  a trifling,  childish  pest.  Captain  Meriam,  of  the  gun- 
boat Madgie,  rendered  me  valuable  assistance. 

I cannot  forbear  to  make  honorable  mention  of  Captain  Hallett,of  the 
Ben  De  Ford.  With  a man  of  less  nerve  and  less  capacity  I would  not 
have  dared  to  take  so  large  a steamer  to  such  a place,  hence  I could 
not  have  obtained  so  valuable  a cargo. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

O.  T.  BEABD, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Forty -eighth  New  Yorh  Volunteers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Vols .,  Mil.  Gov.,  Dept,  of  the  South. 


JANUARY  23-EEBRUARY  1,  1863. — Expedition  from  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  up 
the  Saint  Mary’s  River,  in  Georgia  and  Florida. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  LT.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  T.  W.  Higgiuson,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry  (Union). 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  February  2,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  for  your  information  the  report  of 
Col.  T.  W.  Higginson,  First  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  of  an  expedi- 
tion made  by  a portion  of  his  regiment  up  the  Saint  Mary’s  River,  in 
Georgia  and  Florida. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  report  that  the  expedition  accomplished  every 
object  I had  in  view  in  sending  it  and  was  a complete  success.  Great 
credit  is  due  to  Colonel  Higginson  for  his  bravery  and  skill  in  penetrat- 
ing so  far  into  the  interior  of  a country  filled  with  a warjT,  active  foe, 
with  so  small  a force.  It  foreshadows  clearly  the  very  important  ad- 
vantages which  might  result  to  our  cause  by  the  extensive  arming  of 
the  blacks.  I am  laboring  diligently  toward  this  end  in  this  depart- 
ment, but  the  limited  extent  of  our  lines  renders  it  impossible  for  them 
to  get  to  me  in  any  very  great  numbers.  The  establishment  of  posts 
on  the  main-land  would  enable  them  to  do  so.  No  one  knows  better 
than  the  traitors  now  in  arms  against  our  Government  the  great  element 
of  strength  which  the  cause  of  liberty  and  the  Union  has  in  the  hearts 
and  muscles  of  these  loyal  blacks.  In  my  humble  opinion  it  would  be 
no  misapplication  of  the  best  energies  of  the  Government  should  they 
now  be  directed  toward  the  arming  and  disciplining  of  every  one  that 
can  be  brought  within  our  lines. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier- General  of  Volunteers, 

Hon,  E,  M,  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War, 


Chap.  XXVI.l  EXPEDITION  UP  ST.  MARY’S  RIVER.  195 

Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  T.  W.  Eigginson , Carolina  Infantry  (Union)  .* 

On  Board  Steamer  Ben  De  Ford, 

February  1,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  safe  return  of  the  expedi- 
tion under  my  command,  consisting  of  462  officers  and  men  of  the  First 
Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  who  left  Beaufort  on  January  23, 
on  board  the  steamers  John  Adams,  Planter,  and  Ben  De  Ford : 

The  expedition  has  carried  the  regimental  flag  and  the  President’s 
proclamation  far  into  the  interior  of  Georgia  and  Florida.  The  men 
have  been  repeatedly  under  fire;  have  had  infantry,  cavalry,  and  even 
artillery  arrayed  against  them,  and  have  in  every  instance  come  oft  not 
only  with  unblemished  honor,  but  with  undisputed  triumph. 

At  Township.  Fla.,  a detachment  of  the  expedition  fought  a cavalry 
company  which  met  it  unexpectedly  on  a miduight  march  through  pine 
woods  and  which  completely  surrounded  us.  They  were  beaten  off, 
with  a loss  on  our  part  of  1 man  killed  and  7 wounded,  while  the  oppos- 
ing party  admits  12  men  killed,  including  Lieutenant  Jones,  in  com- 
mand of  the  company,  besides  many  wounded.  So  complete  was  our 
victory  that  the  enemy  scattered  and  hid  in  the  woods  all  night,  not 
venturing  back  to  his  camp,  which  was  5 miles  distant,  until  noon  next 
day,  a fact  which  was  unfortunately  unknown  until  too  late  to  follow 
up  our  advantage.  Had  I listened  £o  the  urgent  appeals  of  my  men  and 
pursued ‘the  fleeing  enemy  we  could  have  destroyed  his  camp;  but  in 
view  of  the  darkness,  his  uncertain  numbers,  and  swifter  motions,  with 
your  injunctions  of  caution,  I judged  it  better  to  rest  satisfied  with  the 
victory  already  gained. 

On  another  occasion  a detachment  of  about  250  men,  on  board  the 
John  Adams,  fought  its  way  40  miles  up  and  down  a river  regarded  by 
the  naval  commanders  as  the  most  dangerous  in  the  department — the 
Saint  Mary’s — a river  left  un traversed  by  our  gunboats  for  many  months, 
as  it  requires  a boat  built  like  the  John  Adams  to  ascend  it  successfully. 
The  stream  is  narrow,  swift,  winding,  and  bordered  at  many  places  with 
high  bluffs,  which  blazed  with  rifle-shots.  With  our  glasses,  as  we  ap- 
proached these  points,  we  could  see  mounted  men  by  the  hundred  gal- 
loping through  the  woods  from  point  to  point  to  await  us,  and  though 
fearful  of  our  shot  and  shell,  they  were  so  daring  against  musketry  that 
one  rebel  actually  sprang  from  the  shore  upon  the  large  boat  which  was 
towed  at  our  stern,  where  he  was  shot  down  by  one  of  my  sergeants. 
We  could  see  our  shells  scatter  the  rebels  as  they  fell  among  them,  and 
some  terrible  execution  must  have  been  done,  but  not  a man  of  this 
regiment  was  killed  or  wounded,  though  the  steamer  is  covered  with 
bullet-marks,  one  of  which  shows  where  our  brave  Captain  Clifton,  com- 
mander of  the  vessel,  fell  dead  beside  his  own  pilot-house,  shot  through 
the  brain  by  a Minie  ball.  Major  Strong,  who  stood  beside  him,  escaped 
as  if  by  magic,  both  of  them  being  unnecessarily  exposed  without  my 
knowledge. 

The  secret  of  our  safety  was  in  keeping  the  regiment  below,  except 
the  gunners;  but  this  required  the  utmost  energy  of  the  officers,  as  the 
men  were  wild  to  come  on  deck,  and  even  implored  to  be  landed-on  shore 
and  charge  on  the  enemy. 

* In  February,  1864,  the  designation  of  this  regiment  was  changed  to  the  “Thirty- 
third  United  States  Colored  Infantry,” 


196 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap,  XXYI. 


Nobody  knows  anything  about  these  men  who  has  not  seen  them  in 
battle.  I find  that  I myself  knew  nothing.  There  is  a fiery  energy 
about  them  beyond  anything  of  which  I have  ever  read,  except  it  be 
the  French  Zouaves.  It  requires  the  strictest  discipline  to  hold  them 
in  hand.  During  our  first  attack  on  the  river,  before  I had  got  them  all 
penned  below,  they  crowded  at  the  open  ends  of  the  steamer,  loading 
and  firing  with  inconceivable  rapidity,  and  shouting  to  each  other, 
“Never  give  it  up.”  When  collected  into  the  hold  they  actually  fought 
each  other  for  places  at  the  few  port-holes  from  which  they  could  fire  on 
the  enemy.  Meanwhile  the  black  gunners,  admirably  trained  by  Lieu- 
tenants Stockdale  and  O’Neil,  both  being  accomplished  artillerists,  and 
Mr.  Heron,  of  the  gunboat,  did  their  duty  without  the  slightest  protec- 
tion and  with  great  coolness  amid  a storm  of  shot. 

This  river  expedition  was  not  undertaken  in  mere  bravado.  Captain 
Sears,  IJ.  S.  Army,  the  contractor  of  Fort  Clinch,  had  urged  upon  the 
War  Department  to  endeavor  to  obtain  a large  supply  of  valuable  bricks, 
said  to  remain  at  the  brick-yards,  30  miles  up  the  Saint  Mary’s,  from 
which  Fort  Clinch  was  originally  supplied.  The  War  Department  had 
referred  the  matter  to  Colonel  Hawley,  who  approved  my  offer  to  under- 
take the  enterprise.  Apart  from  this,  it  was  the  desire  of  Lieutenant 
Hughes,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  U.  S.  steamer  Mohawk,  now  lying  at 
Fernandina,  to  obtain  information  regarding  a rebel  steamer,  the  Berosa, 
said  to  be  lying  still  farther  up  the  river,  awaiting  opportunity  to  run 
the  blockade.  Both  objects  were  accomplished;  I brought  away  all  the 
bricks  and  ascertained  the  Berosa  to  be  worthless. 

I have  the  honor  to  state  that  I have  on  board  the  Ben  De  Ford  250 
bars  of  the  best  new  railroad  iron,  valued  at  $5,000,  and  much  needed 
in  this  department.  This  was  obtained  on  Saint  Simon’s  and  Jekyl’s 
Islands,  Georgia,  from  abandoned  rebel  forts,  a portion  of  it  having 
been  previously  blown  up  and  collected  by  Captain  Steedman,  of  the 
Paul  Jones.  I have  also  eight  large  sticks  of  valuable  yellow-pine 
lumber,  said  to  be  worth  $700,  which  came  from  Saint  Mary’s,  Ga.  There 
is  also  a quantity  of  rice,  resin,  cordage,  oars,  and  other  small  matters 
suitable  for  army  purposes.  On  board  the  John  Adams  there  is  a flock 
of  25  sheep  from  Woodstock,  Fla. 

I have  turned  over  to  Captain  Sears  about  40,000  large-sized  bricks, 
valued  at  about  $1,000,  in  view  of  the  present  high  freights.  I have 
also  turned  over  to  Judge  Latta,  civil  provost-marshal  at  Fernandina, 
4 horses,  4 steers,  and  a quantity  of  agricultural  implements,  suitable 
for  Mr.  Helper’s  operations  at  that  location. 

I have  seen  with  my  own  eyes,  and  left  behind  for  want  of  transpor- 
tation (and  because  brick  was  considered  even  more  valuable),  enough 
of  the  choicest  Southern  lumber  to  load  steamers  like  the  Ben  De 
Ford — an  amount  estimated  at  more  than  1,000,000  feet,  and  probably 
worth  at  Hilton  Head  $50,000.  I also  left  behind,  from  choice,  valu- 
able furniture  by  the  houseful  pianos,  china,  &c.,  all  packed  for  trans- 
portation, as  it  was  sent  inland  for  safe-keeping.  Not  only  were  my 
officers  and  men  forbidden  to  take  any  of  these  things  for  private  use, 
but  nothing  was  taken  for  public  use  save  articles  strictly  contraband 
of  war.  No  wanton  destruction  was  permitted,  nor  were  any  buildings 
burned  unless  in  retaliation  for  being  fired  upon,  according  to  the  usages 
of  war.  Of  course  no  personal  outrage  was  permitted  or  desired. 

At  Woodstock  I took  G male  prisoners,  whom  I brought  down  the 
river  as  hostages,  intending  to  land  part  of  them  before  reaching  Fer- 
uandina  and  return  them  on  parole,  but  in  view  of  the  previous  attack 
made  upon  us  from  the  banks  this  would  have  seemed  an  absurd  stretch 


Ciiap.  XXVI.]  EXPEDITION  UP  ST.  MARY’S  RIVER.  197 

of  magnanimity,  and  by  the  advice  of  Colonel  Hawley  I have  brought 
them  for  your  disposal. 

.At  the  same  place  we  obtained  a cannon  and  a flag,  which  I respect- 
fully ask  for  the  regiment  to  retain.  We  -obtained  also  some  trophies 
of  a different  description  from  a slave-jail,  which  I shall  offer  for  your 
personal  acceptance — three  sets  of  stocks,  of  different  structure,  the 
chains  and  staples  used  for  confining  prisoners  to  the  floor,  and  the  key 
of  the  building.  They  furnish  good  illustrations  of  the  infernal  bar- 
barism against  which  we  contend. 

We  returned  at  the  appointed  time,  although  there  are  many  other 
objects  which  I wish  to  effect,  and  our  rations  are  not  nearly  exhausted; 
but  the  Ben  De  Ford  is  crowded  with  freight  and  the  ammunition  of 
the  John  Adams  is  running  low.  Captain  Hallett  has  been  devoted  to 
our  interests,  as  was  also,  until  his  lamented  death,  the  brave  Captain 
Clifton. 

Of  the  Planter  I have  hitherto  said  nothing,  as  her  worn-out  machin- 
ery would  have  made  her  perfectly  valueless  but  for  the  laborious  efforts 
of  Captain  Eldridge  and  her  engineer,  Mr.  Barker,  aided  by  the  un- 
conquerable energy  of  Captain  Trowbridge,  of  Company  A,  who  had 
the  command  on  board.  Thanks  to  this  they  were  enabled  during  our 
absence  up  the  Saint  Mary’s  to  pay  attention  to  the  salt-works  along 
the  coast. 

Finding  that  the  works  at  King’s  Bay,  formerly  destroyed  by  this 
regiment,  had  never  been  rebuilt,  they  proceeded  ^ miles  up  Crooked 
River,  where  salt-works  were  seen.  Captain  Trowbridge,  with  Captain 
Rogers’  company  (F)  and  30  men,  then  marched  2 miles  across  a marsh, 
drawing  a boat  with  them,  then  sailed  up  a creek  and  destroyed  the 
works.  There  were  22  large  boilers,  2 store-houses,  a large  quantity  of 
salt,  2 canoes,  with  barrels,  vats,  and  all  things  appertaining. 

I desire  to  make  honorable  mention  not  only  of  the  above  officers 
but  of  Major  Strong,  Captain  James,  Company  B;  Captain  Randolph, 
Company  C;  Captain  Metcalf,  Company  G,  and  Captain  Dolly,  Com- 
pany H.  Indeed,  every  officer  did  himself  credit  so  far  as  he  had 
opportunity,  while  the  cheerfulness  and  enthusiasm  of  the  men  made  it 
a pleasure  to  command  them. 

We  found  no  large  number  of  slaves  anywhere;  yet  we  brought 
away  several  whole  families,  and  obtained  by  this  means  the  most  valu- 
able information.  I was  interested  to  observe  that  the  news  of  the 
President’s  proclamation  produced  a marked  effect  upon  them,  and  in 
one  case  it  was  of  the  greatest  service  to  us  in  securing  the  hearty  aid 
of  a guide,  who  was  timid  and  distrustful  until  he  heard  that  he  was 
legally  free,  after  which  he  aided  us  gladly  and  came  away  with  us. 

My  thanks  are  due  for  advice  and  information  to  Captain  Steedman, 
II.  S.  Navy,  of  the  steamer  Paul  Jones;  to  Acting  Master  Moses,  U.  S. 
Navy,  of  the  bark  Fernandiua;  to  Acting  Lieutenant  Budd,  U.  S.  Navy, 
of  the  steamer  Potomska,  for  information  and  counsel,  and  especially  to 
Lieutenant- Commander  Hughes,  U.  S.  Navy,  of  the  steamer  Mohawk, 
for  20  tons  of  coal,  without  which  we  could  not  have  gone  up  the  river. 

1 may  state,  in  conclusion,  that  T obtained  much  valuable  informa- 
tion, not  necessary  to  make  public,  in  regard  to  the  location  of  supplies 
of  lumber,  iron,  rice,  resin,  turpentine,  and  cotton,  and  it  would  afford 
the  officers  and  men  of  this  regiment  great  pleasure  to  be  constantly 
employed  in  obtaining  these  supplies  for  the  Government  from  rebel 
sources;  but  they  would  like  still  better  to  be  permitted  to  occupy  some 
advanced  point  in  the  interior  with  a steamer  or  two  like  the  John 
Adams  and  an  adequate  supply  of  ammunition.  We  could  obtain  to  a 


198 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  3txVI. 


great  extent  our  own  provisions,  could  rapidly  enlarge  our  numbers,, 
and  could  have  information  in  advance  of  every  movement  against  us. 
A chain  of  such  posts  would  completely  alter  the  whole  aspect  of  ther 
war  in  the  sea-board  slave  States,  and  would  accomplish  what  no  accu- 
mulation of  Northern  regiments  can  so  easily  effect. 

No  officer  in  this  regiment  now  doubts  that  the  key  to  the  successful 
prosecution  of  this  war  lies  in  the  unlimited  employment  of  black  troops. 
Their  superiority  lies  simply  in  the  fact  that  they  know  the  country, 
while  white  troops  do  not,  and,  moreover,  that  they  have  peculiarities 
of  temperament,  position,  and  motive  which  belong  to  them  alone. 
Instead  of  leaving  their  homes  and  families  to  fight  they  are  fighting 
for  their  homes  and  families,  and  they  show  the  resolution  and  the 
sagacity  which  a personal  purpose  gives.  It  would  have  been  madness 
to  attempt,  with  the  bravest  white  troops  what  I have  successfully 
accomplished  with  black  ones.  Everything,  even  to  the  piloting  of  the 
vessels  and  the  selection  of  the  proper  points  for  cannonading,  was 
done  by  my  own  soldiers.  Indeed,  the  real  conductor  of  the  whole 
expedition  up  the  Saint  Mary’s  was  Corpl.  Robert  Sutton,  of  Company 
G,  formerly  a slave  upon  the  Saint  Mary’s  River,  a man  of  extraordi- 
nary qualities,  who  needs  nothing  but  a knowledge  of  the  alphabet  to 
entitle  him  to  the  most  signal  promotion.  In  every  instance  when  I 
followed  his  advice  the  predicted  result  followed,  and  I never  departed 
from  it,  however  slightly,  without  finding  reason  for  subsequent  regret. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 


servant, 

Colonel , Comdg.  First  Regiment 

Brigadier-General  Saxton, 

Military  Governor,  &c. 


T.  W.  HIGGINSON, 
South  Carolina  Volunteers . 


JANUARY  27,  1863.— Naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Ga. 

Report  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , C.  S.  Army , commanding  the 
Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  28,  1863. 
Two  enemy’s  gunboats  and  three  steamers  attacked  for  several  hours 
yesterday  Fort  [McAllister],  Genesis  Point,  on  Great  Ogeechee.  Attack 
repulsed ; nobody  hurt  in  fort.  Two  steamers  went  out  this  harbor 
safelv  last  night  and  one  came  in  with  various  army  supplies. 

J * G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector-General. 


JANUARY  29,  1863.— Expedition  to  Daufuskie  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  H.  Mickler,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  Battalion. 

Camp  Palmetto, 

Bluff  ton,  S.  C.,  January  30,  1863. 

Sir:  I beg  leave  respectfully  to  report  to  Lieut,  Col.  E.  II.  Gantt, 
commanding  post,  that,  in  consequence  of  information  furnished  me  by 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  U.  S.  S.  ISAAC  SMITH. 


199 


Mr. Magee  (a  scout  from  district  headquarters),  I proceeded  on 

ooni  inofonf  F»QnfnaPiA  Tsln.nrl  wliprp,  T succeeded 


yesterday,  the  29th  instant,  to  Daufuskie  Island,  where  I succeeded 
in  capturing  12  negroes,  the  only  occupants  of  the  island.  As  they 
proved  to  be  old  persons,  several  of  them  imbeciles,  I did  not  think 
proper  to  remove  them.  An  examination  of  three  hours  disclosed  a re- 
markable accumulation  of  valuable  bed  furniture,  clothing,  provisions, 
dry  goods,  and  sundries,  besides  silver  and  gold  coin  to  the  amount  of 
$188,  which  latter  I have  turned  over  for  the  use  of  the  people  of  Fred- 
ericksburg. I have  also  reported  to  the  quartermaster’s  department  1 
keg  and  2 bags  of  nails,  172  pounds  of  bacon,  2 muskets  and  a shot- 
gun, besides  a small  quantity  of  rope. 

I was  accompanied  by  10  men  from  my  company  and  5 from  company 
B,  Eleventh  Begiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  and  Mr.  Magee. 
Having  only  two  boats  of  limited  capacity  I was  able  to  bring  off  only 
a small  proportion  of  the  spoils.  The  men,  however,  succeeded  in  sup- 
plying themselves  bountifully  with  many  necessary  articles  of  clothing, 
blankets,  &c.  For  prudential  reasons  1 did  not  think  proper  to  burn 
what  I was  unable  to  remove. 

The  men  all  behaved  well.  The  value  of  the  articles  removed  is  not 
less  than  $2,000. 

J.  H.  MICKLER, 

Captain , Commanding  Battalion  at-Bluffton. 

C.  F.  Davis,  Post  Adjutant. 


JANUARY  30,  1863.— Capture  of  U.  S.  steamer  Isaac  Smith,  Stono  River  S.  C. 

REPORTS* 

No.  1.— General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Military  Dis- 
trict. 

No.  3.— Lient.  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding 
expedition. 

No.  4.— Maj.  J.  Welsman  Brown,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  5.— Capt.  John  H.  Gary,  Fifteenth  South  Carolina  Heavy  Artillery. 

No.  1. 


Reports  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  30,  1863. 
Enemy’s  gunboat  Isaac  Smith  (eleven  guns)  surrendered  to-day  in 
the  Stono  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  Yates  after  a short  engagement  with 
siege  ride  guns  in  open  field. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant . and  Inspector- General. 


* For  reports  of  Rear- Admiral  DuPont,  Lieut.  Commander  George  Bacon,  and  Acting 
Master  F.  S.  Conover,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  dated 
December  7,  1863. 


200 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Charleston,  S.  O.,  January  31,  18G3. 

Trap  laid  for  enemy’s  gunboat-steamer  Isaac  Smith  in  Stono  River 
(nine  guns,  Captain  Conover)  succeeded  perfectly  yesterday.  It  sur- 
rendered unconditionally  after  a short  struggle,  badly  crippled,  having 
8 killed,  14  wounded,  and  95  prisoners,  including  10  officers.  Our  loss 
only  1 mortally  wounded. 

******* 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen,,  Boswell  S.  Ripley , G.  S.  Army , commanding  First 

Military  District. 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  O.,  February  4,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copies  of  Special  Orders,  Nos. 
36  and  38,*  from  these  headquarters,  and  the  reports  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonels  Yates  and  Brown  and  Captain  Gary,  showing  how  they  were 
executed.  The  successful  capture  of  the  steamer  reflects  the  highest 
credit  upon  the  officers  and  men  engaged,  and  I heartily  concur  with 
the  commendations  of  their  respective  commanders.  A list  of  prisoners 
taken  is  also  inclosed .*  The  only  casualty  on  our  side  was  the  mortal 
wound  of  Private  McQueen,  of  Alston’s  battalion  of  artillery. 

The  Isaac  Smith  is  but  slightly  damaged,  and  I hope  soon  to  have 
her  and  her  full  armament  ready  for  service.  The  sword  of  the  com- 
manding officer  and  the  flags  of  the  captured  steamer  are  also  trans- 
mitted herewith. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

[Indorsement.] 

* 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida., 

Charleston , S.  C .,  February  6,  1863. 

On  or  about  the  20th  ultimo  I ordered  General  Ripley  to  have  prepa- 
rations made  to  surprise  the  enemy’s  gunboats  in  the  Stono  by  means  of 
boats  or  barges  with  muffled  oars.  Shortly  after  he  reported  that  prob- 
ably it  might  be  preferable  to  put  eight  or  ten  guns  suddenly  in  position 
on  the  west  side  of  the  Stono  during  the  night,  so  as  to  cut  off  the  gun- 
boats when  they  came  up  the  river.  This  proposition  was  approved  by 
me,  provided  the  ground  afforded  cover  for  such  a mode  of  attack.  He 
offered  to  send  Lieut.  Col.  J.  [A.]  Yates  to  make  the  necessary  recon- 
naissances. This  excellent  officer  went  and  reported  favorably  on  his 
return.  I then  ordered  the  attack  to  be  made  with  as  many  rifled  siege 
guns  and  guns  from  the  siege  train  as  could  find  cover  there  from  view, 
properly  supported  by  infantry,  guarding  the  approaches  from  Edisto 


* Not  found. 


Chap,  XXVI,] 


CAPTURE  OF  U.  S.  S.  ISAAC  SMITH. 


201 


with  cavalry.  I ordered  also  three  rifled  24-pounder  guns  to  he  put 
in  position  at  or  about  Grim  ball’s  and  two  more  at  or  about  Battery 
Island  (both  positions  situated  on  the  east  side  of  the  Stono),  to  assist 
in  the  attack,  taking  advantage  of  whatever  shelter  those  localities  af- 
forded, the  expedition  to  take  place  as  soon  and  as  secretly  as  practica- 
ble. I left  its  details  to  General  Ripley,  and  well  lias  he  (Colonel  Yates), 
and  all  who  took  part  in  it,  executed  my  instructions.  The  vessel  has 
been  secured  and  will  be  speedily  repaired  ^and  ready  for  service  as  a 
guard-boat  in  this  harbor.  She  is  said  to  be*  very  fast.  Her  armament 
will  be  much  reduced,  aud  the  guns  taken  from  her  will  be  most  use- 
fullv  employed  here  and  at  Savannah. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


*No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates , First  South  Carolina  Artillery , 
commanding  expedition. 

Headquarters  Special  Expedition, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  February  1,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  instruc- 
tions’from  district  headquarters,  a secret  expedition  was  organized  for 
the  purpose  of  attacking  the  enemy’s  gunboats  in  Stono  River,  consist- 
ing of  the  following  troops : The  siege  train — composed  of  Capt.  B.  C. 
Webb’s  company  (A)  and  Lieut.  S.  W.  Willson,  jr.,  commanding  Com- 
pany B — commanded  by  Maj.  Charles  Alston,  jr. ; Capt.  F.  C.  Schulz’s 
company  (F),  Palmetto  Light  Artillery  Battalion ; light  battery,  manned 
by  Capt.  F.  H.  Harleston’s  company  (D),  First  South  Carolina  Artillery 
(regulars);  one  Parrott  gun,  in  charge  of  Lieut.  T.  E.  Gregg,  Third 
Howitzers  (siege  train);  Capt.  John  C.  Mitcliel’s  company  (I),  First 
South  Carolina  Artillery  (regulars).  Company  H,  Capt.  S.  M.  Roof, 
and  Company  I,  Lieut.  M.  Gunter  commanding  (Twentieth  Regiment 
South  Carolina  Volunteers),  acted  as  sharpshooters. 

On  the  afternoon  of  January  30,  at  4.30  o’clock,  the  enemy’s  gunboat 
Isaac  Smith,  mounting  one  30-pounder  Parrott  gun  and  eight  8 -inch 
heavy  columbiads,  came  up  the  Stono  River,  passing  our  batteries 
(which  were  masked  at  Legare’s  Point  Place  and  at  Grimball’s,  on  John’s 
Island),  and  came  to  anchor  a little  above  them.  She  was  immediately 
fired  upon  from  our  guns  posted  at  Grimball’s,  on  James  Island,  when 
she  attempted  to  make  good  her  escape,  fighting  our  batteries  (which 
had  then  opened)  on  John’s  Island  as  she  passed.  She  succeeded  in 
getting  as  far  as  Legare’s  Point  Place,  at  which  point  she  was  disabled 
by  three  shots  striking  her  machinery,  when  she  dropped  anchor  and 
unconditionally  surrendered*  We  took  prisoners  her  entire  crew,  con- 
sisting of  11  officers,  105  men,  and  3 negroes. 

The  enemy’s  loss  was  25  killed  and  wounded;  on  our  side  1 man 
wounded  (since  died). 

Major  Alston  commanded  the  batteries  at  Grimball’s,  on  John’s 
Island;  Captain  Harleston  those  at  Point  Place.  Captain  Mitchel  com- 
manded the  sharpshooters.  Lieut.  Charles  Inglesby,  First  South  Caro- 
lina Artillery,  acted  as  adjutant. 

The  officers  and  men  under  my  command  behaved  with  great  coolness 
and  bravery,  fighting  their  guns  without  breastworks,  entirely  exposed 
to  the  enemy’s  fire  within  200  or  300  yards. 


202 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  FAST  FLA.  [CjtA*.  XXVI. 


The  Smith  has  been  towed  up  the  Stono  and  put  under  the  guns  of 
Fort  Pemberton. 

In  closing  my  report  I will  not  omit  to  mention  the  very  signal  serv- 
ice rendered  by  the  Stono  Scouts,  and  also  Oapt.  John  [B.  L.]  Walpole. 

The  members  of  the  Signal  Corps  detailed  to  accompany  the  expedi- 
tion discharged  their  duties  with  great  efficiency. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

• JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Expedition. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Maj.  J.  Welsman  Brown , Second  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Headquarters, 

Secessionville,  S.  (7.,  February  1,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report: 

Pursuant  to  Special  Orders,  No.  6,  Headquarters  East  James  Island, 
on  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday,  the  27th  ultimo,  I detailed  25  men  from 
Company  B,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery  Volunteers,  and  the  same 
number  from  Company  K,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Lieuten- 
ants [John  A.]  Bellinger  and  [F.]  Lake;  and  also  50  men  from  the 
Eighth  Battalion  Georgia  Volunteers,  under  charge  of  Lieutenants  [R.] 
Hays  and  [George]  Johnson,  to  act  as  sharpshooters,  and  moved  two 
rifled  24-pounders  to  Legare’s  place,  on  Stono  River.  We  reached  the 
position  indicated  about  7 p.  m.  and  concealed  the  guns  in  the  woods. 
The  night  was  exceedingly  cold  and  wet,  and  this  circumstance,  together 
with  the  fact  that  the  command  was  exhausted  by  the  labor  of  hauling 
the  guns  by  hand  over  a very  bad  road,  prevented  my  placing  the  pieces 
in  position  that  night. 

The  next  morning,  Wednesday  [28th],  three  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats 
were  discovered  below,  near  Cole’s  Island,  and  so  situated  as  to  be  in 
full  view  of  our  operations,  should  we  have  attempted  to  erect  our  plat- 
forms during  daylight.  I therefore  kept  guns  and  men  under  cover 
and  waited  until  after  dark.  After  a hard  night’s  work  the  platforms 
were  finished  and  every  arrangement  made  to  comply  with  my  instruc- 
tions, which  were  in  effect  to  allow  the  enemy’s  vessels  to  pass  my  posi- 
tion unmolested  on  their  way  up  the  river  and  not  to  open  fire  until 
they  returned  or  began  the  attack  upon  me. 

Nothing  occurred  until  Friday  afternoon  [30th],  about  4 o’clock,  when 
the  approach  of  a three-masted  gunboat  was  announced.  I allowed  her 
to  pass  my  battery,  which  she  fortunately  did  without  suspicion,  and 
immediately  moved  my  guns  from  their  concealment  to  the  platforms, 
shifted  them  from  the  traveling  trunnion  beds,  and  awaited  the  return 
of  the  boat.  In  a short  time  a furious  cannonade  began  up  the  river, 
but  with  what  effect  I could  not  see,  as  the  trees  obscured  the  view. 
Soon,  however,  the  boat  rounded  the  point  into  sight,  evidently  crip- 
pled, but  keeping  up  a running  fight  with  the  shore  batteries  above  my 
position  on  each  side  of  the  river.  I was  about  to  order  my  guns  to 
open  upon  her  when  I perceived  that  she  had  a white  flag  flying,  in 
token  of  her  surrender.  Just  at  this  moment  nnother  gunboat  was 


Chap.  XXVI.) 


CAPTURE  OF  U.  S.  S.  ISAAC  SMITH. 


203 


observed  approaching,  which  steamed  up  within  1J  miles  of  my  position 
and  fired  a shot  at  the  battery  on  John’s  Island.  Finding  that  she  did 
not  intend  going  higher  up,  or  that  if  she  did  so  she  might  rescue  or 
destroy  the  prize,  as  she  now  began  to  throw  shot  and  shell  at  the 
latter,’ I opened  my  guns  upon  her  with  good  effect.  She  replied,  but 
without  damage  to  us,  and  retreated  down  and  across  the  river.  I kept 
up  fire  until  she  got  beyond  range,  striking  her  repeatedly.  She  con- 
tinued to  throw  an  occasional  shot  or  shell  toward  the  opposite  side  of 
the  river  until  dark  and  during  the  night  disappeared. 

On'Saturday  morning  [31st],  at  8 o’clock,  another  gunboat  approached 
and  shelled  tlie  village  of  Legareville,  also  throwing  several  projectiles 
within  our  vicinity ; but  she  did  not  come  near  enough  to  warrant  my 
attacking  her.  In  the  afternoon  she  again  steamed  up  and  opened  on 
the  prize  captured  the  night  before  and  upon  my  batteries.  I returned 
the  fire,  striking  her  several  times,  and  she  withdrew.  The  next  morn- 
ing (Sunday,  1st  instant)  I brought  my  guns  back  to  this  post  in  obe- 
dience to  orders. 

Both  officers  and  men  under  my  command  behaved  as  well  as  possi- 
ble. They  were  not  only  cool  and  prompt  under  fire,  but  proved  them- 
selves model  soldiers  by  bearing  without  a murmur  the  hardships  neces- 
sarily entailed  by  our  position,  for  the  weather,  particularly  during  the 
night,  was  extremely  severe,  and  the  secrecy  to  be  observed  debarred 
the  comforts  of  fire  or  shelter.  I have  no  casualties  to  report. 

I am,  captain,  yours,  respectfully, 

J.  WELSMAN  BROWN, 

Major , Second  South  Carolina  Volunteer  Artillery . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  H.  Gary , Fifteenth  South  Carolina  Heavy  Artillery. 

Battery  Means, 

James  Island , S.  (7.,  February  1,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report: 

Pursuant  to  Orders,  No.  38,  District  Headquarters,  I was  detailed  by 
Major  [J.  J.]  Lucas,  commanding  Western  Division,  James  Island,  to 
take  charge  of  the  batteries  stationed  at  Mr.  Thomas  Grimball’s,  J ames 
Island,  consisting  of  three  24-pounder  rifled  guns,  manned  by  detach- 
ments from  Companies  A,  B,  and  C,  Lucas’  battalion  of  artillery, 
[Fifteenth  South  Carolina],  Confederate  States  Provisional  Army,  com- 
manded by  Lieuts.  W.  G.  Ogier,  E.  B.  Colhoun,  and  Capt.  T.  B.  Hayne, 
respectively.  Between  the  hours  of  3 and  4 o’clock  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  30th  ultimo  the  gunboat  Isaac  Smith  made  her  appearance  and 
anchored  off  Mr.  Thomas  Grimbalfs,  some  500  yards  distant  from  my 
batteries.  After  waiting  some  twenty  minutes  and  the  Abolitionists 
showing  no  disposition  to  land  I ordered  my  batteries  to  open  fire,  which 
they  did  in  handsome  style  and  apparently  with  great  precision.  The 
enemy  immediately  returned  the  fire  with  grape,  canister,  shell,  and 
Parrott  shot,  at  the  same  time  slipping  her  cable  and  retreating  down 
the  river.  While  retreating  the  firing  was  kept  up  on  both  sides  briskly. 
A grape-shot  from  the  enemy  struck  the  gun  commanded  by  Captain 


204 


COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Hayne,  but  without  damage.  The  firing  was  continued  by  my  batteries 
until  the  Smith  struck  her  flag. 

I have  no  casualties  to  report.  I cannot,  however,  close  this  report 
without  calling  attention  to  the  gallantry  and  spirit  displayed  both  by 
the  officers  and  men  whom  I had  the  honor  to  command.  I would  also 
mention  Messrs.  H.  W.  Rice  and  Pettigrew  Mellard,  of  the  Signal  Corps, 
as  having  rendered  efficient  service. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  H.  GARY, 

Captain , Commanding  Batteries  at  Thomas  GrimbalVs. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JANUARY  31,  1863. — Attack  on  Blockading  Squadron  off  Charleston,  S.  C. 

REPORTS,  ETC.* 

No.  1. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  with  correspondence  and  proclamation.# 
No.  2. — Flag-Officer  Duncan  N.  Ingraham,  C.  S.  Navy. 

No.  3. — Commander  John  R.  Tucker,  C.  S.  Navy. 

No.  4. — Col.  Ambrose  A.  Lechler,  One  hundred  and  seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  In- 
fantry, et  al. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , C.  S.  Army , icitli  correspondence  and 

proclamation. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  31,  1863.  t 

# m * * * # # . 

Last  night  Confederate  gunboats  Chicora  and  Palmetto  State,  under 
Commodore  Ingraham,  sank  (outside)  the  steamer  Mercedita.  Captain 
Tucker  set  fire  to  one  vessel,  which  struck  her  flag,  and  thinks  he  sank 
another.  Our  loss  and  damage  none.  Enemy’s  whole  fleet  has  dis- 
persed north  and  south.  I am  going  to  proclaim  blockade  of  Charles- 
ton raised. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  January  31,  1863. 

Baron  de  St.  Andre, 

Consul  of  France , Charleston , 8.  C. : 

Sir:  I am  instructed  to  call  your  attention  officially  to  the  fact  that 
the  Confederate  States  naval  forces  on  this  station  this  morning,  about 
the  hour  of  5 o’clock,  attacked  the  United  States  Blockading  Squadron 
off'  the  harbor  of  Charleston,  at  their  habitual  place  of  anchorage,  and 

* For  reports  of  Rear-Admiral  DuPont,  Capts.  William  R.  Taylor  and  Henry  S. 
Stellwagen,  Commander  William  E.  LeRoy  aud  Acting  Lieut.  P.  G.  Watmough,  U.  S. 
Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  dated  December  7,  1863. 
t Portion  of  dispatch  liere  omitted  is  piiuted  on  p.  20u. 


Chap.^XXYLJ  attack  on  blockading  squadron.  205 

after  a brief  engagement  sunk,  dispersed,  or  drove  off  and  out  of  sight 
for  the  time  the  whole  hostile  fleet.  And  I am  further  instructed  to 
call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  this  summary  destruction  and  dis- 
persion of  the  fleet  of  the  United  States,  constituting  the  blockading 
force  of  this  harbor,  by  the  superior  force  of  the  Confederate  States, 
operates  as  an  entire  defeasance  of  the  blockade  of  the  port  of  Charles- 
ton and  of  its  operation.  The  rule  of  public  law  requiring  that  there 
.should  be  a notification  of  a new  blockade  before  foreign  nations  can 
be  affected  with  an  obligation  of  observing  it  as  a blockade  still  exist- 
ing, it  is  deemed  necessary  to  give  you  now  this  formal  notification  of 
the  fact. 

Should  you  desire  I shall  be  pleased  to  place  at  your  disposition  a 
steamer  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  yourself  of  the  unobstructed  con- 
dition of  this  port. 

Eespectf uily,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 
Brigadier -General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 

A similar  letter  sent  to  Senor  Francisco  Munez  Moncada,  Her  Catholic 
Majesty’s  consul,  Charleston. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  31,  1863. 
Some  of  enemy’s  vessels  have  returned,  but  for  several  hours  (three 
or  four)  none  were  in  sight.  Was  blockade  raised  or  not?  What  says 
Attorney- General?  Shall  I publish  my  proclamation,  written  mean- 
while? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  January  31,  1863. 

Capt.  D.  N.  Ingraham, 

Commanding  Naval  Station , Charleston , S.  C. : 

My  Dear  Commodore:  Permit  me  to  congratulate  you  and  the  gal- 
lant officers  and  men  under  your  command  for  your  brilliant  achieve- 
ment of  last  night,  which  will  be  classed  hereafter  with  those  of  the 
Merrimac  and  Arkansas. 

May  your  efforts  be  always  crowned  with  the  same  success  is  the 
sincere  wish  of  your  friend, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


PROCLAMATION. 

Headquarters  Land  and  Naval  Forces, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  January  31,  1863. 

At  about  5 o’clock  this  morning  the  Confederate  States  naval  force 
on  this  station  attacked  the  United  States  Blockading  Fleet  off  the 
harbor  of  the  city  of  Charleston,  and  sunk,  dispersed,  or  drove  off  and 
out  of  sight  for  the  time  the  entire  lioitile  fleet. 


206  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cuav.  XX VI. 

Tlierefore  we,  the  undersigned,  commanders  respectively  of  the  Con- 
federate States  naval  and  land  forces  in  this  quarter,  do  hereby  formally 
declare  the  blockade  by  the  United  States  of  the  said  city  of  Charles- 
ton, S.  C.,  to  be  raised  by  a superior  force  of  the  Confederate  States 
from  and  after  this  31st  day  of  January,  A.  D.  1863. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

D.  N.  INGRAHAM, 

Flag-Officer  Commanding  Naval  Forces  in  South  Carolina. 


Official: 


THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Spanish  Consulate, 
Charleston , February  1,  1863. 

Mr.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Brig.  Gen.  and  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Dept,  of  S.  (7.,  Ga.,  and  Fla. : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I take  pleasure  in  replying  to  your  communication 
of  the  31st  of  January  last,  respecting  the  notification  of  the  raising  the 
blockade  at  Charleston  by  the  naval  force  of  the  Confederate  States. 

I should  inform  you  that  I remitted  a copy  of  the  same  communication 
to  his  excellency  the  minister  plenipotentiary  at  Washington.  I thank 
you  Tor  your  kind  offer  in  placing  a steamer  at  my  disposal  so  that  I 
may  go  and  satisfy  myself  as  to  the  condition  of  the  port.  Having  gone 
out  in  company  with  the  French  consul,  and  arrived  at  the  point  where 
the  Confederate  naval  forces  were,  we  discovered  three  steamers  and  a 
pilot  boat  returning.  I must  also  mention  that  the  British  consul  at 
this  port  manifested  to  me  verbally  that  some  time  subsequent  to  this 
naval  combat  not  a single  blockading  vessel  was  in  sight. 

I avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  offer  you  my  sincere  respects. 

MUNEZ  DE  MONCADA, 

Spanish  Consul. 


Charleston,  February  2,  1863. 
(Received  Richmond,  February  2.) 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

After  consulting  law  authorities  Commodore  Ingraham  and  myself 
have  issued  proclamation  raising  blockade  of  Charleston.  Shall  send 
copy  to  Government  agent  at  Nassau  and  officer  commanding  enemy’s 
fleet,  which  has  returned  in  front  of  this  harbor. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Flag-Officer  Duncan  N.  Ingraham , C.  S.  Navy. 

Office  Naval  Station, 
Charleston , S.  C .,  February  2,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  upon  the  night  of  the  30th 
ultimo  I left  the  wharf  at  this  place  in  company  with  the  steam-ram 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ATTACK  ON  BLOCKADING  SQUADRON.  207 

Chicora,  Commander  John  R.  Tucker,  at  11.15  o’clock,  and  steamed 
slowly  down  to  the  bar,  as  from  our  draught  we  could  not  cross  until 
high  water.  At  4.30  o’clock  we  crossed  the  bar  with  about  a foot  and 
a half  to  spare,  and  soon  after  made  a steamer  at  anchor ; made  for  her 
and  directed  Lieutenant-Commander  [John]  Rutledge  to  strike  her  with 
our  prow.  When  quite  near  we  were  hailed  : u What  steamer  is  that  ? 
Drop  your  anchor  or  you  will  be  into  us.”  He  was  informed  that  it  was 
the  Confederate  steamer  Palmetto  State.  At  this  moment  we  struck 
her  and  fired  the  7-inch  gun  into  her  as  he  gave  an  order  to  fire.  I 
then  inquired  if  he  surrendered,  and  was  answered  in  the  affirmative. 
I then  directed  him  to  send  a boat  on  board,  which  was  done.  After 
some  delay  Lieutenant  Abbott,  commanding,  came  on  board  and  in- 
formed me  that  the  vessel  was  the  United  States  steamer  Mercedita, 
Commander  Stellwagen,  and  that  she  was  in  a sinking  condition,  and 
had  a crew  of  158,  all  told,  and  wished  to  be  relieved  ; that  all  his  boats 
were  lowered  without  the  plugs  being  in  and  were  full  of  water. 

At  this  time  the  Chicora  was  engaged  with  the  enemy  and  the  alarm 
was  given.  I knew  our  only  opportunity  was  to  take  the  enemy  un- 
awares, as  the  moment  he  was  under  way,  from  his  superior  speed,  we 
could  not  close  with  him.  I then  directed  Lieutenant  Rutledge,  com- 
manding, to  require  from  Lieutenant-Commander  Abbott  his  word  of 
honor  for  his  commander,  officers,  and  crew  that  they  would  not  serve 
against  the  Confederate  States  until  regularly  exchanged,  when  he  was 
directed  to  return  with  his  boat  to  his  vessel  to  render  what  assistance 
he  could.  I then  stood  to  the  northward  and  eastward,  and  soon  after 
made  another  steamer  getting  under  way.  We  stood  for  her  and  fired 
several  shots  at  her,  but  as  we  had  to  fight  the  vessel  in  a circle  to  bring 
the  different  guns  to  bear  she  was  soon  out  of  our  range.  In  this  way 
we  engaged  several  vessels,  they  keeping  at  long  range  and  steering  to 
the  southward.  Just  as  the  day  broke  we  made  a large  steamer  (sup- 
posed to  be  the  Powhatan)  on  starboard  bow,  with  another  steamer  in 
company,  which  had  just  got  under  way.  They  stood  to  the  southward 
under  full  steam  and  opened  their  batteries  upon  the  Chicora,  which 
was  some  distance  astern  of  us.  I then  turned  and  stood  to  the  south- 
ward to  support  the  Chicora,  if  necessary,  but  the  enemy  kept  on  his 
course  to  the  southward.  I then  made  signal  to  Commander  Tucker  to 
come  to  anchor,  and  led  the  way  to  the  entrance  of  Beach  Channel, 
where  we  anchored  at  8.45  a.  m.,  and  had  to  remain  seven  hours  for  the 
tide,  as  the  vessels  cannot  cross  the  bar  except  at  high  water.  The  sea 
was  perfectly  smooth,  as  much  so  as  in  the  harbor.  Everything  was 
most  favorable  for  us  and  gave  us  no  opportunity  to  test  the  sea  quali- 
ties of  the  boats.  The  engines  worked  well  and  we  obtained  a greater 
speed  than  they  had  ever  before  attained. 

I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  the  conduct  of  Commander  Tucker 
and  Lieutenant-Commander  Rutledge.  The  former  handled  his  vessel 
in  a beautiful  manner  and  did  the  enemy  much  damage.  I refer  you  to 
his  official  report.  Lieutenant-Commander  Rutledge  also  fought  the 
Palmetto  State  in  a manner  highly  gratifying  to  me. 

Every  officer  and  man  did  his  duty  nobly  and  deserves  well  of  their 
country. 

We  had  but  little  opportunity  of  trying  our  vessels,  as  the  enemy  did 
not  close,  and  not  a single  shot  struck  either  vessel. 

I am  highly  indebted  to  Commander  [H.  J.]  Hartsteue,  who  gallantly 
volunteered  to  take  chargeof  three  steamers,  with  50  men  on  board,  who 
accompanied  us  in  case  we  should  need  their  services,  but  they  could 
not  get  over  the  bar,  but  joined  us  after  daylight  at  the  North  Channel, 


208 


COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


and  rendered  us  their  assistance  in  getting  through  the  channel,  which 
is  very  narrow. 

Of  the  conduct  of  Mr. Gladden,  the  pilot  of  the  Palmetto  State, 

I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms.  He  was  perfectly  cool  under  the  great 
responsibility  he  had  in  taking  the  vessel  over  at  night  with  so  great  a 
draught,  and  during  the  action  rendered  me  great  assistance  in  pointing 
out  the  vessels  as  we  approached  them  in  the  uncertain  light. 

I send  the  reports  of  Commander  Tucker  and  Lieutenant-Commander 
Butledge.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  N.  INGKA'HAM, 
Flag-  Officer , Commanding. 

Hon.  S.  E.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy , Richmond , Va . 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Commander  John  R.  Tucker , C.  S.  Navy. 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Chicora, 

January  31,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  order  I got  under  way  at  11.30  p.  m.  yes- 
terday and  stood  down  the  harbor  in  company  with  the  Confederate 
States  steamer  Palmetto  State,  bearing  your  flag.  We  crossed  the  bar 
at  4.40  a.  in.,  and  commenced  the  action  at  5.20  a.  m.  by  firing  into  a 
schooner- rigged  propeller,  which  we  set  on  fire,  and  have  reason  to  be- 
lieve sunk,  as  she  was  nowhere  to  be  seen  at  daylight.  We  then  en- 
gaged a large  side-wheel  steamer  twice  our  length  from  us,  on  the  port 
bow,  firing  three  shots  into  her  with  telling  effect,  when  she  made  a 
run  for  it.  This  vessel  was  supposed  to  be  the  Quaker  City.  We  then 
engaged  a schooner-rigged  propeller  and  a large  side-wheel  steamer, 
partially  crippling  both  and  setting  on  fire  the  latter,  causing  her  to 
strike  her  flag.  At  this  time  the  latter  vessel,  supposed  to  be  the  Key- 
stone State,  was  completely  at  my  mercy,  having  a raking  position 
astern,  distance  some  200  yards.  I at  once  gave  the  order  to  cease  fir- 
ing upon  her  and  directed  Lieutenant  Bier,  first  lieutenant  of  the  Chi- 
cora, to  man  a boat  and  take  charge  of  the  prize;  if  possible,  to  save 
her.  If  that  was  not  possible  to  rescue  the  crew.  While  the  boat  was 
in  the  act  of  being  manned  I discovered  that  she  was  endeavoring  to 
make  her  escape  by  working  her  starboard  wheel,  the  other  being  dis- 
abled. Her  colors  being  down,  I at  once  started  in  pursuit  and  re- 
newed the  engagement.  Owing  to  her  superior  steaming  qualities  she 
soon  widened  the  distance  to  some  2,000  yards.  She  then  hoisted  her 
flag  and  commenced  firing  her  rifled  gun,  her  commander,  by  this  faith- 
less act,  placing  himself  beyond  the  pale  of  civilized  and  honorable 
warfare.  We  next  engaged  two  schooners — one  brig  and  one  bark- 
rigged  propeller — but  not  having  the  requisite  speed,  were  unable  to 
bring  them  to  close  quarters.  We  pursued  them  6 or  7 miles  seaward. 
During  the  engagement  (near  its  termination } I was  engaged  at  long 
range  with  a large  bark-rigged  steam  sloop  of  war,  but  in  spite  of  all 
our  efforts  was  unable  to  bring  her  to  close  quarters,  owing  to  her 
superior  steaming  qualities.  At  7.30  a.  m.,  in  obedience  to  your  orders, 
we  stood  inshore,  leaving  the  partially -crippled  and  fleeing  enemy 

* Lieutenant-Commander  Rutledge’s  report  not  found. 


Ciiai*.  XXYI.] 


ATTACK  ON  BLOCKADING  SQUADffON. 


209 


about  7 miles  clear  of  tlie  bar,  standing  to  the  southward  and  eastward. 
At  8 a.  m.,  in  obedience  to  signal,  we  anchored  in  4-fathom  water  off  the 
Beach  Channel. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  testify  to  the  good  conduct  and  efficiency  of 
the  officers  and  crew  of  the  Chicora.  I am  particularly  indebted  to  the 
pilots,  Messrs.  Payne  and  Aldert,  for  the  skillful  pilotage  of  the  vessel. 
It  gives  me  pleasure  to  report  that  I have  no  injuries  or  casualties. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  B.  TUCKEB, 
Commander , C.  S.  Navy. 

Flag-Officer  D.  N.  Ingraham,  C.  S.  Navy. 

[Inclosure.] 

We,  the  undersigned,  certify  that  a steamer  (side-wheel)  supposed 
to  be  the  Keystone  State,  not  only  struck  her  flag  on  the  morning  of 
January  31,  but  that  we  saw  a number  of  her  men  rush  upon  the  after- 
part of  her  deck  and  extend  their  arms  toward  us  in  an  imploring  man- 
ner, she  being  at  that  time  completely  at  our  mercy,  distant  from  us 
some  200  yards. 

G.  H.  BIER, 

C.  S.  Navy , First  Lieutenant  and  Exee.  Officer  Cliicora. 

W.  T.  GLASSELL,  Lieutenant. 

BENJAMIN  E.  SHELBY, 

Squadron  Quartermaster. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  Ambrose  A.  Lechler , One  hundred  and  seventy-sixth  Penn- 
sylvania Infantry  et  al. 

Hdqrs.  170th  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Militia, 

Saint  Helena  Island , S.  C.,  February  21,  1863. 

Sir:  Having  seen  a proclamation  issued  by  General  Beauregard  and 
Commodore  Ingraham  to  the  effect  that  upon  the  morning  of  the  31st 
ultimo  they  had  by  force  of  arms  succeeded  in  dispersing  the  blockad- 
ing fleet  which  was  lying  off*  Charleston  Harbor,  and  also  a statement 
purporting  to  have  come  from  the  English  consul  for  that  port  and  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  English  man-of-war  Petrel  that  they  had 
gone  out  to  a point  5 miles  beyond  the  usual  anchorage  of  the  blockad- 
ing fleet  and  that  not  a single  vessel  could  be  seen  even  with  the  aid 
of  powerful  glasses,  and  that  consequently  the  blockade  had  been  most 
effectually  raised,  and  knowing  as  we  do  the  above  statement  to  be 
utterly  false  in  every  particular,  we  feel  constrained  to  tender  our  evi- 
dence as  corroboratory  of  that  already  furnished. 

On  the  evening  of  January  29  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-sixth 
Regiment  Pennsylvania  Militia  (with  which  we  are  connected)  left 
Morehead  City,  N.  C.,  on  board  steamer  Cossack,  destined  for  Port 
Royal.  Upon  the  moriyng  of  the  31st,  when  near  Charleston,  could 
hear  firing  distinctly.  Upon  our  arrival  off*  the  harbor,  which  was  at 
about  8.30  in  the  morning,  found  lying  there  the  blockading  squadron, 
some  of  which  were  at  anchor,  and  also  the  prize  steamer  Princess 
Royal.  The  distance  from  land  at  which  they  were  was  estimated  to 
be  from  4 to  5 miles,  and  although  the  morning  was  somewhat  hazy, 
yet  the  land  could  be  plainly  seen  on  each  side  of  the  harbor.  Vessels 

14  r r — vol  xiy 


210 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.j  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


could  be  seen  in  the  inlets,  and  by  the  aid  of  the  glass  a fort,  said  to  have 
been  Sumter,  was  visible.  We  were  right  in  the  midst  of  the  fleet,  so 
near  as  to  be  able  to  carry  on  a conversation  with  the  Housatonie; 
were  boarded  by  officers  from  it  and  the  Quaker  City.  We  remained 
there  until  about  9 o’clock.  Shortly  after  we  departed  the  Princess 
Royal  followed. 

Being  thus  near  the  site  of  the  engagement,  and  so  soon  after  it  came 
off,  we  do  not  hesitate  in  the  least  to  pronounce  the  statement  that  the 
blockade  was  raised  not  only  absurd,  but  utterly  and  willfully  false  in 
every  particular;  and  the  statement  of  the  English  consul  and  the  com- 
mander of  the  Petrel  that  the  squadron  could  not  be  seen  even  with  the 
aid  of  powerful  glasses  is  one  equally  false,  and  one  that  impels  us  to 
conclude  that  it  would  require  a powerful  glass  truly  to  be  able  to 
discover  one  particle  of  truth  or  honesty  in  the  composition  of  these 
gentlemen.  The  entire  regiment  can  substantiate  the  above  facts,  and 
burn  with  indignation  that  gentlemen  occupying  high  stations  as  they 
do  should  resort  to  such  base  fabrications  to  prop  up  a failing  cause. 

We  have  the  honor,  sir,  to  be,  your  most  obedient  servants, 

A.  A.  LECHLER, 

Col.,  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  seventy-sixth  Regt.  Penn.  Militia. 

W.  F.  FUNDENBURG, 

Surgeon , One  hundred  and  seventy -sixth  Regiment  Penn.  Militia. 

TAYLOR  C.  NEWBURY, 

Captain  Steamship  Cossack. 


Rear-Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Comdg.  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


JANUARY  31,  1863. — Affair  on  Bull  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  C apt.  Charles  T.  Haskell,  jr.,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  post. 

Battery  Marshall,  S.  C.,  February  3,  1863. 

Sir  : For  the  purpose  of  preparing  to  carry  out  orders  issued  to  me 
I left  Sullivan’s  Island  on  the  afternoon  of  January  30  with  7 men  and 
landed  at  Gibbes’  house,  on  Bull  Island,  that  evening  about  dark.  I 
spent  the  next  morning  in  exploring  the  different  creeks  back  of  the 
island,  and  was  just  proceeding  to  reconnoiter  the  position  of  the  gun- 
boat Flambeau,  lying  near,  when  I met  with  and  captured  a man  call- 
ing himself-  the  chief  engineer  of  the  Flambeau.  He  was  armed  with 
an  Enfield  rifle  and  a navy  revolver,  but  said  he  was  only  out  on  a 
shooting  expedition.  I sent  him  off  in  my  boat  to  the  west  end  of  the 
island,  and  supposing  that  he  had  companions,  concealed  myself  and 
fired  off  his  gun  to  entice  them.  Another  man  soon  came  up  with  a 
negro.  I took  the  former  prisoner,  but  the  negro  ran  away.  The  man 
professed  to  be  second  lieutenant  and  acting  master  of  the  Flambeau, 
was  armed  with  a musket,  and  gave  the  same  account  of  himself  as  the 
first.  I hurried  him  off  to  the  west  end  of  the  island  and  sent  both  to 
Sullivan’s  Island,  sending  at  the  same  time  to  ask  that  50  men  should 
be  sent  me. 

I remained  on  the  island  that  night,  and  about  sunset  the  Flambeau 
came  around  to  within  a quarter  of  a mile  of  Gibbes’ house,  and  coming 
to  anchor  within  200  yards  of  the  island,  sent  from  100  to  120  men 
ashore.  They  advanced  a short  distance,  searched  Gibbes’  settlement, 
and  went. aboard  again.  I slept  at  Gibbes’  house  that  night,  and  the 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


ATTACK  ON  FORT  MCALLISTER. 


211 


next  morning  the  50  men  who  I had  desired  to  be  sent  me  arriving  at 
the  west  end  of  the  island,  I immediately  advanced,  being  anxious  to 
lie  in  ambush  at  Gibbes7  Wharf.  The  distance,  however,  was  about  4 
miles,  and  by  the  time  I had  passed  over  half  of  it  I was  met  by  one  of 
my  scouts,  who  informed  me  that  the  enemy  had  landed  and  were  ad- 
vancing. Directly  afterward  I saw  them  myself,  about  75  men  in  front, 
with  a reserve  of  about  50  more  about  500  yards  farther  back.  They 
were  marching  through  an  open  field  in  close  order.  I formed  my  men 
(45,  the  rest  having  been  left  at  the  boats)  just  back  of  Gibbes7  sum- 
mer-house, and  as  they  came  up  gave  them  a volley  from  half  of  my 
force,  ordering  the  remainder  to  reserve  their  fire,  as  1 expected  them 
to  charge  me.  It  seemed  to  take  them  by  surprise,  as  they  had  not 
yet  seen  me,  and  they  immediately  retreated  in  confusion,  returning  my 
fire  as  they  went.  The  very  dense  thicket  prevented  my  fire  from  being 
very  effective.  They  left  one  man  dead  on  the  ground ; a first  lieutenant 
of  marines,  commanding  the  detachment,  was  apparently  mortally 
wounded,  and  another  man  also  appeared  to  be  wounded.  I knew  that 
they  had  a launch  with  a rifled  gun  on  it,  with  which  they  could  de- 
stroy my  boats  and  cut  off  my  retreat,  and  having  only  one  day’s  rations, 
I considered  it  best  to  cross  over  to  Capers7  Island  and  wait  for  re-en- 
forcements. I accordingly,  after  waiting  for  them  to  renew  the  attack 
about  half  an  hour,  marched  back  to  my  boats  and  crossed  over  the 
inlet  dividing  the  two  islands,  sending  off*  a boat  at  the  same  time  to 
ask  for  re-enforcements. 

I waited  on  Capers7  Island  until  the  next  evening  at  8 o’clock,  when 
I received  orders  to  return  to  Sullivan’s  Island.  I set  out  at  9 o’clock 
and  arrived  at  this  post  early  this  morning. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  T.  HASKELL,  Jr., 

Captain , Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  A A.  G.  First  Military  District. 


FEBRUARY  1,  1863.— Naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Genesis  Point,  Ga. 


REPORTS,  ETC.* 


No.  1.— General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  with  congratulatory  orders. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Henry  Bryan,  Assistant  Inspector-General,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Col.  R.  H.  Anderson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  forces  on  the  Ogeechee  River. 
No.  4.— Capt.  George  W.  Anderson,  jr.,  Georgia  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Mc- 
Allister. 

No.  5. — Capt.  Robert  Martin,  Georgia  Artillery,  commanding  mortar  and  light  bat- 
teries. 


No.  1. 


Report  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida , with  congratulatory 
orders. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  2,  1863. 
General  H.  W.  Mercer  reports  quite  a success  at  Genesis  Point  yes- 

* The  Union  vessels  engaged  were  the  Montauk,  C.  P.  Williams,  Dawn,  Seneca,  and 
Wissahickon.  For  report  of  Commander  John  L.  Worden,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual 
Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  dated  December  7,  18G3. 


212  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

terday  after  five  hours7  firing  from  one  monitor,  four  gunboats,  and  one 
mortar  boat.  Monitor  came  to  800  yards  of  battery— principally  one 
rifled  32-pounder  and  one  8-incli  columbiad ; was  compelled  to  retire 
apparently  crippled.  We  lost  1 officer  killed,  4 men  wounded,  and  1 
gun  disabled.  Another  monitor  seen  near  Thunderbolt  Battery,  on 
Vernon  River  ; fired  once  and  retired. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  23.  i Charleston , S.  0.,  February  6,  1803. 

The  commanding  general  announces  to  the  forces  with  satisfaction 
and  pride  the  results  of  the  recent  encounter  of  our  battery  at  Genesis 
Point,  Ga.,  with  an  iron-clad  of  the  monitor  class;  results  only  alloyed 
by  the  life-blood  of  the  gallant  commander,  the  late  Maj.  John  B. 
Gallie. 

For  hours  the  most  formidable  vessel  of  her  class  hurled  missiles  of 
the  heaviest  caliber  ever  used  in  modern  warfare  at  the  weak  parapet 
of  the  battery,  which  was  almost  demolished ; but,  standing  at  their 
guns,  as  became  men  fighting  for  homes,  for  honor,  and  for  independ- 
ence, the  garrison  replied  with  such  effect  as  to  cripple  and  beat  back 
their  adversary,  clad  though  in  impenetrable  armor  and  armed  with  15 
and  11-inch  guns,  supported  by  mortar  boats  whose  practice  was  of 
uncommon  precision. 

The  thanks  of  the  country  are  due  to  this  intrepid  garrison,  who  have 
thus  shown  what  brave  men  may  withstand  and  accomplish,  despite 
apparent  odds. 

“Fort  McAllister’7  will  be  inscribed  on  the  flags  of  all  the  troops  en- 
gaged in  the  defense  of  the  battery. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Henry  Bryan , Assistant  Inspector- General , C.  8.  Army. 

Savannah,  February  1,  1863. 
General  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : I visited  Genesis  Point  this  morning  just  after  the  fight, 
too  late  to  get  a view  of  the  iron-clad,  which  came  much  nearer — per- 
haps within  600  yards,  but  more  likely  about  700.  She  was  afraid  of 
our  fire,  however,  and  fell  back  some  distance. 

I inclose  rough  sketches  of  this  steamer  as  she  appeared  to  three 
parties  and  two  rough  plans  of  the  position  of  enemy’s  fleet  during 
engagement. 

The  iron-clad  seems  to  have  fired  principally  15-inch  shell,  one  of 
which  went  directly  through  the  parapet  (17  feet  thick)  in  front  of  a 
32-pouuder  on  the  left.  At  this  point  the  parapet  was  mostly  built  of 
marsh  mud,  which  I infer  cannot  offer  sufficient  resistance  to  these  mis- 


CriAr.  XXVI.] 


ATTACK  ON  TORT  M’ALLISTER. 


213 


silcs.  Two  shells  seem  to  have  struck  near  the  same  point  on  the  par* 
apet  (made  of  sand)  in  front  of  the  columbiad  and  tore  away  about  a 
third  of  it,  covering  several  men  with  sand ; one  or  two  were  dug  out* 
The  resisting  power  of  sand  is  very  great,  and  after  thick  iron  it  makes 
probably  the  protection  most  desirable.  So  far  as  demolishing  earth- 
work goes  I am  inclined  to  think  the  15-inch  shell  a partial  failure.  X 
think  a concentrated  fire  of  smaller  guns  would  have  been  more  de- 
structive to  us.  Had  they  burst  better,  however,  the  result  might 
have  been  different.  Capt.  George  W.  Anderson,  the  officer  next  in 
rank  to  Major  Gallie,  has  proved  himself  a brave  and  good  young  sol- 
dier, but  I think  Oapt.  Alfred  L.  Hartridge,  Company  B,  First  Georgia 
Sharpshooters,  who  commanded  Genesis  Point  last  summer,  is  the  man 
best  qualified  to  succeed  Major  Gallie.  I will  send  you  by  express  a 
brass  fuse  plug  from  the  15-inch  shell. 

I am,  with  regard,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  BRYAN. 


[Inclosure.] 

Genesis  Point,  February  1,  1863 — 1.30  p.  m. 

Fight  lasted  five  hours,  ending  12.45.  Major  Gallic’s  brains  blown 
out,  nobody  wounded,  and  7 injured  by  concussion.  One  32  had  trun- 
nion knocked  off;  parapet  torn  up  in  about  five  places;  in  front  of 
columbiad  it  was  partly  demolished.  Enemy’s  iron-clad  struck  at  least 
a dozen  times,  perhaps  two  dozen,  and  has  gone  back  out  of  sight.  She 
came  within  1,000  yards  of  our  battery,  probably  700.  Col.  R.  H.  An- 
derson and  garrison  have  acted  nobly. 

HENRY  BRYAN, 

Major  and  Assistant  Inspector- General . 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  R.  H . Anderson , C.  8.  Army , commanding  forces  on  the 

Ogeechee  River. 

Headquarters  C.  S.  Forces,  Ooeechee  River, 

Fort  McAllister y Ga .,  February  2,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  very  respectfully  to  submit  to  the  briga- 
dier-general commanding  the  following  report  of  the  engagement  of  this 
battery  with  the  Abolition  fleet,  which  took  place  yesterday,  the  1st 
instant : 

At  7.45  a.  m.  the  battery  was  attacked  by  one  iron  clad  of  the  monitor 
order,  whose  armament  was  one  15-inch  and  one  11-inch  gun,  three  gun- 
boats (wooden),  and  one  mortar  boat.  Before  the  enemy’s  boats  came 
within  range  1 ordered  Capt.  Arthur  Shaaff,  commanding  the  First  Bat- 
talion Georgia  Sharpshooters,  to  line  the  river  bank  with  his  riflemen. 
His  right  rested  about  a quarter  of  a mile  in  rear  of  and  west  of  the  bat- 
tery. As  Soon  as  I was  satisfied  that  there  was  no  intention  on  the  part 
of  the  enemy  to  land  at  Kilkenny  on  my  right  flank,  and  that  his  inten- 
tion was  restricted  to  passing  the  obstructions,  I ordered  him  to  deploy 
his  battalion  on  his  right  file  at  ten  paces  intervals,  which  enabled  him 
to  cover  the  bank  of  the  river  for  over  a mile  with  his  sharpshooters, 
who  had  excellent  cover,  and  would  have  annoyed  the  enemy  terribly 
had  he  succeeded  in  passing  the  obstructions.  Martin’s  light  battery  1 


214 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  ICitap.  XXVI. 


held  in  reserve  at  Hardwick,  which  is  about  1£  miles  in  rear  of  the  bat- 
tery. Captain  McAllister’s  troop  I also  held  in  readiness  about  a mile 
in  rear  of  the  battery.  The  two  rifle  guns  of  the  Chatham  Artillery, 
under  Lieutenant  Whitehead,  I had  placed  in  pits  on  a commanding 
bluff  on  the  river,  about  a mile  in  rear  of  the  battery;  the  two  guns  of 
the  Confederate  States  steamer  Rattlesnake,  under  the  command  of 
Captain  Baker,  I also  ordered  placed  on  Richmond  Bluff,  about  7 miles 
in  rear  of  the  battery.  The  steamer  Rattlesnake,  according  to  your 
direction,  was  moved  at  a suitable  point  in  the  river  and  in  readiness 
to  be  sunk  had  necessity  required  it. 

At  7.45  a.  m.  the  bombardment  commenced;  our  battery  opened  fire 
first,  but  not  until  the  iron-clad  had  approached  and  taken  a position 
north  of  and  within  800  or  1,000  yards  of  the  battery;  their  wooden 
boats  lay  about  2 miles  from  and  to  the  east  of  the  fort.  The  enemy 
fired  steadily  and  with  remarkable  precision;  at  times  their  fire  was 
terrible.  Their  mortar  firing  was  unusually  fine,  a large  number  of 
their  shells  bursting  directly  over  the  battery.  The  iron-clad’s  fire  was 
principally  directed  at  the  8-inch  columbiad,  and  at  about  8.15  o’clock 
the  parapet  in  front  of  this  gun  was  so  badly  breached  as  to  leave  the 
gun  entirely  exposed.  The  detachment  did  not  leave  their  gun  or  evince 
the  slightest  fear,  but  in  a most  gallant  and  determined  manner  fought 
their  gun  to  the  close  of  the  action,  refusing  to  be  relieved.  The  name 
of  the  brave  officer  who  commanded  this  gun  is  First  Lieut.  W.  D. 
Dixon,  of  the  Republican  Blues,  Company  O,  First  Georgia  Volunteer 
Regiment.  At  8.30  a.  in.  one  of  the  32-pounders  was  disabled,  one  of 
the  trunnions  being  knocked  off.  The  same  shot  also  killed  Maj.  John 
B.  Gallie  [Twenty-second  Battalion  Georgia  Artillery],  the  gallant  com- 
mander of  the  battery.  Prior  to  this  he  had  been  wounded  in  the  face 
by  a fragment  of  shell,  but  refused  to  be  relieved,  and  continued,  not- 
withstanding his  suffering,  inspiring  the  men  with  his  own  gallant  and 
unconquerable  spirit  up  to  the  time  he  was  killed.  Thus  perished  nobly 
a brave,  good,  and  gallant  soldier.  Capt.  G.  W.  Anderson,  jr.,  upon 
Major  Gallie’s  death,  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  battery,  and 
displayed  during  the  whole  action  the  utmost  coolness  and  gallantry, 
as  did  Captain  [Robert]  Martin,  commanding  the  10-inch  mortar,  Capt. 
G.  A.  Nicoll  [Company  F,  Twenty- second  Battalion  Georgia  Artillery], 
and  each  and  every  officer  of  the  battery.  The  whole  fire  of  our  battery 
was  concentrated  upon  the  iron-clad,  which  we  struck  at  least  eighteen 
times,  and  I think  damaged.  At  12.15  p.  m.  she  ceased  firing  and 
dropped  down  the  stream  out  of  reach  of  our  guns.  I think  she  was 
damaged,  for  the  reason  that  just  before  backing  down  the  stream  we 
could  hear  them  hammering  on  the  turret,  which  ceased  to  revolve ; 
neither  did  she  again  return  our  fire,  which  at  this  juncture  was  very 
severe. 

I have  entered  into  particulars,  for  the  reason  that  this  attack  was 
one  of  no  ordinary  character,  as  will  be  readily  admitted,  when  the  class 
of  the  enemy’s  vessels  aud  their  superior  armament  is  taken  into  con- 
sideration, as  well  as  the  close  proximity  of  the  iron-clad  to  the  battery. 
I think  that  the  brave  and  heroic  garrison  of  Fort  McAllister  have, 
after  a most  severe  and  trying  fight,  demonstrated  to  the%world  that 
victory  does  not  as  a matter  of  course  always  perch  itself  on  the  flag 
of  an  iron-clad  when  opposed  even  to  an  ordinary  earthwork  manned 
by  stout  and  gallant  hearts.  In  commemoration  of  this  gallant  action 
I respectfully  recommend  that  the  garrison  be  allowed  to  have  “Fort 
McAllister”  inscribed  on  their  standard.  I beg  leave  to  call  the  atten-' 
tion  of  the  brigadier-general  commanding  particularly  to  my  adjutant, 


attack  ok  fokt  m’alltster. 


215 


CitAV.  XXVI.] 

First  Lie  at,  Robert  Wayne,  who  in  the  most  gallant  and  heroic  manner 
bore  all  of  my  orders  in  the  battery  during  the  whole  action.  He  was 
as  much,  if  not  more,  exposed  than  any  one  during  the  action,  and  his 
conduct  won  the  admiration  of  all.  I would  also  express  my  indebted- 
ness to  Captain  McAllister,  who  by  his  gallantry,  energy,  and  soldier- 
like appreciation  of  what  I required  of  him,  did  much  to  facilitate  my 

arrangements  for  the  defense  ot  the  river.  f 

Our  total  list  of  casualties  are  8 — Major  Gallie  killed,  and  7 privates 

wounded,  none  of  them  severely.  T . 

The  damage  to  the  work  has  been  already  repaired  ; all  that  remains 
to  be  done  is  to  mount  another  gun  in  the  place  of  the  32-pounder  dis- 
abled. This  we  will  do  as  soon  as  the  one  you  have  ordered  to  be 
brought  here  from  Savannah  arrives.  . , 

Inclosed  you  will  please  find  the  report  of  Capt.  G.  W.  Anderson,  jr  , 
the  immediate  commander  of  the  battery,  as  well  as  that  of  Oapt. 
Robert  Martin,  commanding  the  10-inch  mortar. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ ^ li.  H.  ANDERSON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Oapt.  George  A.  Mercer, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Dist.  of  Georgia , Savannah. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  February  0,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  War  Department. 
The  results  related  within  of  the  obstinate  attack  by  an  iron-clad  ot  the 
monitor  class  on  our  battery  at  Genesis  Point  are  important  and  encour- 
aging. The  armament  of  the  battery  in  question  unfortunately  was  not 
heavy,  or  such  as  I should  have  placed  at  that  point  had  the  proper 
guns  been  at  my  disposition.  (See  my  report  of  November  1, 1862.)  It 
consisted  of  but  one  8-inch  columbiad,  one  42  pounder,  five  32-pound- 
ers,  and  one  10-inch  mortar,  which  has  been  placed  there  recently.  Hut, 
thanks  to  the  intrepidity  of  the  garrison  and  supporting  force  ol  officers 
and  men,  the  battery  withstood  the  formidable  attack  and  the  enemy 
was  beaten  back.  I beg  to  commend  to  the  notice  of  the  President  the 

aames  of  all  mentioned  in  these  papers^  ^ BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Capt.  George  W.  Anderson,  jr  Georgia  Artillery,  commanding 

Fort  McAllister. 

Fort  McAllister,  Ga.,  February  2,  1863. 
Lieutenant  : Through  you  I have  the  honor  ot  reporting  to  Col.  R. 
H.  Anderson,  commanding  forces  on  Ogeechee  River,  the  result  of  yes- 
terday’s engagement : . _ . , x . . 

At  7.45  a.  m.  the  battery  was  attacked  by  an  iron-clad  (which  an- 
chored about  1,000  yards  abreast  of  the  battery  and  immediately  oppo- 
site the  chamber  of  our  8-inch  colurnbaid),  three  gunboats,  and  a mortar- 
boat.  The  enemy  fired  steadily  and  with  great  precision  j at  times  it 


216 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AMD’MID.  Alfr)  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

was  exceedingly  severe.  They  fired  un usually  well  with  their  mortar, 
a number  of  shells  bursting  directly  over  the  battery.  The  iron-clad’s 
chief  aim  was  at  the  columbaid ; she  fired  11  and  15  inch  shell.  The 
parapet  in  front  of  the  8-inch  was  breached  and  the  gun  was  left  almost 
entirely  exposed.  Notwithstanding  their  critical  position  not  a man 
composing  the  squad  evinced  the  slightest  fear,  but  continued  to  work 
the  gun  with  as  much  energy  and  asunuch  composure  as  could  be  desired. 

It  would  be  invidious  to  institute  a comparison  when  all  alike  ex- 
hibited the  utmost  gallantry ; but  I would  respectfully  beg  leave  to  call 
the  colonel’s  attention  to  the  8-inch  and  to  the  42-pouuder  squads. 

The  damage  to  the  work  can  be  repaired  in  forty  eight  hours.  Early 
in  the  day  (8.30  o’clock)  the  iron-clad  disabled  one  of  my  32-pounders, 
knocking  one  of  the  trunnions  off.  It  was  this  shot  which  killed  the 
heroic  Major  Gallie.  Prior  to  this  he  was  badly  cut  in  the  face,  while 
standing  by  the  8-inch  gun,  inspiring  the  men  with  his  own  indomitable 
spirit.  He  refused  to  be  relieved,  saying  he  would  u be  able  to  attend 
to  duty  in  a few  minutes.”  Shortly  afterward  he  fell,  while  discharging 
his  duties  under  the  most  trying  circumstances,  pierced  through  the 
head. 

At  12.30  o’clock  the  enemy  slowly  backed  out  of  range  of  our  guns. 
The  tower  of  the  iron-clad  was  struck  several  times.  We  could  hear 
them  hammering  distinctly,  evidently  mending  something  which  had 
been  broken  by  our  shot.  The  turret  finally  ceased  to  revolve;  whether 
designedly  or  not  is  left  to  conjecture.  We  were  unable  to  reach  the 
wooden  vessels.  Our  rifle  projectiles  are  miserable.  As  soon  as  they 
leave  the  muzzle  of  the  gun  they  commence  to  revolve  over  and  over. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows:  * 

I am,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully, 

GEO.  W.  ANDERSON,  Jr., 
Captain,  Commanding  Fort  McAllister. 

Lieut.  Robert  Wayne, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Capt.  Robert  Martin , Georgia  Artillery , commanding  mortar 

and  light  batteries. 

Gamp  Arnold,  February  1,  1863. 

Lieutenant:  Through  you  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following- 
report  to  Col.  R.  H.  Anderson,  commanding  forces  at  and  around  Genesis 
Point : 

According  to  an  order  from  Brigadier-General  Mercer,  placing  me  in 
command  of  the  10-incli  mortar  at  Fort  McAllister,  I promptly  repaired 
to  my  post,  having  first  given  orders  to  Lieut,  W.  G.  Robson,  senior 
lieutenant  present,  to  move  my  light  battery  in  supporting  distance  of 
the  fort,  1 arrived  at  my  mortar  battery  a few  minutes  after  0 a.  m. 
and  immediately  opened  fire  on  the  Abolition  fleet.  At  10.40  a.  m.  my 
platform  gave  way,  and  I was  compelled  to  remove  the  planking  and  fire 
from  the  second  tier  of  boards,  which  stood  the  firing  very  well. 

I have  but  one  casualty  to  report,  i.  e .,  one  of  my  detachment,  from  a 
fragment  of  shell  in  the  head,  slightly. 


Nominal  fist  shows  1 officer  killed  and  7 men  wounded. 


CitAf.  XXVI.] 


DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  NASHVILLE. 


21? 


The  firing  from  the  fleet  was  good.  My  men  were  frequently  covered 
with  sand,  and  shell  and  fragments  of  shell  frequently  fell  around  us* 
My  practice  was  at  first  bad,  owing  to  the  mist,  but  toward  midday  it 
improved,  the  shells  bursting  over  or  falling  near  the  vessels.  My  men 
stood  to  their  work  well. 

I am,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

7 ‘ R.  MARTIN, 

Captain , Commanding  Mortar  and  Light  Battery , P.  A.  C.  8. 

Lieutenant  [Eobert]  Wayne, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Fort  McAllister , Ga. 


FEBRUARY  28,  1863.— Engagement  at  Fort  McAllister,  Ga.,  and  destruc- 
tion of  the  Eashville.* 


Report  of  Capt.  George  W.  Anderson  Jr.,  Georgia  Artillery , command- 
ing Fort  McAllister. 


Headquarters, 

Fort  McAllister , Ga.,  February  28,  1863. 

Captain:  Through  you  I have  the  honor  of  reporting  to  Brigadier- 
General  Mercer  the  result  of  this  morning’s  engagement: 

At  7.25  a.  m.  three  gunboats,  one  mortar-boat,  and  an  iron  clad  came 
in  sight  of  our  battery.  The  gunboats  and  mortar-boat  took  the  same 
positions  as  in  the  former  engagements.  The  iron-clad  anchored  be- 
tween 800  and  1,000  yards  abreast  of  our  battery  and  directed  her  entire 
fire  at  the  Rattlesnake, [Nashville,]  which  was  aground  about  three- 
fourths  of  a mile  from  her.  The  wooden  vessels  directed  their  fire  at  the 
battery ; did  no  damage,  but  slightly  injuring  the  quarters  of  the  Emmett 
Rifles  and  plowing  up  the  dirt  in  our  parade.  At  7.40  o’clock  the  Rat- 
tlesnake was  set  on  fire— whether  by  her  commander  (Captain  Baker) 
or  by  the  shells  of  the  enemy  1 am  unable  to  say.  It  by  Captain  Baker, 
I think  it  was  entirely  unnecessary,  circumstances  not  demanding  her 
destruction.  The  iron-clad  was  struck  by  several  of  our  shot;  the 
wooden  vessels  were  struck  once  by  our  32-pounder  rifle. 

Officers  and  men  acted  with  their  accustomed  bravery  and  only  re- 
gretted the  brevity  of  the  fight. 

At  9.30  o’clock  the  vessels  ceased  firing  and  dropped  down  the  river. 
The  iron-clad  apparently  passed  and  repassed  with  impunity  over  the 
spot  where  the  torpedoes  were  sunk. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  W.  ANDERSON,  Jr., 

Captain , Commanding. 

Capt.  George  A.  Mercer, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


* The  Union  forces  engaged  were  the  Montauk,  Seneca,  Wissahickon,  and  Dawn. 
See  Commander  John  L.  Worden’s  report  in  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


218 


COASTS  OF.  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


MARCH  3,  1863. — Naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Ga. 

REPORTS,  ETC.* 

No.  1. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  with  congratulations. 

No.  2.— Maj.  D.  B.  Harris,  C.  S.  Army,  Chief  Engineer  Department  of  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  Florida. 

No.  3. — Capt.  John  McCrady,  C.  S.  Army,  Chief  Engineer  State  of  Georgia. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina,  Georgia , and  Florida . 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  March  3,  1863. 

General  Mercer  reports  steamer  Nashville  destroyed  by  enemy’s 
shells,  having  stranded  half  mile  above  Fort  McAllister.  Three  moni- 
tors and  two  mortar-boats  attacked  fort  this  morning.  After  six  hours’ 
firing  destroyed  one  gun-carriage  and  slightly  wounded  2 men.  Dam- 
age to  monitors  not  known.  Firing  still  going  on  at  3 p.  m.  One  mon- 
itor and  eight  wooden  vessels  lying  several  miles  below  fort. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjiitant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  4,  1863. 

Fort  McAllister  has  again  repulsed  enemy’s  attack.  Iron  clads  re- 
tired at  8 p.  m.  yesterday  $ mortar-boats  shelled  until  6 o’clock  this 
morning.  All  damages  repaired  during  night ; 8-inch  columbiads 
mounted  and  fort  good  as  ever.  No  casualties  reported.  Result  is  en- 
couraging. Enemy’s  vessels  still  in  sight. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  4,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  Mercer,  Savannah : 

I congratulate  again  the  defenders  of  Fort  McAllister.  Hope  gal- 
lant example  will  be  followed  by  all  the  other  batteries.  Clingman’s 
troops  will  be  sent,  but  must  be  ready  to  support  Walker  at  Pocotaligo 
as  required. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


* Tile  Union  vessels  engaged  were  the  Nahant,  Passaic,  and  Patapsco.  For  reports 
of  Rear-  Admiral  DuPont,  Capt.  Percival  Drayton,  Commanders  Daniel  Ammen  and 
John  Downes,  and  Lieutenant-Commander  J.  N.  Miller,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual 
Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


CHAr.  XXVI.]  ATTACK  ON  FORT  M7ALLISTER,  GA.  219 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  D.  B.  Harris , C.  S.  Army , Chief  Engineer  Department 
of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida. 

Savannah,  Ga.,  March  9, 1863. 

General:  In  compliance  with  my  instructions  Captain  [John]  Mc- 
Crady  has  made  a report  in  detail  of  the  engagement  of  the  enemy  with 
the  battery  at  Genesis  Point  (Fort  McAllister),  on  the  3d  instant,  which 
I have  the  honor  to  hand  you  herewith.  This  interesting  report  is 
based  chiefly  upon  information  furnished  by  Asst.  Engr.  J.  W.  Mc- 
Alpin,  to  whose  admirable  conduct  on  this  and  previous  attacks  upon 
Fort  McAllister  I respectfully  invite  the  attention  of  the  general  com- 
manding. 

I have  visited  the  battery  since  the  engagement,  and.  found  it  in  good 
condition  in  every  respect.  It  would  appear  that  the  iron-clads  are  not 
such  formidable  monsters  after  all,  particularly  against  sand  batteries. 
Where  crushing  effect  is  desired,  as  against  vessels,  and  brick  or  other 
walls,  the  15-inch  shell  and  solid  shot  could  be  used  to  advantage;  but 
for  the  reduction  of  sand  batteries  the  same  amount  of  metal  thrown 
from  8 or  10  inch  guns  in  the  same  time  would,  I think,  have  treble  the 
effect.  The  firing  of  the  iron-clads  was  not  as  accurate  as  it  should  have 
been  under  the  circumstances.  The  firing  of  our  battery  having  been 
directed  against  one  of  them  alone,  the  others  ought  to  have  fired  with 
all  the  deliberation  and  care  requisite  to  insure  accuracy.  I am  there- 
fore at  a loss  to  account  for  their  wild  firing.  The  most  of  their  shots 
passed  over  the  battery.  The  mortars  were  fired  at  a distance  of  at 
least  2£  miles  without," as  usual,  any  damaging  effect  upon  the  battery. 
I am  fully  persuaded  the  turret  of  No.  1 (Montauk)  was  injured  during 
the  engagement.  The  result  of  this  engagement  ought  to  make  us  feel 
quite  comfortable.  When  the  grand  affair  with  which  the  Abolitionists 
have  been  so  long  threatening  us  shall  come  off  (if  it  ever  does),  I am 
sure  our  sand  batteries  will  give  a good  account  of  themselves.  Mr. 
McAlpin  thinks  the  iron-clads  did  not  pass  over  the  torpedoes  in  the 
river.  I have  directed  an  examination  to  be  made  to  ascertain  if  they 
are  in  the  position  in  which  they  were  anchored  in  the  stream. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  yours,  very  respectfully. 

D.  B.  HAREIS, 

Major  and  Chief  Engineer. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff . 


r No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  McCrady , C.  S.  Army , Chief  Engineer  State  of 

Georgia. 

Engineer  Office,  G.  S.  Army, 

Savannah , March  8,  1863. 

Major:  The  following  report  of  the  engagement  with  three  of  the 
enemy’s  monitor  fleet,  which  occurred  at  Fort  McAllister  on  Tuesday, 
March  3,  is  founded  upon  the  notes  and  observations  of  Assistant 
Engineer  McAlpin,  and  the  statements  of  Capt.  [G.  W.]  Anderson, 


220  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  DA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cbap.  XXVI. 

[jr.],  Capt.  J.  L.  McAllister,  Lieut.  E.  A.  Elarbee,  and  Air.  Motte  Mid- 
dleton. 

Three  of  the  monitor  fleet  took  position  off  the  battery  at  8.45  a.  m., 
opened  fire  at  8.54  a.  m.,  and  ceased  at  4.15  p.  in.,  the  action,  so  far  as 
these  vessels  were  concerned,  lasting  seven  hours  and  twenty  four  min- 
utes. Another  monitor  lay  near  the  bend  of  the  river  below  Harvey’s 
Out,  but  took  no  part  in  the,  action.  She  was  accompanied  by  one 
river  steamer  and  one  ocean  steamer,  besides  two  mortar  schooners  in 
plain  View,  and  one  which  was  not  seen,  but  which  threw  mortar  shells, 
together  with  the  other  two,  during  the  whole  engagement.  The  three 
iron-clads  were  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  at  distances  varying  from 
1,400  to  1,900  yards  from  the  battery.  At  these  distances  they  ap- 
peared to  be  all  so  nearly  of  the  same  model  as  to  render  it  impossible 
to  distinguish  them  by  differences  of  form  or  proportion.  Each  carried 
a single  turret  nearly  amidships  and  in  front  of  smoke-stack.  They 
could  only  be  distinguished  from  each  other  by  their  differences  of 
color,  which  are  given  in  the  inclosed  table.  One  of  them  lay  above 
the  target,  the  other  two  below  it.  Calling  that  above  the  target  and 
nearest  the  battery  No.  1,  No.  2 lay  about  300  yards  below  it,  and  No. 
3 about  50  yards  below  No.  2.  Their  position  was  in  the  channel, 
about  200  yards  from  the  marsh,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 
Asst.  Engr.  Posted,  stationed  at  Eosedew,  states  that  one  only  of  the 
three  carried  a flag  upon  her  turret.  This  was  probably  the  Montauk, 
which  in  previous  engagements  carried  such  a flag.  The  plates  on  the 
hull  of  No.  1 were  distinguishable  from  the  battery,  and  were  thought 
by  Mr.  McAlpin  to  be  from  18  to  24  inches  square. 

The  tables  attached  to  this  report  will  show  the  differences  of  color, 
armament,  &c.,  of  the  three  iron-clads,  as  well  as  the  number  of  shot 
fired  by  each  and  the  number  which  took  effect  upon  the  battery.  The 
whole  number  fired  was  224,  and  of  these  not  more  than  50  struck  any 
part  of  our  works.  Of  the  27  which  struck  the  traverses  and  superior 
slope  only  12  shells  exploded,  and  they  did  no  serious  damage.  The 
greatest  injury  inflicted  by  a shot  was  the  destruction  of  the  carriage 
of  the  8-inch  gun. 

The  fire  of  our  battery  was  concentrated  exclusively  on  Monitor  No. 
1.  No  shots  whatever  were  fired  at  Nos.  2 and  3.  The  men  on  No.  3 
watched  the  engagement  from  the  deck  of  their  vessel  without  fear  of 
being  fired  at.  Captain  Anderson  reports  that  he  attempted  firing  by 
battery,  but  did  not  succeed  for  want  of  a signal  which  could  be  heard 
in  all  the  gun  chambers  at  once.  He  reports  that  the  stroke  of  the 
bass-drum  was  not  sufficient  for  this  purpose.  The  firing  of  the  10-inch 
mortar  (Captain  Martin)  was  very  accurate,  all  the  shells  falling  near 
No.  1,  and  one  filled  with  sand  striking  her  deck  and  breaking  to  pieces. 
The  32-pounder  rifled  gun  with  charges  of  7 pounds  of  powdpr  did  well, 
all  the  bolts  and  most  of  the  shells  being  thrown  satisfactorily.  The 
8-incli  gun  fired  with  its  usual  accuracy  until  dismounted  at  11  o’clock. 
The  firing  of  the  42-pounder,  always  accurate,  was  only  interrupted  for 
thirty  minutes,  when  the  traverse- wheel,  being  broken  by  a fragment 
of  shell,  it  required  that  time  to  replace  it.  The  gun  was,  however, 
fired  several  times  with  the  broken  wheel,  but  at  last  gave  way.  The 
10-inch  gun  was  served  with  an  elevation  of  G°  30',  and  generally  shot 
over  the  turret;  it  is  thought,  however,  that  several  of  its  shot  struck 
the  vessel.  The  32  pounders  were  fired  I suppose  for  the  purpose  of 
dividing  the  enemy’s  attention.  It  will  be  thus  seen  that  the  42-pounder 
and  the  rifle  gun  wTere  those  which  principally  maintained  the  action  on 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


221 


ATTACK  ON  FORT  M’AL LISTER,  GA. 

our  part,  the  8-inch  gun  having  been  disabled  at  11  o’clock  and  the 
10-inch  generally  overshooting  the  mark. 

The  following  are  the  circumstances  which  have  caused  a belief  that 
No.  1 was  injured  in  the  engagement:  The  last  shot  fired  at  her  was 
from  the  42-pounder.  It  was  reported  to  have  struck  near  the  turret 
and  low  down  toward  the  water  line.  Immediately  after  she  was  struck 
a volume  of  smoke  or  steam  issued  from  her  side  in  a manner  not  wit- 
nessed in  previous  engagements,  and  which  caused  a remark  that  she 
was  on  fire j at  the  same  time  3 men  rushed  out  of  her  turret,  but 
shortly  returned.  She  then  blew  her  whistle  three  times,  when  No.  2, 
which  had  already  weighed  anchor  and  started  downstream,  returned, 
and  coming  up  to  No.  1 took  her  position  until  she  had  retired.  Mean- 
while both  guns  of  No.  1 were  discharged— or  discharged  themselves — 
without  aim  up  the  river,  one  of  the  shot  striking  in  the  middle  of  the 
stream  near  the  obstructions.  These  circumstances  were,  in  whole  or 
in  part,  witnessed  by  Mr.  Motte  Middleton,  Assistant  Engineer(McAlpin, 
the  officers  in  the  battery,  Lieutenant  Elarbee  in  the  marsh  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river,  and  the  maneuvers  of  the  two  vessels  were  also  wit- 
nessed from  Rosedew  by  Assistant  Engineer  Postell.  Captain  Mc- 
Allister’s pickets  at  Cottenham  report  that  the  enemy  were  working  on 
one  of  their  iron-clads  all  night  after  the  engagement. 

Lieutenant  Elarbee  and  4 men  of  Captain  McAllister’s  company  went 
over  into  the  marsh  opposite  the  fort  the  night  before  on  a call  for  vol- 
unteers for  that  purpose.  They  attained  a position  from  200  to  250 
yards  from  Monitor  No.  1.  On  the  officer  stepping  out  of  the  turret  to 
ascertain  the  effect  of  his  shot  one  rifle  was  fired  at  him,  but  missed, 
upon  which  he  immediately  turned  to  re-enter  the  turret,  but  was  shot 
in  the  act,  stumbling  forward,  and  at  last  entering  only  with  difficulty. 
No.  1 fired  grape  or  canister  at  the  men  in  the  marsh  immediately  after 
this  and  once  subsequently,  but  without  hurting  one  of  them.  Lieu- 
tenant Elarbee,  from  his  position,  had  a nearer  view  of  No.  1 than  any 
one  has  yet  had  of  one  of  the  monitor  fleet.  No.  1 is  supposed  to  be 
the  Montauk.  He  reports  that  her  ports  are  always  open ; that  her  guns 
run  in  and  out  of  battery,  and  that  they  are  loaded  from  the  muzzle. 
He  could  distinctly  hear  the  words  of  command,  “In  battery,”  &c.,  and 
saw  the  hands  of  the  men  and  the  staff  of  the  rammer  protruded  through 
the  port  in  loading.  He  also  reports  that  in  No.  1 the  muzzle  of  the  gun 
when  in  battery  protrudes  about  6 inches  from  the  port.  He  could  see 
nothing  of  the  same  kind  in  Nos.  2 and  3.  He  could  observe  no  injury 
done  by  our  shot  to  the  turret,  the  only  observable  effect  being  a whitish 
streak  on  the  iron.  The  shot  either  glanced  or  were  broken  to  pieces. 
One  of  our  shot  is  reported  to  have  struck  about  6 inches  from  a port. 
According  to  Lieutenant  Elarbee’s  observations,  and  also  Mr.  McAlpin’s, 
the  turret  of  No.  1 during  this  engagement  turned  only  one  way,  the 
revolutions  being  to  an  outsider  uniformly  from  left  to  right.  Lieu- 
tenant Elarbee  also  observed  that  the  motion  of  revolution  was  not 
even  and  continuous,  but  affected  by  a marked  trip  at  regular  intervals. 
The  turret  appeared  to  be  sometimes  arrested  temporarily  in  its  revolu- 
tions; whether  from  design,  imperfect  machinery,  or  injury  from  our 
shot  could  not  be  ascertained. 

The  mortar  fire  of  the  enemy  did  no  damage  to  the  works  during  the 
day.  They  resumed  firing  at  G p.  m.  and  continued  their  bombard- 
ment until  G a.  m.  the  next  day.  Only  one  shell  struck  any  part  of  the 
works,  and  that  opened  a crater  of  about  4 feet  in  diameter  and  2 feet 
deep  in  the  top  of  the  covered  way  leading  from  the  main  work  to  the 
mortar  battery.  To  sum  up  the  effect  of  the  seven  hours’  bombardment 


222 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


on  Fort  McAllister  by  three  iron-clads,  carrying  each  two  guns  of  the 
heaviest  caliber , and  three  mortar  boats,  carrying  each  one  10  or  15-inch 
mortar,  I make  the  following  statement  of  damage: 

Earthwork — No  material  damage  nor  any  that  could  not  be  repaired 
in  one  night. 

Guns . — One  gun-carriage  shattered;  two  traverse* wheels  broken. 

Men. — Two  men  slightly  wounded. 

On  account  of  the  continued  bombardment  the  negroes  could  not  be 
worked  during  the  night,  and  a working  party  was  detailed  for  that 
purpose  from  the  sharpshooters.  With  these  men  and  the  assistance 
of  their  officers  Assistant  Engineer  McAlpin  had  all  the  damage  re- 
paired by  morning,  the  8-inch  columbiad  remounted  on  a spare  carriage 
sent  from  Savannah,  and  the  broken  traverse- wheel  of  the  32-pounder 
replaced  by  a new  one.  The  broken  traverse- wheel  of  the  42-pounder 
had  been  replaced  during  the  action  by  Lieutenant  [D.]  Quinn,  of  the 
Emmett  Rifles  [Twenty-second  Battalion  Georgia  Artillery  on  rolls], 
commanding  the  gun,  the  spare  traverse-wheel  having  been  brought 
from  the  rear  of  the  battery  in  the  midst  of  the  flying  shells  by  one  of 
the  gun  detachment,  who,  being  unable  to  lift  it  the  whole  way,  rolled 
it  along  the  ground  by  holding  the  fork. 

A fresh  supply  of  ammunition  was  received  from  Savannah  during  the 
night,  and  the  following  morning  the  garrison  were  as  well  prepared  to 
renew  the  fight  as  they  had  been  to  begin  it;  but  the  enemy  did  not 
come  up  to  time.  The  battery  will  be  in  all  respects  complete  by  Tues- 
day night,  should  nothing  untoward  prevent. 

I desire  to  make  special  mention  to  the  general  commanding  of  the 
coolness,  courage,  and  presence  of  mind  of  Asst.  Engr.  J.  W.  McAlpin, 
who,  while  under  fire,  sketched  the  positions  of  the  vessels,  and  kept, 
with  the  assistance  of  others,  a tally  of  the  shots  fired  by  the  enemy, 
besides  taking  notes  and  collecting  the  principal  facts  upon  which  this 
report  and  the  annexed  tables  are  founded. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  MoCRADY, 

Captain  and  Chief  Engineer  State  of  Georgia. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer  Dept.  S.  <7.,  Ga.,  and  Fla.,  Charleston , S.  C. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Table  showing  effect  on  worJcs  at  Genesis  Point  ( Fort  McAllister)  of  seven 

hours’’  bombardment  by  three  tur reted  monitor s,  on  March  3,  1863. 

Founded  on  report  of  Asst.  Engr.  J.  W.  McAlpin. 


Mortar  battery. — Not  struck. 

Thirty -two-pounder  rifle  chamber. — One  shell  in  exterior  slope,  dis- 
placing about  1 cubic  yard  of  earth.  One  rifle  shell  grazed  eastern  slope 
of  right  flank  traverse  between  rifle  gun  and  8-inch. 

Eight-inch  columbiad  chamber. — Two  shells  exploded  in  right  flank 
traverse,  doing  but  little  damage.  One  shot  struck  gun-carriage  right 
diagonal  brace,  which  it  shivered,  and  rendered  guu  useless.  Five  shot 
entered  extension  slope  of  parapet ; no  serious  damage. 

Forty-two  pounder  gun  chamber. — Three  shots  struck  top  of  traverse 
between  8-inch  and  42-pounder  ; one,  being  a shell,  exploded ; no  seri- 
ous damage  was  done.  Two,  if  not  more,  shot  or  shell  (one  exploding) 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


223 


ATTACK  ON  FORT  M7ALLISTER,  GA. 

struck  northwest  angle  of  the  same  traverse,  carrying  away  earth  for 
0 feet  from  front.  Traverse  in  rear  struck  twice,  one  shell  exploding; 
no  serious  damage  done.  One  traverse-wheel  broken,  probably  by  a 
fragment  of  shell.  One  man  wounded  by  fragment  of  shell.  One  man 
wounded  by  a sod  peg.  Eight  shot  entered  exterior  slope  of  parapet ; 
no  serious  damage.  Two  rifle  shot  struck  traverse  on  left  flank ; one 
exploded,  breaking  left  traverse-wheel;  no  serious  damage.  One  11- 
inch  shell  struck  same  traverse  and  exploded ; no  serious  damage. 

Ten-inch  gun  chamber.— Two  shot  struck  the  superior  slope  in  front 
of  this  gun  without  damage.  One  of  them,  a shell,  ricochetted  and 
struck  top  of  traverse  in  rear,  exploding  in  front  of  bomb-proof,  doing 
no  harm.  Three  shot  struck  exterior  slope  of  parapet  without  doing 
severe  damage. 

Thirty -two  pounder  double  chamber. — One  shell  struck  and  exploded 
in  superior  slope  of  parapet,  making  a hole  2 feet  deep  and  4 feet  in 
diameter.  A fragment  broke  right  traverse-wheel  of  32-pounder  on  left. 
Four  shot  struck  traverse  in  rear ; two  of  them  (shell)  exploded  near  left 
angle,  low  down,  displacing  a considerable  amount  of  earth.  One  shot 
struck  traverse  on  left  flank.  Two  shot  struck  exterior  slope  of  parapet ; 
no  serious  damage  done. 

Thirty-two-pounder  on  left  flanh. — No  shot  struck.  One  shot  struck 
parapet  in  front  of  hot- shot  furnace. 

Bomb-proof. — Three  shot  struck  northern  side;  one  exploded.  Four 
shot  struck  top.  No  damage  done. 

JOHN  McCRADY, 

Captain  and  Chief  Engineer  State  of  Georgia. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Table  showing  color , armament,  projectiles,  &c.,  of  the  three  turreted  mon 

itors  which  attached  Fort  McAllister  on  March  3,  1863.  Founded  on 

observations  of  Asst.  Engr.  J.  W.  McAlpin. 

No.  1. — Color:  Turret  and  smoke-stack,  black;  hull,  brown.  Arma- 
ment : One  15-inch  gun  and  one  11-inch  gun  (smooth-bore).  Project- 
iles : 15-inch  hollow  shot  and  shell;  11  inch  shell  and  solid  shot ; 15-inch 
shell,  with  three  fuses.  Number  of  shot  fired  at  battery,  90. 

No.  2. — Color:  Hull  and  smoke-stack,  light  colored;  top  of  smoke- 
stack, red.  Armament:  One  8-inch  rifle  and  one  11-inch  gun  (smooth- 
bore). Projectiles : Cylindro-conoidal  percussion  shell,  l7  inches  long,  8 
inches  in  diameter  at  base  ; 11-inch  solid  shot  and  shell.  Number  of 
shot  fired  at  battery,  70. 

No.  3. — Color : Hull,  turret,  and  top  of  smoke-stack,  dark  green.  Ar- 
manent : Two  8-inch  rifles.  Projectiles  : Cylindro-conoidal  percussion 
shell,  17  inches  long  and  8 inches  in  diameter  at  base.  Number  of  shot 
fired  at  battery,  64. 

Intervals  between  successive  delivery  of  fire  : Average  of  ten  minutes. 

Penetration  : 11  inch  solid  shot  penetrated  9 feet  10  inches  in  sand ; 
8-inch  rifle  shell  penetrated  3 feet  6 inches  in  sand. 

JOHN  McCRADY, 

Captain  and  Chief  Engineer  State  of  Georgia . 


224  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXVI. 

MARCH  9,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

EBPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Haldimand  S.  Putnam,  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  C.  Abbott,  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

Ho.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Haldimand  S.  Putnam,  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Infantry m 

Headquarters, 

Saint  Augustine , Fla.,  March  12,  1863. 

Colonel:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Monday,  the  9th 
instant,  the  advanced  picket  guard,  stationed  about  2 miles  north  of 
the  town,  was  attacked.  I had  reliable  information  that  the  enemy  con- 
sisted of  a company  of  about  80  horsemen,  commanded  by  a Captain 
Dickison,  and  that  his  camp  was  at  a place  called  Fort  Peyton,  7 miles 
southwest  oi  this  place.  I immediately  dispatched  Lieutenant  Colonel 
Abbott,  Seventh  Hew  Hampshire  Volunteers,  with  120  men,  with  orders 
to  proceed  directly  to  and  attack  h:s  camp,  and  in  case  he  had  not 
returned  to  it  to  take  the  road  to  1 he  upper  ford  of  the  Saint  Sebastian, 
with  the  expectation  of  encountering  him  as  he  returned  to  his  camp. 

It  will  be  seen  by  the  inclosed  sketch  that  the  enemy  had  to  make 
a detour  of  some  13  miles  to  reach  his  camp,  from  which  circumstance 
I hoped  to  surprise  or  intercept  him.  A mounted  vedette  gave  notice 
of  our  approach,  and  the  advance  guard  only  encountered  a small  num- 
ber of  the  rear  guard  of  the  enemy  , with  whom  they  kept  up  a scatter- 
ing but  ineffective  fire  for  about  a mile,  the  enemy  retreating  rapidly, 
and,  being  mounted,  pursuit  was  fruitless. 

I regret  to  report  that  a sergeant  and  4 men,  who  were  detached  from 
the  main  body  to  reconnoiter  the  ground  to  the  right  before  the  situa- 
tion of  the  enemy  was  discovered,  were  captured.  Aside  from  this 
unfortunate  occurrence,  which  is  mainly  owing  to  the  densely  wooded 
nature  of  the  country,  1 believe  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Abbott  and  the 
officers  and  men  under  him  displayed  good  conduct  and  judgment. 

For  details  I have  the  honor  to  refer  you  to  the  report  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Abbott,  which  is  inclosed. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

. ' ' * H.  S.  PUTHAM, 

Colonel  Seventh  N ew  Hampshire  Volunteers,  Comdg.  Post. 

Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 


Ho.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  C.  Abbott,  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  March  10,  1863. 
Sir:  In  pursuance  of  your  orders,  dated  the  9th  instant,  directing 
me  to  proceed  with  a detachment  of  HO  men  to  Fort  Peyton  and  the 
place  of  Bartols  Masters  and  capture,  if  possible,  a party  of  the  enemy 
in  that  vicinity,  and  also  directing  me  how  to  proceed  in  case  the  party 


Chap.  XXVI.]  SKIRMISH  NEAR  ST.  AUGUSTINE,  FLA.  225 

had  left  or  in  case  they  appeared  to  be  between  the  Saint  Sebastian 
and  North  Rivers,  I crossed  the  Saint  Sebastian  at  the  bridge  opposite 
Saint  Augustine  at  about  1.30  p.  m.  yesterday  with  detachments  of 
Companies  B,  D,  and  F,  making  in  all  about  120  men,  and  proceeded 
at  once  along  the  Palatka  road  toward  Fort  Peyton,  the  road  running 
in  a southwesterly  direction  up  the  left  bank  of  the  Matanzas  River 
and  from  2 to  3 miles  distant  from  it. 

When  within  about  3 miles  of  Fort  Peyton  (Bartols  Masters’  place)  2 
horsemen  were  seen  in  the  road  and  were  challenged  by  our  advance 
guard,  but  refused  to  halt  and  were  beyond  the  range  of  their  rifles. 
A little  more  than  a mile  north  of  Fort  Peyton  I sent  a sergeant  and  4 
men  to  reconnoiter  about  a house  plainly  observable  thi  ough  the  pine 
woods  on  the  right  and  apparently  not  much  more  than  a quarter  of  a 
mile  distant,  with  instructions  to  report  immediately.  This  house,  I 
afterward  learned,  was  occupied  by  a man  named  Carrero.  About  half 
a mile  north  of  Fort  Peyton  the  advanced  guard  came  upon  the  enemy’s 
pickets  and  fired  upon  them.  Upon  hearing  the  firing  I ordered  Lieu- 
tenant Taylor,  of  Company  B,  to  advance  with  10  men  as  skirmishers, 
which  was  promptly  done,  while  the  remainder  of  the  detachment  con- 
tinued to  advance.  Coming  upon  a small  creek,  crossed  by  a bridge,  a 
few  rods  beyond  where  the  firing  commenced,  the  skirmishers  crossed 
and  deployed  on  the  other  side.  The  skirmishers,  in  the  mean  time, 
were  concealed  from  the  main  body  by  a thick  growth  of  trees  and 
bushes. 

Crossing  the  bridge  at  double-quick  with  the  main  detachment,  as- 
cending a slight  elevation  and  forming  in  line,  I discovered  that  the 
firing  was  between  our  skirmishers  and  those  of  the  enemy  a little  to 
the  left  and  in  advance  of  our  front.  I then  ordered  Captain  Mason, 
of  Company  B,  to  advance  in  the  direction  of  the  firing,  while  I,  with 
Companies  F and  D,  bore  to  the  right  upon  Masters’  house,  thinking 
the  main  body  of  the  enemy  either  in  or  around  it.  Upon  halting  at 
the  house  we  found  no  one  there  excepting  John  Mauncy  and  Bartols 
Masters,  with  their  families,  none  of  whom  would  give  any  information 
respecting  the  main  body  of  the  enemy,  but  told  me  that  2 wagons  be- 
longing to  them  had  left  on  the  Palatka  road,  about  half  an  hour  before, 
rapidly.  The  skirmishers  of  the  enemy  having  now  disappeared  I 
recalled  Company  B and  recrossed  the  creek,  intending  to  go  up  the 
Saint  Sebastian  in  pursuit  of  the  main  body. 

In  the  mean  time  the  men  whom  I had  sent  toward  Carrero’s  house 
had  not  reported,, and  on  arriving  opposite  the  house  I sent  a corporal 
and  5 men  to  ascertain  the  reason.  They  returned,  bringing  with  them 
Carrero  himself,  who  stated  that  the  first  party  had  been  intercepted 
by  Dickison’s  (rebel)  horsemen,  numbering  about  80  men,  and  had  been 
captured.  From  his  statement  it  appeared  evident  that  the  main  body 
of  the  enemy  had  seen  us  as  we  passed  toward  Fort  Peyton,  heard  the  fir- 
ing, and  retreated  hastily  toward  Palatka. 

Deeming  farther  pursuit  useless,  I returned  to  a point  near  the  Saint 
Sebastian  bridge,  and  according  to  orders  reported  to  you,  and  pursu- 
ant to  subsequent  orders  recrossed  into  the  town. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfullv, 

JOSEPH  C.  ABBOTT, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Volunteers. 

Col.  H.  S.  Putnam, 

Seventh  Regiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers. 

15  R R — YOL  XIV 


226  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

MARCH  10,  1863. — Reoccupation  of  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  by  Union  forces. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gon.  Joseph  Finegan,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  East  Florida. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton , U.  S.  Army. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  March  14,  1863. 

Sir:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  expedition  which  I sent  up 
the  Saint  John’s  River,  Florida,  consisting  of  the  First  Regiment  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  Col.  T.  W.  Higginson  commanding,  and  a portion 
of  the  Second  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  Colonel  Montgomery, 
captured  and  took  possession  of  the  town  of  Jacksonville  on  Tuesday, 
the  10th  instant.  As  I stated  in  my  last  report  to  you,  the  object  of 
this  expedition  was  to  occupy  Jacksonville  and  make  it  the  base  of  opera- 
tions for  the  arming  of  negroes  and  securing  in  this  way  possession  of 
the  entire  State  of  Florida.  It  gives  me  pleasure  to  report  that  so  far 
the  objects  of  the  expedition  have  been  fully  accomplished.  The  town 
is  completely  in  our  possession  and  many  prisoners.  There  has  been 
constant  skirmishing  going  on  for  several  days,  and  in  every  action  the 
negro  troops  have  behaved  with  the*  utmost  bravery.  Never  in  a single 
instance  can  I learn  that  they  have  flinched.  It  is  my  belief  that 
scarcely  an  incident  in  this  war  has  caused  a greater  panic  throughout 
the  whole  Southern  coast  than  this  raid  of  the  colored  troops  in  Florida. 

The  negroes  are  collectihg  at  Jacksonville  from  all  quarters.  There 
is  a great  scarcity  of  muskets  in  this  department.  I have  endeavored 
to  procure  suitable  ones  for  the  troops  under  my  command  without  suc- 
cess. If  ample  supplies  of  Springfield  muskets,  smooth  bore,  with  buck- 
and-ball  cartridges,  could  be  obtained  it  would  be  of  the  greatest  ad- 
vantage for  this  peculiar  service.  I am  convinced  that  the  enemy  will 
attempt  to  drive  us  from  our  position  at  Jacksonville.  He  can  only 
succeed  by  the  failure  of  our  ammunition.  I was  obliged  to  send  the 
expedition  with  only  50  rounds  of  ammunition  for  its  artillery,  a limited 
supply,  but  I was  unwilling  to  delay  the  expedition  until  supplies  could 
be  obtained  from  the  North. 

I beg  leave  respectfully  to  report  that  I have  great  difficulty  in  ob- 
taining suitable  arms  from  the  ordnance  depot  in  this  department. 

It  would,  in  my  humble  opinion,  be  of  great  advantage  to  the  service 

an  officer  could  be  sent  here  to  report  for  your  information  upon  its 
sondition. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier- General  of  Volunteers. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan , G.  S.  Army , commanding  District 

of  East  Florida. 

Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  District  East  Florida, 
Camp  near  Jacksonville,  March  14,  1863. 
General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  10th  instant  I 


227 


CiiAr.  XXVI.]  EEOCCUPATION  OF  JACKSONVILLE,  FLA. 

received  information  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  McCormick,  commanding 
forces  at  Camp  Finegan,  of  the  arrival  at  Jacksonville  of  five  gunboats 
and  transports,  and  the  landing  of  a large  number  of  Abolition  troops, 
said  to  be  negroes.  I immediately  issued  orders  by  telegraph  and  ex- 
press trains  for  the  concentration  of  all  the  troops  which  I could  reach 
within  the  space  of  four  or  five  days  at  the  camp  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  Jacksonville,  prepared  to  check  any  movement  of  the  enemy 
by  land  into  the  interior.  To  do  this  I am  compelled  to  leave  with 
entirely  inadequate  protection  many  important  points  on  the  coast 
whence  negroes  may  escape  in  large  numbers  to  the  enemy  and  where 
they  have  easy  access  to  the  interior. 

On  the  same  evening  I proceeded  to  the  camp,  arriving  there  near 
midnight.  I here  found  that  the  enemy  had  landed  from  five  gunboats 
and  transports,  and  he  had  occupied  the  town  with  so  much  celerity 
and  secrecy  as  to  have  surrounded  it  with  his  pickets  before  the  people 
generally  were  aware  of  his  presence. 

The  next  morning  I made  a reconnaissance  in  person,  with  the  cav- 
alry companies  of  Captains  Stephens  and  Chambers,  of  the  Second 
Florida  Cavalry,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  McCormick,  of 
the  same  regiment,  and  directed  Major  Brevard,  commanding  First  Bat- 
talion Partisan  Bangers,  with  the  companies  of  Captains  Mays,  Bird,  J. 
Q.  Stewart,  and  Asa  Stewart,  numbeiing  200  men,  to  advance  .to  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  the  town,  and  cut  off,  capture,  or  kill  their  other 
pickets.  The  cavalry  detachment  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel McCormick,  which  J accompanied,  advanced  into  the  suburbs  of 
the  town,  where  we  found  the  enemy  posted  in  strong  picket  force. 
We  were  fired  upon  by  their  first  pickets  without  effect,  except  the 
disabling  of  1 or  2 horses,  and  drove  them  into  the  town.  Proceeding 
farther,  we  encountered  a stronger  force,  which  I estimated  to  be  about 
two  companies  of  infantry,  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  and  advanta- 
geously posted.  These  opened  on  us  unexpectedly,  firing  alternately 
by  platoons  and  by  file,  with  some  degree  of  regularity.  Our  men,  at 
great  disadvantage  of  position,  returned  their  fire  with  effect  and  drove 
them  in  haste  and  confusion  from  their  position,  killing  2 of  whom 
we  are  certainly  advised  and  wounding  4 or  5,  and  we  have  some  rea- 
son to  believe  inflicting  on  them  a severe  loss.  In  this  skirmish  we 
lost  a valuable  life  in  Acting  Surgeon  Meredith,  who  accompanied  the 
expedition,  and  was  killed  in  the  second  skirmish  with  the  enemy.  At 
this  point  I had  expected  to  meet  the  infantry  detachment  under  com- 
mand of  Major  Brevard,  and  with  them  to  have  retired  from  the  town, 
capturing  such  pickets  as  were  posted  still  farther  out.  The  road  taken 
was  shorter  than  anticipated,  and  the  two  skirmishes  with  the  enemy 
had  accelerated  our  progress,  so  that  we  arrived  at  the  place  in  advance 
of  the  infantry.  Being  under  the  range  of  the  enemy’s  five  gunboats 
and  of  his  field  pieces,  we  withdrew,  bringing  off  the  body  of  Surgeon 
Meredith. 

Later  in  the  day  Major  Brevard,  commanding  the  infantry  detach- 
ment, making  his  way  into  the  suburbs  of  the  town,  encountered  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  same  place  one  or  two  companies  of  the  enemy  drawn  up 
in  line  under  cover  of  the  trees  and  a house.  Feeling  the  party  with 
skirmishers,  he  then  opened  on  them  with  his  entire  command,  when 
they  broke  and  fled  in  confusion,  having  first,  however,  returned  his 
fire.  Major  Brevard  then  withdrew  his  command,  and,  although  the 
enemy  opened  on  them  with  shell  from  their  gunboats,  escaped  without 
loss,  having  inflicted,  as  we  believe,  some  loss  on  the  enemy.  M£e  have 
ascertained  from  the  reconnaissances  aud  other  sources  of  information 


228  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

that  the  enemy  are  certainly  in  large  force  in  Jacksonville ; that  they 
are  negroes,  with  white  commissioned  officers,  company  and  field,  and 
generally  mulatto  non-commissioned  officers.  From  the  best  informa- 
tion that  we  can  gather  there  may  be  4,000  negroes  now  in  the  place, 
with  perhaps  one  company  of  white  troops.  That  they  are  expecting 
re- enforcements  and  have  strongly  fortified  the  place,  having  cut  down 
all  the  trees,  of  which  there  were  a great  number,  and  made  of  them 
barricades  and  abatis;  that  they  have  posted  field  pieces  in  all  the 
streets  and  covering  the  approaches,  and  have  burned  the  houses  from 
the  river  out  beyond  the  suburbs  of  the  town,  so  as  to  enable  them  to 
sweep  with  their  heavy  guns  the  whole  country  in  rear  and  on  either 
side  of  the  place.  They  keep  five  boats  with  guns  of  long  range  in  front 
and  on  the  sides  of  the  town,  thus  enabling  them  from  the  conformation 
of  the  ground  to  cover  the  country  for  several  miles.  The  object  of 
these  formidable  preparations,  as  we  gather  from  our  people  who  have 
been  allowed  to  come  out  and  as  indicated  by  the  probabilities  of  the 
case,  is  to  hold  the  town  of  Jacksonville  and  then  to  advance  up  the 
Saint  John’s  in  their  gunboats  and  establish  another  secure  position 
higher  up  the  river,  whence  they  may  entice  the  slaves.  That  the  en- 
tire negro  population  of  East  Florida  will  be  lost  and  the  country  ruined 
there  cannot  be  a doubt,  unless  the  means  of  holding  the  Saint  John’s 
Eiver  are  immediately  supplied.  The  next  movement  of  the  enemy  will 
be  to  Palatka,  and  it  may  be  to-day  or  to-morrow,  and  will  necessitate 
the  division  of  the  force  here  concentrated.  In  a short  time  a similar 
landing  may  be  effected  in  the  vicinity  of  Fernandina  and  another  di- 
vision of  the  force  required.  It  is  impossible  to  do  anything  of  impor- 
tance unless  I obtain  the  means  asked  for.  All  positions  on  the  river, 
with  the  superior  weight  and  number  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  are  untenable 
with  the  means  which  I possess.  I hope  the  commanding  general  will 
be  able  to  supply  me  with  the  means  absolutely  necessary  for  the  pres- 
ervation of  the  people  of  this  district.  With  the  four  siege  guns  asked 
for  I can  drive  off  the  enemy’s  gunboats  preparatory  to  an  attack  on  the 
town. 

I am  to-day  advised  that  the  regiment  of  white  troops  in  Saint  Au- 
gustine have  been  ordered  to  re-enforce  the  enemy  at  Jacksonville.  It 
is  more  probable,  however,  that  they  will  proceed  to  Palatka,  which  is 
an  easy  march  of  30  miles,  through  an  open  country,  and  there  estab- 
lish themselves.  With  the  means  at  my  command  I shall  not  be  able 
to  prevent  it. 

To  appreciate  the  danger  of  the  permanent  establishment  of  these 
posts  of  negro  troops  on  the  Saint  John’s  Eiver  I respectfully  submit 
to  the  commanding  general  that  a consideration  of  the  topography  of 
the  country  will  exhibit  the  fact  that  the  entire  planting  interest  of 
East  Florida  lies  within  easy  communication  of  the  river;  that  inter- 
course will  immediately  commence  between  negroes  on  the  plantations 
and  those  in  the  enemy’s  service;  that  this  intercourse  will  be  conducted 
through  swamps  and  under  cover  of  the  night,  and  cannot  be  pre- 
vented. A few  weeks  will  suffice  to  corrupt  the  entire  slave  population 
of  East  Florida. 

I herewith  transmit  a copy  of  an  address  which  I deemed  it  my 
duty  to  publish  to  the  people  of  the  State,  and  which  I trust  will  meet  j 
the  approval  of  the  commanding  general ; also  a copy  of  general  orders, 
complimentary  to  the  conduct  of  officers  and  men  of  this  command 
in  the  two  skirmishes  of  the  11th  instant. 

The  whole  force  which  I am  able  to  concentrate  at  this  point,  after  r 
leaving  exposed  many  important  points,  will  be  less  than  1,000  men  (of 
/ „ v 


Chap.  XXVI.]  REOCCUPATION  OF  JACKSONVILLE,  FLA. 


229 


all  arms).  I further  beg  leave  to  urge  upon  the  commanding  general 
the  necessity  of  supplying  me  with  300  or  400  Enfield  rifles  and  neces- 
sary ammunition  for  new  recruits  and  new  companies. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1 JOS.  FINEGAN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District  of  Florida. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  District  of  East  Florida, 
Camp  near  Jacksonville , Fla.,  March  13,  1863. 

I feel  it  my  duty  as  brigadier-general  commanding  this  district  to 
inform  the  people  of  the  district  and  of  the  State  that  our  unscrupulous 
enemy  has  landed  a large  force  of  negroes,  under  command  of  white 
officers,  at  Jacksonville,  under  cover  of  gunboats.  He  is  attempting  to 
fortify  the  place  so  as  to  make  it  secure  against  attacks.  The  purpose 
of  this  movement  is  obvious  and  need  not  be  mentioned  in  direct  terms. 
It  is  sufficient  to  inspire  the  whole  body  of  the  people  with  a renewed 
and  sterner  purpose  of  resistance.  I therefore  call  on  such  of  the  citi- 
zens as  can  possibly  leave  their  homes  to  arm  and  organize  themselves 
into  companies  without  delay  and  to  report  to  me.  Ammunition,  sub- 
sistence, and  transportation  will  be  furnished  them  while  they  remain 
in  service.  1 further  ask  the  zealous  co-operation  of  the  whole  people 
in  forcing  into  service  all  persons  within  the  conscript  .age  who  yet 
remain  out.  With  the  blessing  of  the  Almighty,  the  zealous  support  of 
the  people  and  the  Government,  I doubt  not  that  the  detestable  foe 
will  soon  be  driven  from  their  cover. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 


[Inclosurc  No.  2.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  East  Florida, 

No. . 1 Camp  near  Jacksonville , March  11,  1863. 

The  brigadier-general  commanding  desires  to  notice  in  general  orders 
the  coolness  and  daring  exhibited  by  the  officers  and  men  of  this  com- 
mand of  detachments  of  the  companies  of  Capt.  W.  E.  Chambers  and 
Capt.  Winston  Stephens,  of  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  and  of  the  com- 
panies of  Capts.  S.  W.  Mays,  P.  B.  Bird,  J.  Q.  Stewart,  and  Asa  Stewart, 
under  the  command  of  Maj.  T.  W.  Brevard,  First  Battalion  Partisan 
Rangers,  in  two  separate  skirmishes  with  the  enemy  in  the  suburbs  of 
Jacksonville  on  this  day.  These  troops  advanced  with  steadfast  bravery 
while  within  range  of  his  gunboats  and  attacked  and  drove  him  from 
his  cover.  The  brigadier  general  commanding  commends  the  gallant 
and  meritorious  conduct  in  this  affair  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  McCormick, 
Second  Florida  Cavalry,  commanding  cavalry  force,  and  Capts.  W.  E. 
Chambers  and  W.  Stephens,  of  Second  Cavalry,  and  their  officers  and 
men,  and  of  Maj.  T.  W.  Brevard,  First  Battalion  Partisan  Rangers, 
commanding  infantry  force,  and  his  captains,  S.  W.  Mays,  P.  B.  Bird, 
J.  Q.  Stewart,  and  Asa  Stewart,  and  their  officers  and  men. 

The  command  mourns  the  loss  of  Surgeon  Meredith,  who  fell  by  nobly 
discharging  his  duty. 

By  order  of  Brigadier- General  Finegan,  commanding: 

VV . CALL, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


230 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


MARCH  20,  1863.— Affair  in  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  Middle  Florida* 
including  affair  in  Ocklockonnee  Bay,  Florida,  March  24,  1863,  with  con- 
gratulatory letter  from  General  Beauregard. 

No.  2. — Maj.  W.  W.  Scott,  C.  S.  Army,  First  Battalion  Florida  Infantry. 


No.  1. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  District  of 

Middle  Florida , including  affair  in  Ocklockonnee  Bay , Florida , 

March  24,  1863,  with  congratulatory  letter  from  General  Beauregard. 

Headquarters  District  of  Middle  Florida, 

Quincy , Fla,,  March  28,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  of  inclosing  to  you  reports  of  two  skir- 
mishes in  this  district— the  one  at  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay  by  a portion  of 

Capt. Robinson’s  company ; the  other  at  Ocklockonnee  Bay  by 

a detachment  under  the  command  of  Captain  [G.  W.]  Scott,  of  the 
Second  Florida  Cavalry*  The  first  was  a party  of  foraging  Yankees 
who  had  come  ashore  to  steal  and  plunder ; all  but  3 of  them  were 
killed.!  The  second  was  a Yankee  party  sent  up  the  Ocklockonnee  Bay 
to  capture  a schooner  (Onward)  which  had  lately  run  the  blockade.  The 
Yankees  were  in  possession  of  the  vessel  and  attempting  to  carry  it  out 
when  discovered.  The  prompt  movements  of  Captain  Scott  and  his 
officers  and  men  enabled  them  to  reach  the  place  before  the  Yankees 
could  succeed;  and  though  for  the  want  of  the  necessary  means  they  could 
not  recapture  the  vessel,  the  Yankees  were  compelled  to  abandon  and 
burn  it,  with  a loss,  it  is  believed,  of  10  or  12  men  killed.  In  both  cases 
the  flag  of  the  Abolitionists  was  captured,  and  I now  have  them,  sub- 
ject to  the  order  of  the  commanding  general. 

We  sustained  no  loss  in  either  affair. 

There  has  been  no  serious  demonstration  on  any  part  of  this  district, 
and  I have,  in  response  to  the  request  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan, 
sent  forward  to  his  support  such  re-enforcements  as  1 felt  might  be 
temporarily  spared  from  the  district.  I have  also  notified  him  that  if 
the  emergency  required  it  I would  still  further  re-enforce  him,  and  with 
that  view  I keep  a portion  of  my  command  ready  to  march  at  a mo- 
ment’s notice.  If  required  here  they  can  be  promptly  returned  to  me. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

’ ’ HOWELL  COBB, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District. 

General  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff,  Charleston,  S.  C. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  April  3,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  Cobb, 

Commanding  District  of  Fast  Florida : 

General:  The  commanding  general  instructs  me,  through  you,  to 

* See  p.  236.  , „ , , 

tFor  report  of  Actg.  Master  John  Sherrill,  commanding  U.  S.  bark  Roebuck,  see 
Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


AFFAIR  IN  ST.  ANDREW^  BAY,  FLA. 


231 


express  to  Capts.  G.  W.  Scott  and  Robinson,  and  the  officers,  non- 
commissioned officers,  and  men  of  their  respective  commands,  his  high 
sense  of  their  soldierly  conduct  on  the  occasions  reported  severally  by 
Maj.  W.  W.  Scott  and  Oapt.  G.  W.  Scott.  By  enterprises  such  as  these, 
conducted  with  coolness  and  address  and  characterized  by  resolute 
courage,  small  detachments  of  our  troops  may  strike  the  enemy  with 
such  effect  as  to  prevent  them  from  landing  within  the  limits  of  your 
command. 

The  flags  captured  should  be  sent  to  these  headquarters  by  some 
convenient  opportunity.  If  you  deem  it  proper  or  convenient  you 
might  by  flag  of  truce  communicate  to  the  commander  of  the  United 
States  forces,  to  whicli  the  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay  party  belonged,  the 
statement  of  Captain  Scott,  and  demand  the  surrender  of  the  boat  and 
its  arms  and  equipments,  as  it  stood  when  surrendered,  and  the  men, 
and  notify  them  that  unless  this  is  done  that  hereafter  quarter  must 
be  denied  under  similar  circumstances. 

I am  likewise  instructed  to  say  to  you  that  the  general  is  much  grati- 
fied by  the  prompt  manner  in  which  you  sent  assistance  to  Brigadier- 
General  Finegan. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JOED  AN, 

Chief  of  Staff, 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  W.  W.  Scott , C.  S.  Army , First  Battalion  Florida  Infantry . 

Headquarters, 

Marianna , W.  Fla.,  March  22,  1863. 

Dear  Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  the  commanding  general 

an  affair  of  Capt.  Robinson’s,  on  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay.  His 

report  to  me  is  as  follows : 

I proceeded  to  the  town  of  Saint  Andrew’s  on  the  19th  instant  with  a lieutenant 
sergeant,  and  20  men.  Arriving  just  before  night,  I encamped. 

Yesterday  morning  [March  20],  about  10.30  o’clock,  the  enemy  came  into  the  bay  in 
a launch,  on  which  was  mounted  a brass  howitzer  (I  think  a 12-pounder),  and  landed 
an  armed  party,  consisting  of  an  officer  and  9 men,  2 men  remaining  in  the  boat. 
They  formed  and  marched  down  the  beach,  the  boat  keeping  opposite  to  them.  I 
formed  my  men  and,  taking  advantage  of  a bluff,  charged  within  75  yards  of  them 
before  we  were  discovered.  Being  the  stronger  party  I ordered  them  to  surrender, 
which  they  refused  to  do,  but  attempted  to  get  on  their  boat.  I ordered  my  men  to 
fire,  which  brought  down  4 or  5.  We  charged  into  the  water  after  them  about  waist- 
deep,  which  brought  us  within  their  musket-range  from  the  boat,  and  our  fire  was  so 
hot  they  could  not  board  her,  but  swam  out  into  the  bay.  Several  attempted  to  gets 
on  board,  but  were  killed.  The  men  on  the  boat  tried  to  fire  their  cannon,  but  were 
so  badly  wounded  that  they  wore  not  able  to  do  so.  They  finally  lowered  their  flag 
and  asked  for  quarter.  I immediately  ordered  my  men  to  cease  firing.  They  then 
asked  permission  to  pick  up  their  men,  who  were  wounded  and  drowning,  which  was 
granted.  They  got  2 on  board  j the  balance  had  sunk ; and  being  then  nearly  out  of 
range,  they  hoisted  sail  and  escaped  with  boat.  We  had  no  boat  to  board  them  and 
the  water  was  too  deep  to  wade.  There  were  but  3 men  in  the  boat  able  to  sit  up,  and 
1 of  them  was  shot  from  his  seat  as  they  went  off.  One  escaped  to  the  woods  and  we 
were  unable  to  capture  him,  though  there  is  a party  still  after  him.  I do  not  think  & 
single  man  escaped  unhurt,  as  we  could  see  from  the  blood  that  the  2 that  remained 
in  the  boat  were  seriously  wounded.  We  got  their  flag,  4 Minie  muskets,  3 cartridge 
boxes,  3 bayonets ; also  1 pair  of  oars.  I should  have  taken  the  boat  but  for  their 
begging  quarter.  \ 


232 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


I have  received  the  flag  captured  by  Captain  Robinson,  and  will  for- 
ward to  the  commanding  general  if  he  directs  me. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant,  &c., 

W.  W.  SCOTT, 

Major , Commanding. 


Capt.  James  Barrow, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MARCH  22,  1863. — Destruction  of  steamer  Georgiana,  off  Charleston,  S.  C. 


Report  of  Capt.  Charles  T.  Haslcell,  jr.,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  at  Bat- 
tery Marshall. 


Battery  Marshall,  S.  C.,  March  23,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  between  5 and  6 p.  m.  yesterday 
the  enemy  sent  launches  to  the  steamer  Georgiana.  Shortly  after  they 
left  her  an  explosion  took  place  on  her  decks,  carrying  away  her  masts 
and  rigging.  I opened  fire  upon  two  of  his  vessels  from  which  the 
launches  were  going  to  and  fro  at  a distance  of  from  3£  to  4 miles. 
They,  however,  keeping  in  motion,  I failed  to  strike  them/  I fired  four 
shot  and  shell. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  T.  HASKELL,  Jr., 

Captain , Commanding. 


Capt.  William  Greene, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


MARCH  23-31,  1863. — Operations  near  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  John  D.  Rust,  Eighth  Maine  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  C.  S.  Array. 

' No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  John  T).  Rust , Eighth  Maine  Infantry. 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  April  2,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  for  the  in- 
formation of  the  major-general  commanding  Department  of  the  South : 

In  accordance  with  orders  received  1 embarked  my  regiment  on  board 
the  steamers  Delaware  and  General  Meigs,  at  Beaufort,  March  13,  for 
Jacksonville,  Fla.,  where  I arrived  on  the  23d  ultimo,  having  been 
delayed  by  rough  weather.  Major  Hemingway,  with  three  companies 
on  the  General  Meigs,  had  already  arrived.  When  I reached  there  a 
rebel  battery  mounted  on  a platform  car  propelled  by  a locomotive  was 
shelling  the  town.  The  gunboat  Norwich,  which  accompanied  me,  en- 
gaged it,  replying  vigorously,  as  did  also  a rifled  Parrott  32-pounder 
on  shore.  The  enemy  were  soon  driven  back.  He  was,  as  I afterward 


Chap.  XXVI  ] OPERATIONS  NEAR  JACKSONVILLE,  FLA. 


233 


learned,  making  a reconnaissance,  which  it  was  his  plan  to  follow  up  by 
an  attack  in  force  after  night-fall.  He  expected  to  make  the  attack  so 
close  as  to  render  our  gunboats  unavailable  from  the  danger  of  their 
shells  falling  among  our  own  men.  Everything  remained  quiet  during 
the  night.  The  fact  that  our  pickets  had  previously  been  drawn  in  at 
night  to  the  edge  of  town  encouraged  this  plan,  which  was  frustrated 
by  the  arrival  of  the  Eighth  Maine  Regiment  and  placing  a night  picket 
afterward  at  a distance.  On  Tuesday  night  the  locomotive  battery 
again  approached  and  threw  several  68-pounder  rifled  shells,  striking 
several  buildings,  but  injuring  no  one. 

On  Wednesday  a reconnaissance  in  force,  commanded  by  Colonel  Hig- 
ginson,  and  consisting  of  five  companies  of  the  Eighth  Maine,  under 
Lieutenant- Colonel  Twitchell;  four  companies  of  Sixth  Connecticut,  un- 
der Major  Meeker,  and  a portion  of  Colonel  Higginson’s  colored  regiment 
advanced  along  the  railroad  upward  of  4 miles,  driving  in  General  Fin- 
egan’s  pickets,  but  were  not  able  to  overtake  the  enemy. 

After  proceeding  as  far  as  was  deemed  advisable,  and  the  enemy 
showing  no  disposition  to  accept  battle,  our  forces  commenced  to  return. 
Soon  after  the  locomotive  battery  appeared  and  threw  several  shells, 
but  was  careful  to  keep  out  of  reach  of  our  rifles.  One  of  its  shells 
killed  privates  T.  G.  Hoole  and  Joseph  Goodwin  and  severely  wounded 
William  Willis,  all  of  Captain  McArthur’s  company  (1),  Eighth  Maine 
Volunteers,  who  were  the  only  persons  killed  or  wounded  after  my  arri- 
val. On  this  occasion  all  the  troops  behaved  exceedingly  well. 

Colonel  Montgomery,  with  about  120  men  of  his  regiment,  accompanied 
by  Captain  Steedman,  of  the  gunboat  Paul  Jones,  made  a successful  ex- 
pedition to  Palatka,  7o  miles  up  the  river,  taking  prisoners  a lieutenant 
and  14  men.  with  all  their  arms.  The  lieutenant  violated  his  parole  of 
honor  and  escaped.  A quantity  of  cotton,  rifles,  horses,  and  other  prop- 
erty, amounting  to  several  thousand  dollars,  has  been  captured. 

In  accordance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  162,  received  from  Headquar- 
ters Department  of  the  South,  I withdrew  all  the  Union  forces  from 
Jacksonville,  Fla.,  March  31,  and  embarked  them  on  board  transports, 
a part  of  which  had  just  arrived  for  that  purpose. 

While  the  evacuation  was  taking  place  several  fires  were  lit,  a por- 
tion of  theni  undoubtedly  by  secessionists;  these  fires  were  not  con- 
fined to  the  lines  of  any  regiment.  Perhaps  twenty-five  buildings  were 
destroyed.  On  my  arrival  I had  found  that  many  buildings  had  pre- 
viously been  destroyed,  some  by  rebels,  others  by  Union  forces  from 
military  necessity. 

Many  Union  families  came  away  with  us,  our  soldiers  freely  making 
all  possible  room  for  them  on  the  transports. 

The  expedition  has  all  returned  safely. 

Much  creditis  due  to  Capt.  H.  Boynton,  of  Eighth  Regiment  Maine 
Volunteers,  ffirthe  careful  and  prudent  manner  in  which  he  had  ad- 
ministered the  affairs  of  provost-marshal  during  our  brief  stay  at  Jack- 
sonville. 

Captain  Cannon,  of  the  Delaware,  and  his  gentlemanly  officers  deserve 
mention  for  their  kind  treatment  of  officers  and  men. 

JOHN  D.  RUST, 

Colonel  Eighth  Regiment  Maine  Vote.,  Commanding  Forces. 

Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  South. 


234  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan , G.  S.  Army. 

. 

Headquarters  District  of  East  Florida, 

Lake  City , Fla.,  March  31,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  night  of  the  24th  : 
instant  I directed  Lieutenant  [T.  E.]  Buckman,  chief  of  ordnance,  to  i 
proceed  with  the  rilled  32-pounder  furnished  me  by  Brigadier-General 
[H.]  Cobb,  mounted  on  a platform  car  on  the  railroad,  and  a sufficient  j 
infantry  support  for  the  gun,  to  within  range  of  the  town,  and  open  on 
it  with  shot  and  shell.  In  obedience  to  this  order  Lieutenant  Buckman 
proceeded  to  within  1£  miles  of  the  town  and  opened  on  it  with  effect, 
throwing  shell  with  great  accuracy  into  those  parts  of  the  town  where  the 
enemy  were  located.  The  gun  was  admirably  served,  and  great  credit 
is  due  to  Lieutenant  Buckman  and  to  Private  Francis  Soul6,  of  Captain  ; 
[Edwin]  West’s  company,  First  Special  Battalion  Florida  Volunteers, 
commanding  gun  detachment,  for  its  effective  service.  The  firing  of  the 
enemy  from  a large  number  of  heavy  guns  on  their  gunboats  and  some 
in  battery  soon  became  concentrated  and  accurate,  and  the  gun,  in  pur- 
suance of  orders,  was  withdrawn  after  inflicting  some  damage  on  the 
enemy  and  without  loss  on  our  side. 

On  the  succeeding  morning  the  enemy  advanced  in  force,  about  1,500 
strong,  in  three  columns,  driving  in  pickets  with  skirmishers,  and  formed 
in  line  of  battle  about  3 miles  from  town.  My  entire  force  was  imme- 
diately ordered  with  all  possible  expedition  to  proceed  to  the  ground 
where  they  were  drawn  up  and  engage  them.  The  rifled  32-pounder, 
under  command  of  Lieuteuant  Buckman,  with  a strong  support  of  in- 
fantry and  cavalry  on  left  flank,  protected  on  the  right  by  the  main  body 
of  our  troops,  was  sent  down  on  the  railroad,  and  opened  on  the  enemy 
as  soon  as  they  came  within  range,  gradually  approaching  them  until 
within  full  view  of  a considerable  force  protected  by  a 12-pouuder  Par- 
rott gun,  and  engaged  in  destroying  a culvert  over  which  it  was  necessary 
for  our  gun  to  pass  in  order  to  shell  the  town.  Lieutenant  Buckman 
opened  on  them  with  effect,  throwing  shell  with  great  accuracy  and  dis- 
persing the  party. 

In  the  mean  time  a section  of  Captain  [R.  H.]  Gamble’s  battery  of 
Florida  artillery  was  ordered  some  little  distance  in  advance  of  our  main 
body,  and  under  command  of  Captain  Gamble  and  Lieutenant  [F.  L.] 
Villepigue  opened  on  the  enemy  a cross-fire  in  the  direction  where  they 
were  supposed  to  be  lying  concealed  in  some  force.  The  enemy  had  in 
this  fight,  in  addition  to  the  Parrott  gun  on  the  railroad  car,  a small 
hand  piece,  with  which  he  opened  in  the  direction  of  the  firing  from  Cap- 
tain Gamble’s  section.  He  did  not  await  the  advance  of  the  main  body 
of  our  troops,  but  retired  precipitately  soon  after  the  32-pounder  gun  had 
opened  on  him.  I continued  to  throw  shell  into  their  column  for  some 
distance  on  their  retreat,  and  found  evidence  of  considerable  loss  on  their 
part — a number  of  guns,  caps,  haversacks,  canteens,  and  fragments  of 
human  bodies  and  portions  of  skulls  were  found  on  the  several  roads 
occupied  by  their  columns. 

The  conduct  and  services  on  this  occasion  of  Lieut.  T.  E.  Buckman, 
chief  of  ordnance,  and  of  Private  Francis  Soute,  of  Captain  West’s 
company  (First  Special  Battalion),  commanding  gun  detachment  of 
32-pounder  rifled  gun,  is  again  entitled  to  special  commendation. 

The  enemy  having  retired,  I sent  forward  a strong  body  of  infantry, 
under  command  of  Major  [T.  W.]  Brevard,  First  Partisan  Rangers, 


Chap.  XXVI.]  OPERATIONS  NEAR  JACKSONVILLE,  FLA. 


235 


with  orders,  to  hold  them  in  reserve  under  cover  from  the  enemy’s 
guns,  and  to  send  forward  a body  of  skirmishers  to  approach  cautiously 
and  ascertain  the  position  of  the  enemy  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
town  and  endeavor  to  draw  them  out  in  force.  The  order  was  executed 
by  Major  Brevard  with  promptness,  gallantry,  and  discretion.  The 
skirmishers,  under  command  of  Major  Brevard  in  person,  advanced  to 
within  a short  distance  of  the  town.  Finding  the  enemy’s  pickets  drawn 
into  their  outer  battery  (a  strong  position  on  the  brow  of  a hill),  a ravine 
in  front,  and  a strong  force  well  posted  for  its  defense  and  under  good 
cover  on  either  hank,  and  having  no  further  object  to  gain,  I ordered 
Major  Brevard’s  command  to  retire,  and  replacing  and  strengthening 
my  pickets,  returned  with  the  main  body  of  my  force  to  camp,  having 
inflicted  on  the  enemy,  as  I have  reason  to  believe,  a probable  loss  of 
10  or  15  men,  without  any  casualties  to  my  own  troops. 

The  conduct  and  spirit  of  both  officers  and  men  of  the  entire  command 
were  excellent,  and  I desire  to  mention  favorably  to  the  commanding 
general  Col.  Duncan  L.  Clinch,  Fourth  Georgia  Cavalry ; Lieutenant- 
Colonel  [A.  H.]  McCormick,  Second  Florida  Cavalry ; Major  [R.  B.] 
Thomas,  inspector-general  and  acting  chief  of  artillery;  Maj.  T.  W. 
Brevard,  First  Battalion  Partisan  Rangers ; Major  [Robert]  Harrison, 
Second  Florida  Cavalry;  Major  [J.  0.]  McDonald,  Fourth  Georgia 
Cavalry;  Captain  [Edwin]  West,  First  Special  Battalion;  Captains 
[John]  Westcott,  [Samuel  W.]  Mays,  P.  B.  Bird,  and  J.  Q.  Stewart,  of 
Brevard’s  battalion  of  Partisan  Rangers,  and  Lieut. Tucker,  com- 

manding company  from  camp  of  instruction,  and  his  officers  and  men. 

On  the  succeeding  day  (the  26tli  instant)  I placed  early  in  the  morn- 
ing a strong  force  of  infantry,  with  a battery  of  artillery,  under  Major 
Brevard,  First  Battalion  Partisan  Rangers,  under  cover  some  woods 
to  the  right  of  where  the  enemy  were  posted  on  the  25th  instant, 
with  the  design  of  getting  in  their  rear  should  they  again  venture 
out.  During  the  day  information  reached  me  that  they  were  out  in 
force,  and  I again  marched  to  meet  them,  with  the  intention  of  cut- 
ting them  off,  but  they  retired  before  we  got  near  them.  On  the  night 
of  the  26th  [instant]  they  were  out  in  some  force  attempting  to  destroy 
the  railroad  track  about  1 mile  from  town.  Lieutenant  Buckman  was 
again  ordered  with  the  rifled  32-pounder  and  an  infantry  support  to 
drive  them  in.  This  he  accomplished  with  a few  rounds.  On  each  suc- 
ceeding day  I posted  a large  body  of  infantry  under  cover  for  the  pur- 
pose of  cutting  off  any  force  that  might  come  out ; but  the  enemy  kept 
closely  within  their  lines  in  the  suburbs  of  the  town  and  under  the  im- 
mediate fire  of  their  gunboats  and  batteries. 

On  Sunday,  the  29th  instant,  while  reconnoitering  the  town  from  a 
position  on  the  river,  I discovered  it  was  on  fire  in  several  places  and 
that  the  transports  were  being  loaded  with  troops.  I immediately  con- 
jectured that  the  enemy  were  leaviDg,  and  pressed  on  into  the  town, 
arriving  just  after  the  departure  of  the  last  gunboat.  I found  the  town 
in  great  part  consumed,  but  succeeded  in  extinguishing  the  fire  in  some 
valuable  buildings.  There  were  evidences  of  precipitate  departure  by 
the  enemy,  and  some  quartermaster’s  stores  were  left  by  them,  which 
were  taken  and  turned  over  to  the  proper  officers. 

I regret  to  report  that  on  the  night  of  the  27th  instant  Lieutenant  [O. 
F.]  Braddock,  of  Captain  [John]  Westcott’s  company  Partisan  Rangers, 
who  had  obtained,  through  the  solicitation  of  his  officers,  permission  to 
proceed  to  the  east  bank  of  the  Saint  John’s  River  to  bring  across  the 
wives  and  children  of  men  in  the  service  who  were  there  destitute  and 
exposed  to  the  outrages  of  the  negro  troops  of  the  enemy,  after  having 


236 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA,,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


crossed  the  river,  some  12  miles  above  my  camp,  and  met  the  wagons 
sent  by  his  captain  to  convey  the  women  and  children,  was  captured, 
with  15  men,  2 wagons,  and  8 mules,  by  a force  of  the  enemy  under 

Col. Montgomery.  The  mules  were  recovered  by  a force  which 

I sent  in  pursuit,  but  the  wagons  were  burned  by  the  enemy  and  the 
women  and  children  carried  off.  I have  ordered  the  arrest  of  this  offi- 
cer (who  subsequently  escaped  from  his  captors),  and  will  ask  for  his 
trial  by  court-martial  whenever  the  proper  witnesses  can  be  produced. 
The  fortifications  erected  by  the  enemy  around  Jacksonville  were  for- 
midable. 

I desire  to  bring  to  the  notice  of  the  commanding  general  in  the  high- 
est terms  of  praise  the  conduct  and  services  of  both  officers  and  men  of 
the  command  in  the  recent  operations,  and  herewith  transmit  a copy  of 
General  Orders,  No.  12,  issued  by  me,  to  which  I beg  to  refer  the  com- 
manding general  for  special  mention  of  instances  of  individual  merit.  I 
will,  however,  here  mention  as  pre-eminently  entitled  to  consideration 
the  services  and  conduct  of  Lieut.  T.  E.  Buckman,  chief  of  ordnance 
on  my  staff,  a most  accomplished,  brave,  ingenious,  and  energetic  offi- 
cer, and  Privates  Francis  Soule,  of  Captain  West’s  compauy,  First 
Special  Battalion,  and  James  Chestnut,  of  Captain  Chambers’  company, 
Second  Florida  Cavalry ; also  Capts.  W.  E.  Chambers  and  Winston 
Stephens  of  the  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  and  their  officers  and  men. 

I have  ascertained  that  the  enemy’s  force  in  Jacksonville  was  as  fol- 
lows: Eighth  Maine,  1,100  strong;  Sixth  Connecticut,  800  strong 
(whites);  First  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (black  troops),  commanded 
by  Col.  T.  W.  Higginson,  a full  regiment,  estimated  from  900  to  1,500; 
Second  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (blacks),  Colonel  Montgomery  com- 
manding, not  full. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  Charleston , S.  C. 


MARCH  24,  1863. — Affair  in  Ocklockonnee  Bay,  Fla. 

Report  of  Capt.  G.  IV.  Scott,  C.  S.  Army,  Second  Florida  Cavalry .* 

Newport,  Fla.,  March  24,  1863. 

Colonel:  Having  received  your  order  of  23d  instant  to  assist  Lieu- 
tenant [H.  K.]  Simmons,  at  Roberts’  Ferry,  at  2.30  a.  m.  of  the  24th 
instant,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  within  an  hour  after  the  receipt 
of  the  order  to  report  1 left  my  camp  at  Newport  with  a detachment  of 
30  men  of  my  company  for  the  point  designated,  having  previously 
ordered  a like  force  from  Company  I,  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  to  accom- 
pany me. 

A t 8 a.  m.,  having  accomplished  a distance  of  30  miles  in  four  and  a 
half  hours,  1 reached  with  my  command  a point  on  the  Ocklockonnee 
Bay,  where  the  schooner  Onward,  a prize  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy, 
was  aground.  Having  joined  forces  with  Lieutenant  Simmons,  coin- 

* For  report  of  Acfcg.  Master  Richard  J.  Hoffner,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of 
the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  PALATKA,  FLA. 


237 


manding  a detachment  of  Captain  [W.  H.]  Miltons  company  (G),  Second 
Florida  Cavalry,  who  had  been  watching  the  movements  of  the  enemy 
during  the  night,  I determined  on  an  immediate  attack,  and  disposed 
my  troops  accordingly.  A reconnaissance  having  been  effected  by 
Lieutenant  Simmons,  and  the  men  having  been  dismounted,  I advanced 
the  command  at  a double-quick  through  the  open  woods  to  the  beach 
and  opened  on  the  enemy  with  Maynard  rifles  at  a distance  of  about  300 
yards.  The  enemy  replied  with  shell  and  grape  from  a howitzer  they 
had  mounted  on  the  prize  and  with  musketry.  After  a spirited  engage- 
ment, which  was  maintained  for  an  hour  and  ten  minutes,  the  enemy 
abandoned  the  prize  and  succeeded  in  making  their  escape  in  small 
boats,  having  previously  fired  the  schooner  to  prevent  its  falling  into 

our  possession.  , , , . „ 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  in  this  engagement  it  is  not  possible  to  deter- 
mine accurately.  When  the  action  commenced  from  24  to  28  men  were 
counted  on  the  deck  of  tbe  schooner,  and  at  its  termination  not  more 
than  from  9 to  12  were  seen  to  escape  in  the  boats.  Many  were  seen  to 
fall  while  the  action  was  in  progress.  On  our  side  not  a man  was  hurt. 
The  enemy  fled  precipitately,  leaving  behind  their  flag,  which,  through 
Sergeant  Strickland,  of  Company  G,  Second  Florida  Cavalry  (whose 
gallantry  in  rescuing  it  from  the  burning  vessel  I would  desire  in  an 
especial  manner  to  commend),  fell  into  our  possession.  , 

I cannot  too  highly  extol  the  coolness  and  bravery  displayed  by  the 
troops  under  my  command  on  this  occasion.  Without  exception  they 
behaved  with  the  greatest  gallantry,  evincing  the  utmost  composure  m 

the  face  of  danger.  _ ~ , T 

To  Lieutenant  Simmons,  of  Company  G,  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  I 
am  indebted  for  valuable  assistance,  and  take  pleasure  m referring  to 
the  gallantry  displayed  by  him  throughout  the  engagement. 

The  detachment  of  30  men  from  Company  I,  Second  Florida  Cavalry, 
under  command  of  Lieutenant  [J.]  Tucker,  I regret  to  state,  did  not 
arrive  at  the  scene  of  action  until  10.30  p.  m.  of  the  same  day,  at  least 
an  hour  after  the  engagement  had  terminated. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted.  ar./vprn 

G.  W.  SCU11, 

Captain , Commanding. 


MARCH  27,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Palatka,  Fla. 


Report  of  Ca.pt.  J.  J.  Dickison,  C.  8.  Army,  commanding  post,  and  con- 

gratulatory  orders. 

Camp  Leo,  Palatka , F.  Fla.,  March  27,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  a signal  victory  over  the 
enemy,  which  occurred  at  this  place  about  7 a.  m.,  as  they  were  making 
an  attempt  to  land  their  forces.  . 

On  the  day  before  my  pickets  reported  a boat  coming  up  the  river,  i 
immediately  marched  to  town  as  infantry,  leaving  my  horses  m camp, 
and  took  a position  previously  selected  by  me,  placing  one  detachment 
of  30  men,  under  Lieutenant  [W.  H.]  McCardell,  within  50  yards  of  the 
river  to  cover  one  of  the  positions  which  [where]  it  was  supposed  the 
enemy  might  make  an  effort  to  land;  the  other,  under  command  of 
Lieutenant  [W.  J.]  McEaddy,  of  10  men,  to  cover  one  of  the  main 


238  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

streets  in  town.  My  command  consisted  of  50  men,  and  I occupied  a 
position  within  about  100  yards  of  Teasdale  & Ried’s  upper  wharf. 
Scarcely  had  we  our  positions  when  the  boat  hove  in  sight  and  anchored 
about  miles  off,  opposite  Mr.  Baza’s,  on  the  east  bank  of  the  river, 
then  about  4 p.  m.  I discovered  that  there  was  constant  communica- 
tion between  the  gunboat  and  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  by  means 
of  small  boats,  but  at  the  time  could  not  discover  the  causes,  &c.  At 
night  I covered  all  the  landings  above  and  below  the  town  with  my 
pickets,  with  instructions  that  they  would  report  to  me  at  daybreak 
without  fail,  as  I was  under  the  impression  that  the  enemy  would  make 
an  effort  to  land  early  in  the  morning.  We  held  our  positions  firmly 
during  the  night,  but  were  not  disturbed.  About  daylight  I discovered 
that  the  enemy  again  communicated  with  the  opposite  side  of  the  river 
(at  Mr.  Baza’s).  A short  time  after  sunrise  they  moved  up  slowly  and 
landed  at  Teasdale  & Ried’s  Wharf.  Having  nothing  to  cover  my  men 
from  their  view  but  a plank  fence  and  an  intreuchment  thrown  up 
during  the  night,  I ordered  all  to  lie  close  and  keep  concealed,  at  the 
same  time  occupying  a position  myself  so  as  to  watch  every  movement 
of  the  enemy.  No  sooner  had  the  boat  struck  the  wharf  than  they  sent 
a man  ashore,  evidently  as  a spy,  as  he  was  familiar  with  the  place, 
being  afterwards  informed  by  some  of  my  men  that  he  was  Bill  Roe, 
well  known  as  the  engineer  of  the  steamer  Saint  Mary’s.  As  soon  as 
he  returned  to  the  boat  they  commenced  landing  their  forces.  So  soon 
as  I saw  30  or  40  men  on  the  wharf,  and  at  the  same  time  the  upper 
and  lower  deck  of  the  boat  crowded  as  thick  as  they  could  stand,  I 
ordered  my  men  to  fire,  which  order  was  executed  in  as  cool  and  delib- 
erate a manner  and  in  as  good  order  as  any  men  could  do.  The  enemy 
immediately  retreated  to  their  boat  in  great  confusion,  dragging  their 
dead  and  wounded  after  them,  and  as  [in]  falling  back  returned  our 
fire  both  by  small-arms  as  well  as  heavy  and  light  artillery,  throwing 
shell,  grape,  and  canister-shot,  moving  as  rapidly  as  their  steam  could 
carry  them  under  cover  of  their  heavy  fire,  &c. 

They  fell  back  opposite  Mr.  Baza’s  and  ordered  their  land  forces  to 
fall  back,  which  had  been  marched  up  from  Orange  Mill  the  evening 
previous  (70  or  80  negroes,  with  white  officers).  This  transport  had 
on  board  three  or  four  pieces  of  light  artillery  mounted  as  usual  for 
such  guns.  I cannot  be  mistaken  in  this,  as  my  position  gave  me  the 
best  opportunity  to  observe  them  closely.  We  suppose  the  forces  on 
board  from  600  to  700,  under  command  of  the  notorious  Montgomery. 
He  acknowledged  to  the  Hon.  T.  T.  Russell  that  his  whole  regiment 
was  on  board,  except  the  70  or  80  negroes  landed  on  the  east  bank  of 
the  river.  My  candid  opinion  is  that  we  must  have  killed  and  wounded 
not  less  than  from  20  to  30.  Among  the  wounded,  we  are  informed, 
was  the  illustrious  colonel  himself.  This  was  acknowledged  to  several 
parties  on  the  river;  but  among  the  strongest  proofs  of  some  accident 
befalling  their  leading  officer  is  that  they  drew  off  from  the  wharf  in 
great  haste  as  soon  as  they  could  take  in  their  dead  and  wounded  under 
cover  of  their  heavy  artillery.  Among  the  trophies  on  the  wharf  was 
a considerable  quantity  of  blood  in  several  places  and  also  many  frag- 
ments of  bone,  pronounced  by  the  surgeon  of  the  post  here  pieces  of 
cranium. 

I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  my  men  for  their  cool  and  deliber- 
ate action  under  heavy  fire  of  the  enemy.  This  transport  was  supposed 
to  be  the  Ben  De  Ford,  the  largest  ever  up  the  river;  and  it  was  thought 
by  good  judges  that  she  would  carry  at  least  1,000  troops.  The  position 
of  my  two  detachments  was  such  that  they  were  unable  to  fire,  in  conse- 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  PALATKA,  FLA. 


239 


quence  of  the  large  warehouse  concealing  the  enemy  from  them.  They 
held  their  position  as  ordered,  to  be  ready  to  attack  him  if  he  had  ad- 
vanced into  the  town  as  we  expected.  Every  order  was  obeyed  and  car- 
ried out  to  my  satisfaction.  Had  he  advanced,  as  we  expected,  we  should 
no  doubt  have  had  a close  and  desperate  engagement ; but  the  vandals, 
satisfied  with  their  warm  reception,  thought  best  to  retire  as  quick  as 
possible.  They  proceeded  down  to  Orange  Mill  and  took  on  board  then- 
land  forces,  several  negroes,  horses,  and  plunder,  of  which  they  had  robbed 
the  good  citizens  on  that  side  of  the  river.  They  committed  great  dep- 
redations in  their  raid  from  Orange  Mill  up  to  Mr.  Sanchez7,  taking 
everything  they  could  lay  their  hands  upon — negroes,  horses,  and  pro- 
visions of  all  kinds.  They  were  guilty  even  of  breaking  open  the  trunks 
of  helpless  women,  stealing  and  destroying  the  contents.  Hon.  T.  T. 
Russell  informs  me  that  in  conversation  with  Montgomery  he  said  that 
he  would  the  next  day  occupy  Palatka  and  in  a few  days  have  4,000  or 
5,000  troops  at  that  place,  and  as  he  had  his  own  provost-marshal,  he 
wanted  all  the  citizens  on  that  side  of  the  river  to  report  at  their  earliest 
convenience. 

Excuse  my  lengthy  report,  as  I deem  it  my  duty  to  give  you  all  the 
details  and  real  acts  of  such  demons.  My  little  command  is  again  ready 
for  them,  and  will  contest  every  inch  of  ground  if  he  should  attempt  an- 
other landing.  I had  1 man  slightly  wounded  in  the  thigh  by  a frag- 
ment of  shell.  Thank  God,  none  killed.  All  in  fine  spirits. 

J.  J.  DICKISON, 

Captain , Commanding  Company  H and  Post . 

Oapt.  W.  Call, 

Headquarters , Camp  Finegan , East  Florida. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  District  of  East  Florida, 

Lake  City)  Fla.,  April  11,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral. I have  ascertained  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Liberty]  Billings,  of 
the  First  South  Carolina  (negro)  Regiment,  was  wounded  in  four  places 
in  the  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  land  at  Palatka. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier - General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  East  Florida, 

No.  244.  j Lake  City , April  11,  1863. 

The  brigadier-general  commanding  has  much  pleasure  in  commending 
in  the  highest  degree  the  gallantry  and  bravery  of  Capt.  J.  J.  Dickison, 
Company  H,  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  his  officers  and  men,  in  their  vic- 
tory over  the  enemy,  on  the  27th  March,  at  Palatka.  The  enemy  landed 
iu  large  force,  and  were  doubtless  sure  of  an  easy  victory  at  so  isolated 
a point,  but  they  were  met  by  Captain  Dickison  and  his  gallant  men 
with  a coolness  and  daring  deserving  the  emulation  of  all  soldiers.  They 
attacked  the  enemy  )vith  their  small-arms,  and  in  comparatively  open 
view  of  the  formidable  batteries  of  their  gunboat,  and  drove  them  on 
board  in  the  greatest  confusion,  killing  and  wounding  many,  and  with- 
ouc  loss  to  themselves. 

The  brigadier-general  commanding  also  notices  with  the  highest  ap- 


240  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

probation  the  vigilance  and  good  services  of  this  company  ever  since  its 
entrance  upon  the  active  duties  of  the  service.  Being  stationed  at  an 
isolated  point,  at  a long  distance  from  support,  they  have  performed 
their  duty  well  and  faithfully,  and  have  rendered  as  useful  service  to 
the  country,  and  particularly  to  the  civil  interests  of  the  district,  as  any 
other  troops  in  the  world  of  the  same  number  could  have  done,  and  they 
deserve  in  the  highest  degree  the  thanks  not  only  of  the  commanding 
general  but  of  the  whole  district. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan: 

R.  B.  THOMAS, 

Major  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


APRIL  7,  1863.— Engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

REPORTS,  ETC.* 

No.  1. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

No.  2. — Maj.  D.  B.  Harris,  C.  S.  Engineers,  Chief  Engineer. 

No.  3. — Maj.  William  H.  Echols,  C.  S.  Engineers. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  Boswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Military  District. 

No.  5. — Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Sumter.. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  E.  Prioleau  Ravenel,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  7.— Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  on  Sullivan’s  Island. 

No.  8. — Col.  Lawrence  M.  Keitt,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  9. — Col.  William  Butler,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry,  commanding  Fort 
Moultrie. 

No.  10. — Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  Simkins,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry,  commanding  Bat- 
tery Bee. 

No.  11. — Capt.  J.  A.  Sitgreaves,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Battery 
Beauregard. 

No.  12.— Lieut.  Col.  A.  T.  Dargan,  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  13. — Maj.  C.  K.  Huger,  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  artillery  on  Morris 
Island. 

No.  14. — Col.  A.  D.  Frederick,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort 
Johnson,  James  Island. 

No.  15. — Lieut.  W.  T.  Glassell,  C.  S.  Navy,  commanding  C.  S.  steamer  Chicora. 

No.  16. — Thanks  of  the  South  Carolina  Legislature. 

No.  17.— Capt.  Henry  S.  Tafft,  U.  S.  Signal  Corps,  Chief  Signal  Officer  Department 
of  the  South. 


No.  1. 

* 

Reports  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  May  19,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  with  this  the  report  of 
Brigadier-General  Ripley,  commanding  the  First  Military  District 

* The  reports  of  the  U.  S.  naval  commanders  are  published  with  the  Annual  Report 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  dated  December  7,  1863.  See  also  Hunter  to  Lincoln, 
May  22,  1863,  in  “Correspondence,  etc ,,”posf. 


241 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 

South  Carolina,  of  the  battle  of  the  7th  ultimo,  together  with  the  reports 
of  his  subordinate  officers,  and  of  Majs.  D.  B.  Harris  and  W.  H.  Echols, 
Provisional  Engineer  Corps. 

The  accumulation  of  the  enemy’s  troops,  transports,  and  iron-clad 
vessels  at  Port  Eoyal  during  the  months  of  February  and  March  and 
subsequently  in  the  North  Edisto  and  Stono  Eivers,  having  convinced 
me  that  the  long-threatened  attack  on  Charleston  was  immediately  im- 
pending, every  possible  precaution  was  at  once  made  for  the  exigency, 
including  the  concentration  at  strategic  points  in  this  vicinity  of  all 
available  troops  for  the  defense  of  the  several  land  approaches  to  the 
position,  and  provisions  for  the  further  and  rapid  concentration  upon 
this  point  of  forces  from  other  of  the  military  subdivisions  of  the  de- 
partment. 

On  the  5th  of  the  month  the  enemy’s  iron- clads  of  the  monitor  class 
appeared  and  anchored  off  the  bar,  which  they  crossed  on  the  follow- 
ing day,  accompanied  by  the  iron- mailed  frigate  New  Ironsides,  bearing 
£he  admiral’s  pennant. 

On  the  7th  of  April,  in  the  afternoon,  the  enemy  moved  forward  to 
the  attack  in  single  file,  seven  single-turreted  monitors,  to  wit:  Wee- 
liawken,  Catskill,  Montauk,  Nantucket,  Passaic,  Nahant,  and  Patapsco; 
the  Keokuk,  with  two  fixed  turrets,  and  the  New  Ironsides,  the  Wee- 
hawken  leading  and  the  New  Ironsides  fifth  in  the  order  of  battle.  By 
3 o’clock  p.  m.  the  head  of  the  line  had  come  within  easy  range  of  Forts 
Sumter  and  Moultrie,  and  Batteries  Beauregard,  Bee,  Cummings  Point, 
and  Wagner;  a few  minutes  later  the  first  gun  was  fired  from  Fort 
Moultrie,  and  soon  the  engagement  became  general.  On  our  side 
seventy-six  guns  of  various  calibers,  including  nine  mortars  and  fifteen 
smooth-bore  32-pounders,  were  brought  to  bear  on  the  fleet,  which  car- 
ried thirty-two  guns  of  the  heaviest  calibers  ever  used  in  war,  to  wit, 
15  and  11-inch  Dahlgren  guns  and  8 inch  rifled  pieces. 

The  Weehawken,  in  advance,  provided  with  a contrivance  for  catch- 
ing and  exploding  torpedoes,  was  soon  compelled  to  retire  before  the 
iron  storm  it  encountered.  The  New  Ironsides,  at  the  distance  of  1,700 
yards  from  Fort  Sumter,  was  frequently  struck,  and  was  next  forced  to 
fall  back  out  of  range,  evidently  injured. 

The  Keokuk,  having  mean  time  approached  to  about  900  yards  of  Fort 
Sumter,  was  quickly  riddled,  her  guns  silenced,  and  she  was  withdrawn 
from  the  fight  vitally  crippled. 

The  remaining  monitors,  six  in  number,  with  twelve  guns,  maintained 
their  fire  until  5.25  p.  m.,  when  they  too  retired  out  of  range  of  our  bat- 
teries and  came  to  anchor,  four  of  them  hors  de  combat  and  one  of  them 
(the  Passaic)  so  disabled  as  to  make  it  necessary  to  send  her  under  tow 
at  once  to  Port  Eoyal.  On  the  following  morning  the  full  extent  of 
the  injury  done  to  the  Keokuk  was  shown,  as  she  sunk  at  her  anchors 
in  the  shallow  water  off  Morris  Island.  Her  armament,  two  11-inch 
Dahlgren  guns,  two  U.  S.  flags,  two  pennants,  and  three  signal  flags 
have  since  been  taken  from  her,  and  the  former  are  now  in  position  for 
effective  service — substantial  trophies  of  the  affair.  The  New  Ironsides 
and  six  monitors  remained  at  anchor  within  the  bar,  but  out  of  effective 
range  of  any  of  our  works,  until  the  afternoon  of  the  12th  of  April, 
their  crews  and  a corps  of  mechanics  visibly  and  actively  employed  re- 
pairing damages  and  apparently  preparing  to  renew  the  attack ; then, 
weighing  anchor,  they  all  recrossed  the  bar,  the  New  Ironsides  to  resume 
her  position  as  one  of  the  blockading  fleet  and  the  monitors  (four  of 
them  in  tow)  to  return  to  Port  Eoyal.  For  the  details  of  this  conflict  \ 

10  r pv— yoL  xiv 


242 


COASTS  O.F  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXYL 


beg  to  refer  to  the  several  reports  herewith  submitted ; but  it  may  not 
be  amiss  to  recapitulate  some  of  the  salient  results. 

The  action  lasted  two  hours  and  twenty-five  minutes,  but  the  chief 
damage  is  reported  by  the  enemy  to  have  been  done  in  thirty  minutes. 
The  Keokuk  did  not  come  nearer  than  900  yards  of  Fort  Sumter;  she 
was  destroyed.  The  New  Ironsides  could  not  stand  the  fire  at  the  range 
of  a mile;  four  of  her  consorts  (monitors)  were  disabled  at  the  distance 
of  not  less  than  1,300  yards.  They  had  only  reached  the  gorge  of  the 
harbor — never  within  it  — and  were  baffled  and  driven  back  before  reach- 
ing our  lines  of  torpedoes  and  obstructions,  which  had  been  constructed 
as  an  ultimate  defensive  resort  as  far  as  they  could  be  provided.  The 
heaviest  batteries  had  not  been  employed.  Therefore  it  may  be  accepted, 
as  shown,  that  these  vaunted  monitor  batteries,  though  formidable  en- 
gines of  war,  after  all  are  not  invulnerable  nor  invincible,  and  may  be 
destroyed  or  defeated  by  heavy  ordnance  properly  placed  and  skill- 
fully handled.  In  reality  they  have  not  materially  altered  the  military 
relations  of  forts  and  ships.  On  this  occasion  the  monitors  operated 
under  the  most  favorable  circumstances.  The  day  was  calm,  and  th£ 
water  consequently  was  as  stable  as  of  a river ; their  guns  were  fired 
with  deliberation,  doubtless  by  trained  artillerists.  According  to  the 
enemy’s  statements  the  fleet  fired  151  shots;  8 of  which  are  ascribed  to 
the  New  Ironsides,  3 to  the  Keokuk,  and  but  9 to  the  Passaic,  which 
was  so  badly  damaged.  Not  more  than  34  shots  took  effect  on  the  walls 
of  Fort  Sumter — abroad  mark — which,  with  the  number  of  discharges, 
suggests  that  the  monitor  arrangement  as  yet  is  not  convenient  for  accu- 
racy or  celerity  of  fire.  Fort  Moultrie  and  our  other  batteries  were  not 
touched  in  a way  to  be  considered,  while  in  return  they  threw  1,399  shots. 
At  the  same  time  Fort  Sumter  discharged  810  shots,  making  the  total 
number  of  shots  fired  2,209,  of  which  the  enemy  report  that  520  struck 
the  different  vessels ; a most  satisfactory  accuracy  when  the  smallness  of 
the  target  is  considered.  This  precision  was  due  not  only  to  the  discipline 
and  practice  of  the  garrisons  engaged,  but  in  no  slight  degree  to  an  in- 
vention of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  which  had  been  applied  to  many  of  our  best  guns,  and  which 
shall  as  fast  as  possible  be  arranged  for  all  the  heavy  ordnance  in  the  de- 
partment. By  this  felicitous  device  our, guns  were  easily  held  trained 
upon  the  monitors,  although  the  latter  were  constantly  in  movement,  and 
this  with  but  5 men  at  the  heaviest  pieces. 

The  reports  of  the  engineers  herewith  will  show  the  precise  extent  of 
the  damage  inflicted  on  Fort  Sumter.  It  is  sufficient  for  me  to  say  that 
at  the  time  the  enemy  quit  these  waters  the  work  was  capable  of  resist- 
ing as  formidable  an  attack  as  the  one  it  had  just  foiled. 

For  the  casualties  of  the  day,  so  slight,  I must  refer  you  to  the  reports 
herewith.  Too  much  praise  cannot  be  given  to  the  officers  and  men  in 
all  the  works  engaged  for  their  spirit,  gallantry,  and  discipline,  .which 
indeed  I had  a right  to  expect  from  the  high  soldierly  condition  into 
which  these  garrisons  had  been  brought  by  their  officers.  My  expecta- 
tions were  fully  realized,  and  the  country  as  well  as  the  State  of  South 
Carolina  may  well  be  proud  of  the  men  who  first  met  and  vanquished 
the  iron-mailed,  terribly  armed  Armada,  so  confidently  prepared  and  sent 
forth  by  the  enemy  to  certain  and  easy  victory. 

To  the  professional  resources,  skill  as  an  artillery  officer,  intelligent 
and  indefatigable  zeal  and  assiduity  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  com- 
manding the  First  Military  District,  and  especially  charged  with  the  de- 
fense of  the  harbor,  much  is  due  for  the  completeness  of  the  defenses 
and  the  proud  results  of  the  7 th  of  April.  He  was  ably  seconded  by  his 


243 


Chap.  XXVLl  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 

subordinate  commanders,  whose  services  he  has  fitly  noticed  in  his  own 
report. 

To  Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales,  chief  of  ordnance  and  artillery,  and  Maj.  D. 
B.  Harris,  chief  engineer,  and  Maj.  W.  H.  Echols,  Provisional  Engineer 
Corps,  and  their  several  assistants  I return  my  thanks  for  valuable  serv- 
ices in  their  respective  departments. 

I have  also  to  record  my  obligations  to  the  Hon.  William  Porcher 
Miles,  Representative  in  Congress,  for  constantly  exerted  services  in 
securing  for  the  defense  of  Charleston  so  many  of  the  heaviest  guns 
wielded  so  effectually. 

The  Confederate  States  iron-clad  ships  Palmetto  State  and  Chicora, 
under  the  command  of  Capt.  J.  R.  Tucker,  C.  S.  Navy,  as  soon  as  the 
enemy  advanced  to  the  attack,  took  their  positions,  previously  arranged, 
ready  to  perform  their  part  in  the  conflict  at  the  opportune  moment. 
On  the  day  after  the  combat  Flag-Officer  Lynch,  C.  S.  Navy,  arrived 
here  from  North  Carolina  with  an  effective  detachment  of  sailor  artil- 
lerists to  tender  service  in  any  battery.  He  was  assigned  to  a most 
responsible  position— Cummings  Point  Battery— but  was  in  three  days 
thereafter  recalled  by  the  Navy  Department. 

The  flags  and  trophies  sent  herewith  were  taken  from  the  wreck  of 
the  Keokuk  by  Lieut.  W.  T.  Glassell,  C.  S.  Navy.  The  more  material 
trophies,  two  11-inch  Dahlgren  pieces,  now  in  battery,  were  recovered 
under  the  supervision  of  General  Ripley  by  the  mechanical  resources 
and  energy  of  Mr.  Adolphus  LaCoste,  employ^  of  the  district  ordnance 
department,  assisted  by  parties  from  the  garrison  of  Fort  Sumter,  under 
command  of  Lieut.  S.  Cordes  Boyleston,  and  Lieuts.  J.  M.  Rhett  and  K. 
Kemper,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

The  enemy’s  land  forces,  collected  in  considerable  strength  on  Sea- 
brook  Island,  and  in  transports  in  North  Edisto  River  and  on  Folly, 
Cole’s,  and  other  islands  about  the  mouth  of  the  Stono  River,  made  no 
attempt  to  co-operate  actually  with  the  naval  attack. 

In  conclusion,  I shall  avail  myself  of  the  occasion  to  give  as  my  opin- 
ion that  the  best,  the  easiest,  way  to  render  Fort  Sumter  impregnable 
would  be  to  arm,  conformably  to  its  original  plan,  both  tiers  of  case- 
mates and  the  barbette,  with  the  heaviest  guns,  rifled  or  smooth-bore, 
that  can  be  made. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


[Inclosure.] 

[Copied  from  United  States  journals.] 


New  Ironsides  fired 

Catskill  fired 

Keokuk  fired 

Montauk  fired 

Nantucket  fired 

Passaic  fired 

Nakant  fired 

Weehawken  fired  .. 
Patapsco  fired 


Rounds. 
...  8 
...  25 
...  3 

...  26 
...  15 

...  9 

...  24 

...  26 
...  18 


154 


244  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


New  Ironsides  received  of  sliots 65 

Keokuk  received  of  shots 90 

Weehawken  received  of  shots 60 

Mootauk  received  of  shots 20 

Passaic  received  of  shots 58 

Nantucket  received  of  shots 51 

Catskill  received  of  shots 51 

Patapsco  received  of  shots 45 

Nahant  received  of  shots *. 80 


520 

THOMAS  JOED  AH, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  October  15,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army : 

General  : In  a published  circular  (Ho.  39)  of  the  State  Department 
at  Washington,  signed  by  Mr.  William  H.  Seward,  and  addressed  to 
the  diplomatic  agents  of  the  Government  abroad,  I notice  a statement 
relative  to  the  defeat  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  fleet  in  the  attack  on 
Fort  Sumter  on  the  7th  April  last  so  contrary  to  the  actual  facts  of 
the  case  that  I feel  called  upon,  as  commander  of  this  military  depart- 
ment, most  emphatically  to  deny  the  truth  of  that  version,  which  is  as 
follows : 

An  attack  by  the  fleet,  on  the  7th  of  April  last,  upon  the  forts  and  batteries  which 
defend  the  harbor  of  Charleston  failed  because  the  rope  obstructions  in  the  channel 
fouled  the  screws  of  the  iron-clads  and  com  pelled  them  to  return  after  passing  through 
the  tire  of  the  batteries.  These  vessels  bore  the  fire  of  the  forts,  although  some  de- 
fects of  construction  were  revealed  by  the  injuries  they  received.  The  crews  passed 
through  an  unexampled  cannonade  with  singular  impunity.  Not  a life  was  lost  on 
hoard  a monitor. 

From  the  inclosed  reports*  of  Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley,  Col.  William 
Butler,  and  Col.  Alfred  Bliett,  who  commanded  at  that  period  respect- 
ively in  this  military  district  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and 
Fort  Sumter,  it  will  be  seen  that — 

1st.  No  iron-clads  came  nearer  than  about  600  yards  of  the  rope  ob- 
structions, except  the  disabled  Keokuk,  which  drifted  in  to  about  300 
yards  before  it  could  be  again  got  under  way  but  in  a sinking  condi- 
tion, consequently  the  propellers  of  the  iron  clads  ne.ver  could  have 
become  entangled  in  the  rope  obstructions. 

2d.  The  iron-clads  never  passed  through  the  fire  of  the  batteries,  for 
they  never  approached  nearer  than  from  1,100  to  1,300  yards  of  the 
outer  batteries,  except  the  Keokuk,  which  came  up  to  about  900  yards 
and  was  sunk.  Hone  of  the  iron-clads  came  within  range  of  the  heaviest 
batteries  in  Fort  Sumter  and  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  which  they  would 
have  been  compelled  to  do  on  entering  the  harbor. 

3d.  The  fleet  did  not  escape  without  material  injury,  for  one  of  the 
number,  the  Keokuk,  was  sunk,  and  its  armament  is  now  in  position 
for  defense  of  Charleston  on  our  own  batteries.  Another  monitor  had 
to  be  sent  to  Hew  York  for  extensive  repairs,  and  several  others  were 
sent  to  Port  Eoyal  also  for  repairs. 

4th.  Hot  a life  may  have  been  lost  on  the  iron-clads,  but  on  examina- 
tion of  the  wreck  of  the  Keokuk  its  hull  was  found  penetrated,  and  the 
10-inch  round  shots  and  7-iuch  rifled  bolts  had  made  clean  holes  through 

*See  pp.  1015-1017. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  245 

its  turrets.  Several  United  States  flags,  3 officers’  swords,  pistols,  &c., 
a quantity  of  bloody  clothes  and  blankets  were  found  on  board. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  B.  B.  Harris , C.  S.  Engineers , Chief  Engineer. 

Office  of  Chief  Engineer, 
Charleston , S.  <7.,  April  28,  1863. 

General  : In  compliance  with  instructions  Major  Echols  has  made 
a report  in  detail  of  the  engagement  on  the  7th  instant  of  the  enemy’s 
iron-clad  fleet  with  the  forts  and  batteries  commanding  the  outer  harbor 
of  this  city,  which  1 have  the  honor  to  hand  you  herewith. 

This  report  is  based  upon  information  derived  from  the  commanding 
officers  of  the  forts  and  batteries  engaged  in  the  fight  and  upon  an  ex- 
amination in  company  with  myself  of  those  works  on  the  8th  and  9th 
instant. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  directed  chiefly  against  Fort  Sumter  at  a 
distance  of  from  900  to  1,500  yards.  The  injuries  to  the  fort,  of  which 
the  tables  and  drawings  accompanying  Major  Echols’  report  give  an 
accurate  description,  were  not  of  a character  to  impair  its  efficiency. 
The  crushing  effect  of  the  enemy’s  heavy  missiles  was  less  than  I had 
anticipated.  The  chief  damage  was  probably  caused  by  the  explosion 
of  shells  against  and  in  the  walls  of  the  fort. 

The  manner  in  which  the  fort  withstood  the  bombardment  is  a mat- 
ter of  congratulation,  and  encourages  us  to  believe  that  the  repairs  that 
have  been  made  and  the  measures  now  in  progress  to  strengthen  and 
protect  its  walls  will  enable  the  fort  to  withstand  a much  more  formida- 
ble bombardment  with  like  good  results. 

Of  the  other  works  engaged,  none  of  which  attracted  much  of  the 
enemy’s  attention,  only  one  (Fort  Moultrie)  received  any  damage,  and 
that  was  very  trivial. 

Fort  Moultrie,  Battery  Wagner,  and  Cummings  Point  Battery  fired 
upon  the  fleet  at  a distance  of  from  1,200  to  1,500  yards ; Batteries  Bee 
and  Beauregard,  at  a distance  of  from  1,600  to  2,000  yards — too  far,  in 
the  case  of  the  latter-named  batteries,  for  useful  effect  against  iron- 
clads. 

Our  batteries  were  admirably  served  by  our  skilled  artillerists.  Much 
of  the  rapidity  and  accuracy  with  which  our  heavy  guns  were  fired  was 
due  to  the  use  of  Colonel  Yates’  traverser,  with  the  merits  of  which  the 
general  commanding  has  been  fully  impressed. 

Our  batteries  discharged  about  2,200  shot  of  all  sorts ; the  enemy’s 
fleet  about  110,  chiefly  15-inch  shell  and  11-inch  solid  shot;  not  less  than 
80  of  which  were  directed  at  Fort  Sumter. 

The  sinking  of  the  Keokuk  and  the  discomfiture  of  other  iron-clads 
has  established  their  vulnerability  to  our  heavy  projectiles  at  a range, 
say,  of  from  900  to  1,200  yards. 

It  appeared  on  an  examination  of  the  wreck  of  the  Keokuk,  on  the 
16th  instant,  by  Lieutenant  Boyleston,  confirmed  in  the  main  by  my 
own  observations  on  the  19th  instant,  that  her  turrets  within  4J  feet  of 
their  tops  had  been  pierced  by  four  10-inch  shot  and  one  7-inch  rifle 


246  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XX YI. 

shot,  and  a wrought-iron  Brooke  bolt  had  penetrated  seven-eighths  of  its 
length  and  stuck  in  the  plating.  Several  severe  indentations  were  also 
observed,  near  which  the  plates  were  warped  and  the  bolts  broken  or 
started.  The  top  of  the  smoke-stack  of  sheet-iron  was  very  much  torn, 
and  the  bottom  of  it — of  similar  structure  to  the  turrets — pierced  by  a 
10-inch  shot.  The  vessel  having  sunk  in  13  feet  of  water  prevented  an 
examination  of  the  lower  portions  of  her  turrets  or  of  her  hull,  which  no 
doubt  were  served  in  like  manner.  From  this  it  would  appear  that  the 
10-inch  shot  are  just  as  effective  at  the  distance,  say,  of  900  yards,  as  the 
7-inch  Brooke  bolts  against  such  structures  as  the  turrets  of  the  Keokuk. 

The  result  of  this  engagement  is  highly  gratifying,  and  increases  our 
confidence  in  our  ability,  with  good  batteries  of  suitable  guns,  to  con- 
tend successfully  with  vessels  of  the  monitor  class.  The  enemy’s  evi- 
dent and  just  dread  of  torpedoes,  as  evinced  in  his  preparation  for  their 
explosion  by  the  u devil”  or  torpedo-searcher,  should  induce  us  to  mul- 
tiply our  defenses  of  that  character  in  whatsoever  manner  they  can  be 
made  available. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Engineers . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  H.  Echols , C.  S.  Engineers. 

Confederate  States  Engineers’  Office, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  April  9,  1863. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  engage- 
ment between  Fort  Sumter  and  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  ffeet  on  the  7th 
April,  1863,  at  3 o’clock  p.  m.,  lasting  two  hours  and  twenty-five  minutes. 

The  incidents  which  transpired  during  the  engagement  are  based  upon 
information  received  from  the  officers  in  charge  of  tile  works,  but  more 
particularly  from  the  observations  of  Colonel  Rhett,  commanding  Fort 
Sumter,  and  Lieut.  S.  C.  Boyleston,  adjutant  First  Regiment  South  Caro- 
lina Artillery,  who  made  special  observations  during  the  whole  action  j 
the  remainder  from  personal  inspection  afterward. 

Forts  Sumter,  Moultrie,  Batteries  Bee,  Beauregard,  Cummings  Point, 
and  Wagner  were  engaged.  The  fleet  consisted  of  the  Ironsides,  sup- 
posed armament  sixteen  guns ; the  Keokuk,  two  stationary  turrets,  car- 
rying one  gun  each,  and  seven  single  revolving  turreted  vessels,  carry- 
ing, supposed,  two  guns  in  each,  presumed  to  be  the  Montauk,  Passaic, 
Weehawken,  Patapsco,  Nahant,  Catskill,  and  Nantucket,  which  took 
position  from  900  to  1,500  yards  from  Fort  Sumter. 

They  steamed  up  main  Ship  Channel  toward  Fort  Moultrie  in  line  of 
battle  as  follows : Four  single  turrets,  Ironsides,  three  single  turrets, 
and  Keokuk,  following  one  after  the  other  at  intervals  of  about  300  yards, 
the  foremost  one  moving  slowly,  and  carrying  on  her  prow  the  u devil,” 
or  torpedo-searcher,  a description  and  drawing  of  which  are  appended. 
When  within  2,200  yards  Fort  Moultrie  fired  the  first  gun  upon  her  near 
buoy  No.  3,  then  distant  about  1,500  yards  from  Fort  Sumter,  which  had 
previously  trained  her  battery  of  barbette  guns  upon  the  buoy,  and 
opened  fire  by  battery  when  she  reached  that  position,  at  three  minutes 
past  3 o’clock. 


Chap.  ixtfl.1  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


247 


The  first  turret  opened  fire  at  five  minutes  past  3,  and  moved  back- 
ward, thus  developing  their  maneuver  of  attack.  At  this  moment  the 
engagement  became  general.  The  second  turret  passed  the  first,  fired, 
moved  backward;  the  first  moved  forward,  passed  the  second,  fired, 
and  backed,  then  retired  from  action;  the  other  turrets  maneuvering  in 
the  same  relative  manner,  each  time  nearing  or  receding  a little  from 
the  fort  in  order  not  to  present  a permanent  target. 

The  Ironsides,  when  at  1,700  yards  from  Moultrie  and  2,000  yards 
from  Sumter,  stopped,  discharged  a battery  at  the  former,  when  Sum- 
ter concentrated  a heavy  fire  upon  her.  Numbers  of  shot  were  seen  to 
strike  her  and  several  to  penetrate,  three  at  least,  in  her  wooden  stern. 
Deeming  2,000  yards  too  close  quarters  she  retired  out  of  range,  sup- 
posed injured,  in  favor  of  less  prominent  and  more  formidable  imps, 
after  an  engagement  of  forty  five  minutes.  The  Keokuk,  at  five  min- 
utes past  4,  defiantly  turning  her  prow  directly  toward  Sumter,  firing 
from  her  forward  turret  gun,  the  batteries  Of  Sumter,  Moultrie,  Bee,  and 
Cummings  Point  were  concentrated  upon  her,  her  turrets  receiving 
numbers  of  well-directed  shots,  several  apparently  penetrating,  showed 
evidence  of  considerable  damage.  When  within  900  yards  she  was 
struck,  supposed  by  a wrought-iron  bolt,  117  pounds,  from  a 7-inch 
Brooke  rifle  en  barbette , near  her  bow,  penetrating  and  ripping  up  a 
plating  about  6 feet  long  and  2J  wide,  which  ended  her  career.  She 
stopped,  seemed  disabled  for  a few  minutes,  then  turned  to  the  channel, 
and  proceeded  toward  the  bar  at  forty-five  minutes  to  4.  She  sank  off 
the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  at  half-past  8 o’clock  the  following  morn- 
ing. Her  smoke-stack  and  turrets  are  now  visible  at  low  water.  From 
her  wreck  floated  ashore  a book,  a spy- glass, 'and  pieces  of  furniture, 
bespattered  with  blood,  and  small  fragments  of  iron  sticking  in  them. 

The  firing  of  the  turrets  was  timed.  They  discharged  generally  at  in- 
tervals of  ten  minutes.  The  engagement  lasted  two  hours  and  twenty- 
five  minutes.  Allowing  six  of  them  constantly  engaged,  they  delivered 
87  shots ; one  fired  twice  and  retired ; the  Keokuk  fired  three  or  four 
times  and  the  Ironsides  about  17,  making  the  total  number  fired  by  the 
enemy  about  110,  which  were  principally  directed  at  Sumter.  Her  walls 
show  the  effect  of  55  missiles — shot,  shell,  and  fragments.  The  carriage 
of  a 10-inch  columbiad  on  western  face  was  completely  demolished  by  a 
shot  coming  over  the  parapet ; a 42-pounder  rifle  on  northeast  face  dis- 
mounted by  breaking  a traverse- wheel;  both  soon  remounted  in  position; 
four  small  holes  knocked  in  the  roof  of  the  eastern  quarters  by  grazing 
shots  ; an  8-inch  columbiad  burst  on  the  eastern  face,  throwing  the 
chassis  and  half  the  reinforce  over  the  parapet,  the  other  half  over  the 
quarters  in  the  parade,  demolished  the  carriage,  but  did  no  other  dam- 
age ; nearly  all  the  window-panes  and  some  of  the  sashes  in  the  fort 
♦ were  broken  by  concussion. 

The  accompanying  table  of  effects  of  shot  and  sketches  of  the  eleva- 
tions of  the  faces  show  the  points  of  impact,  the  kind  of  projectile  used, 
so  far  as  could  be  ascertained  by  inspection  and  found  ; they  were  prin- 
cipally 15-inch  shells  and  11-inch  shot.  The  nature  of  the  material 
against  which  they  were  projected  crumbling  generally  without  retain- 
ing an  impression  precludes  any  positive  information  as  to  their  exact 
kind  or  caliber ; only  a few  were  evident.  To  the  best  of  my  judgment, 
according  to  the  effect,  eight  15-inch  shells  struck  the  faces ; two  of 
these  penetrated  the  wall  of  the  eastern  face  just  below  the  embrasures 
in  the  second  tier  next  to  the  east  pan  coupe , not  seriously  damaging 
the  masonry,  one  exploding  in  the  casemate  set  fire  to  some  bedding.; 
the  other  passed  through  a window  and  burst  in  the  center  of  the  fort. 


248  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Several  exploded  in  contact  with  the  wall',  by  which  the  principal  craters 
appear  to  have  been  formed.  One  passed  over  the  parapet  into  the 
quarters  on  the  western  side,  exploded,  damaging  several  walls.  Five 
11  inch  shot  struck  the  faces;  one,  penetrating  near  one  of  the  same  em- 
brasures pierced  by  the  15  inch  shell,  broke  through  and  stuck  into  the 
interior  wall  of  the  quarters.  Only  one  impression  represented  any 
appearance  of  a rifle  projectile.  One  15-inch  solid  shot,  one  15- inch 
hollow  shot,  several  15-incli  shells  and  11-inch  shot  were  found  in  and 
around  the  fort.  Fragments  of  15-inch  shells  were  picked  up  on  the 
outside.  The  berme  being  very  narrow  and  sloping  prevented  any 
means  of  ascertaining  by  the  bodies  themselves  their  kind,  all  being 
precipitated  into  the  water  after  striking.  It  is  reported  also  that 
several  shrapnel  were  fired  over  the  barbptte  guns  of  Sumter.  Some  of 
the  shells  which  exploded  in  contact  with  the  wall  may  probably  have 
been  percussion  rifle  shells,  as  some  of  the  turrets  are  known  to  carry 
8-inch  rifles,  but  no  fragments  were  found,  nor  do  any  of  the  officers  re- 
port indications  of  rifle  projectiles  by  sound  or  otherwise,  with  but  one 
exception.  The  commanding  officer  of  Battery  Wagner  reports  one  by 
sound  to  have  passed  over,  fired  by  the  Ironsides.  Nine  shots  were  tired 
at  Moultrie  at  distances — of  turrets,  1,300  yards  ; of  Ironsides,  1,700 
yards.  An  11-inch  shot  struck  down  the  flag-staff  at  thirty-seven  min- 
utes past  3,  passed  through  the  roof  of  the  quarters,  penetrated  the 
wall  of  the  ordnance  store  house,  about  2 feet  thick,  and  dropped  in 
the  room;  another  struck  the  glacis  aud  ricochetted  over  the  fort;  a 
third,  a 15-inch  shell,  burst  at  the  water’s  edge,  a fragment  of  which 
was  found;  the  others  passed  over.  Five  shots  were  fired  at  Battery 
Bee,  without  effect,  at  a distance  of  about  2,000  yards  ; one  fell  behind 
the  breakwater;  another  passed  along  the  front  of  the  battery  and 
burst;  the  others  passed  over.  Six  or  seven  were  fired  at  Battery 
Beauregard,  at  a distance  of  2,000  yards,  without  effect;  two  11-inch 
shot  were  found.  Two  w ere  fired  at  Cummings  Point  without  effect; 
one  at  1,200  or  1,300  yards,  from  Ironsides;  the  other  at  1,400  to  1,500 
yards,  from  a turret.  Four  were  tired  at  Battery  Wagner;  one  from 
Ironsides  -sounded  like  a rifle  shot  passing  through  the  air;  one  grazed 
top  of  traverse;  another  exploded  over  the  battery,  sending  a fragment 
into  a traverse. 

A single  turret,  which  fired  her  two  guns  simultaneously,  ceased  to 
fire  one  of  them  at  about  4 o’clock,  half  of  the  port  being  closed  the  re- 
mainder of  the  action ; cause  not  visible.  They  wrere  frequently  struck 
upon  their  decks,  and  several  shot  were  seen  sticking  in  the  hull  of  one 
of  them,  and  from  another  steam  issued  when  struck  upon  it.  A cast- 
iron  bolt,  rifle  42,  struck  a leveled  plate  or  guard  around  the  base  of  a 
turret,  which  curved  and  turned  one  end  up. 

The  projectiles  generally  broke  in  pieces,  as  could  be  seen  by  frag- 
ments falling  in  the  water,  or  bounded  from  the  vessel.  One,  after 
striking,  was  observed  to  drop  and  rest  at  the  foot  of  the  turret.  Sev- 
eral of  the  smoke-stacks  were  penetrated. 

A lookout  appeared  on  top  of  one  of  the  turrets,  apparently  observing 
the  effect  of  the  shot;  at  the  flash  of  a battery  from  Moultrie  he  in- 
stantly disappeared. 

The  casualties  are  slight.  At  Sumter  5 men  were  wounded  by  frag- 
ments of  masonry  and  wood.  One  of  the  negroes  engaged  at  work  at 
the  fort,  who  was  sitting  on  the  berme  of  the  western  face,  wTas 
wounded  by  a brick  knocked  from  the  parapet  and  falling  upon  his 
he&d. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  249' 

At  Moultrie  1 man  was  killed  by  the  falling  of  the  flag-staff  when 
shot  away. 

At  Battery  Wagner  an  ammunition  chest  in  the  angle  of  the  parapet 
and  traverse  in  the  chamber  of  the  32-pounder  exploded  from  the  blast 
of  the  gun,  killing  3 men,  mortally  wounding  1,  slightly  wounding  Lieu- 
tenant Steedman,  in  charge  of  the  gun,  and  3 men ; blew  them  about  20 
feet,  cracked  the  traverses,  threw  the  shot  from  the  pile  of  balls  in 
every  direction,  and  slightly  damaged  the  chassis. 

I arrived  at  Fort  Sumter  about  2 o’clock  at  night  after  the  engage- 
ment, and  found  Mr.  E.  J.  White,  of  the  Engineer  Department,  busily 
engaged  building  in  the  casemates,  first  and  second  tiers,  behind  the 
damaged  walls,  with  sand  bags ; several  of  them  were  completed  and 
considerably  strengthened.  This  work  was  continued  all  night  and  the 
next  day  by  the  garrison  and. the  50  negroes  who  had  been  employed 
at  the  fort  and  remained  during  the  engagement.  On  the  following 
morning  the  fleet  lay  inside  the  bar  in  the  same  line  of  battle  in  which 
they  approached,  the  first  one  about  2 J miles  from  Sumter  and  1 J miles 
from  Morris  Island.  Men  were  visible  all  day  on  the  turret  of  one  ham- 
mering, evidently  repairing  her  plating.  Wind-sails  were  set,  indicat- 
ing that  their  quarters,  even  at  this  season  of  the  year,  were  uncomfort- 
able and  badly  ventilated.  About  noon  one  of  the  turrets  went  south, 
probably  to  Port  Boyal  for  repairs,  or  for  the  security  of  that  place 
against  our  iron  clads  from  Savannah. 

The  Ironsides  has  kept  up  a full  head  of  steam  since  the  engagement, 
as  can  be  seen  by  her  constantly  blowing  off.  Three  holes  are  distinctly 
seen  in  her  stern ; two  just  above  the  water  line. 

The  “devil”  floated  ashore  on  Morris  Island ; the  cables  by  which  it 
was  attached  to  the  turret’s  bow  were  cut  away.  It  is.  probable  that 
the  “devil,”  becoming  unmanageable,  was  the  cause  of  the  turret  retiring 
early  from  the  action,  it  being  a massive  structure,  consisting  of  two 
layers  of  white  pine  timbers  18  inches  square,  strongly  bolted  together; 
a re-entering  angle  20  feet  deep  to  receive  the  bow  of  the  vessel,  50 
feet  long,  27  feet  wide ; a layer  of  beveled  timbers  on  the  front,  forming 
a bow ; seven  heavy  iron  plates,  through  which  passed  chains  directly 
down  and  over  the  sides  through  hawser-pipes ; to  these  were  attached 
grappling  irons,  with  double  prongs,  suspended  underneath,  at  the 
sides  and  bow ; in  the  countersinks  of  the  plates  were  loose  iron  rollers, 
apparently  to  facilitate  the  drawing  of  the  chains  through  the  holes 
over  them  when  the  grapplings  took  hold,  to  drag  up  to  the  “devil” 
whatever  he  may  catch  with  his  hooks. 

The  colors  of  the  six  turrets  remaining  on  the  8th  are  as  follows : 

First  turret,  lead  color;  stack,  lead  color;  top  of  stack,  red  with 
black  ring. 

Second  turret  and  stack,  black. 

Third  turret,  black  ; stack,  white ; top,  green. 

Fourth  turret,  black;  stack,  black;  top  stack,  one- third  lead  color. 

Fifth  turret  and  stack,  lead  color. 

Sixth  turret  and  stack,  black. 

The  hull  of  the  turret  in  running  trim  stands  about  2 feet  above  water 
level,  carrying  a whistle,  stove-pipe,  and  stanchions  for  swinging  a 
small  boat  on  deck,  with  a light  railing  around  it.  When  cleared  for 
action  she  is  submerged  almost  to  the  water  level ; the  other  articles 
all  removed  flush  with  the  deck ; the  issue  of  steam  from  the  deck  sev- 
eral times  observed,  if  not  from  injury,  is  probably  from  the  blow-off 
pipe,  taken  down  flush,  as  she  cannot  carry  it,  as  other  vessels,  on  her 
sides. 


250  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVl. 

I accompany  the  report  with  a sketch  of  the  battle  ground,  showing 
the  relative  positions  of  the  forts  and  fleet ; one  of  the  faces  of  the  fort, 
showing  parts  damaged;  one  of  the  Keokuk,*  one  of  a turret  sub- 
merged for  action,*  and  one  of  the  “devil.” 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  ECHOLS, 

Major , Engineers. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer  Department. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXvI.1  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  251 

flnclosurf'  Xo.  1.] 

PLAN  of  the  approach  and  attach  on  Fort  Sumter  by  the 
Federal  Iron- Clad  Fleet,  April  7,  1863. 

0 Beale  of  Miles- 


DriWjri-  1m  ftccarrvpany  Erujimeer  Reportr* 

~Wm.II Eihols. 

JVIaj.  Eng: 


ELEVATIONS  of  faces  of  Fort  Sumter,  showing  the  effect  of  the 


252 


COASTS  OF  S.  OA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap. XXVl 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


JVdrtAeccs-t  face. 


u/or 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR, 

flnclosure  No.  3.] 


s.  c. 


253 


- 


254 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MJD.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


[Inclosure  Xo.  4.] 

SKETCH  of  the  Devil,  or  Torpedo  Searcher,  carried  by  a 
Monitor  in  Charleston  Harbor,  April  7,  1863. 


Wm,  H.  ECHOLS, 

Maj.  of  Engineers. 


Cha 

[Th< 

No.  | 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

n 

12 

i3> 

m 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

31 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 


. xxvi.1  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


255 


[Inclosure  No.  5.] 


Table  of  effects  of  projectiles  on  walls  of  Fort  Sumter. 


numbers  correspond  with  those  on  drawing  of  elevations,  showing  the  locations  of  points  of 

impact.] 


Projectile. 

Penetration. 

Crater. 

Height.  1 

Width. 

Feet. 

Inches. 

Feet. 

Inches. 

Feet. 

Inches. 

2 

6 

2 

3 

4 

4 

9 

3 

4 

1 

1 

1 

1R 

33 

. 1 

2 

2 

2 

6 

10 

8 

2 

3 

6 

4 

1 

6 

3 

3 

li’rii.ormPTit,  nf  ahftll 

1 

6 

3 

3 

2 

2 

3 

3 

15 

1 

6 

3 

3 

3 

5 

5 

1 

6 

3 

3 

1 

6 

4 

3 

15-incli 

5 

4 

3 

5 

2 

2 

2 

6 

3 

6 

3 

6 

15-in  cli 

5 

4 

4 

l 

4 

2 

3 

2 

1 

2 

4 

5 

5 

1 

3 

4 

6 

2 

6 

2 

5 

3 

2 

1 

6 

2 

6 

2 

15-inch 

1 

3 

3 

4 

10 

2 

3 

’Fpfl.gm ftn f of  shell 

4 

2 

2 

2 

4 

4 

1 

2 

4 

2 

1 

3 

3 

10 

1 

6 

1 

6 

1 

2 

2 

2 

Fragment  of  shell. . . 

Remarks. 


Scaled. 

Scaled. 

Embrasure  A ; exterior  con- 
crete keystone  and  interior 
embrasure  arch  knocked  out; 
masonry  cracked. 

Assisted  No.  3 ; spent. 

Penetrated  concrete  and  new 
masonry  facing. 

Ricochet  and  spent. 

Scaled. 

Apparently  rifle  shot ; no  seri- 
ous injury. 

One  15-inch ; other  two  not 
known ; parapet  wall  cracked 
25  feet  in  length ; serious 
damage,  perhaps  by  explod- 
ing shell. 

Interior  arch  of  embrasure  B 
dislocated ; masonry  between 
piers  and  embrasure  badly 
shaken  and  projecting. 

Scaled. 

Shook  masonry. 

Scaled. 

Interior  embrasure  C ; arch 
broken ; masonry  cracked. 

Perhaps  exploding  shell. 

Scaled;  spent  ball. 

Masonry  shaken. 

Exploding  shell  on  pier;  not 
much  internal  injury. 

No  serious  injury. 

Masonry  around  embrasure  D 
badly  cracked  and  projecting 
inside. 

Penetrated,  striking  head  of 
arch  and  thrown  upward, 
tearing  away  a quantity  of 
masonry,  not  seriously  dam- 
aging body  of  masonry ; ex- 
ploded in  casemate. 

Same  effect  as  22;  destroyed 
embrasure  E. 

Not  seriously  damaging  body 
of  masonry. 

Same  effect  as  22;  destroyed 
embrasure  F ; exploded  in 
parade. 

Scaled  ; ricochet  and  spent. 

No  serious  damage. 

No  serious  damage. 

Serious  damage;  wall  not  much 
cracked. 

Scaled. 

Knocked  off  1 foot  of  angle. 

Knocked  off  6 inches  of  angle. 

Oblique  fire ; scaled. 

Scaled. 

Shook  masonry. 

Broke  and  projected  in  sole  of 
embrasure  G-. 

Very  oblique  fire;  no  damage. 

Very  oblique  fire ; no  damage. 

Very  oblique  fire ; no  damage. 

Very  oblique  fire;  no  damage. 

Exploding  shell. 

Oblique;  scaled. 

No  serious  injury. 


Scaled. 


256 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 
Table  of  effects  of  projectiles  on  walls  of  Fort  Sumter — Continued. 


Projectile. 

Penetration. 

Crater. 

Height. 

Width. 

Feet. 

Inches. 

Feet. 

Inches. 

Feet. 

Inches. 

2 

4 

5 

5 

1 

2 

5 

6 

3 

5 

3 

7 

6 

11-inch 

15-inch 

11-inch 

Remarks. 


Scaled  ; very  oblique. 

Exploding  shell ; cracked  para- 
pet wall. 

Knocked  out  iron  embrasure 
slab  1 foot  wide,  6 inches 
thick,  3 feet  long ; indented' 
it  1£  inches  and  broke  it  in 
three  pieces;  shook  masonry. 

No  serious  injury. 

Brick  traverse ; east  pan  coupS. 

Entered  western  quarters  and 
exploded,  damaging  walls. 

Entered  western  quarters  and 
remained  in  quarters. 

Pemolished  10-inch  columbiad 
carriage  and  chassis  in  south- 
west angle. 

Struck  end  stone  masonry 
berme  southeast  angle ; four 
small  holes  knocked  in  brick 
arch  roof  of  eastern  quarters 
by  grazing  shots  or  frag- 
ments from  traverse. 


WILLIAM  H.  ECHOLS, 

Major , Engineers, 


[Inclosure  No.  6.] 

Table  showing  the  number,  kind,  and  position  of  guns  in  action,  and  number  and  kind  of 
projectiles  used  against  the  iron- clad  fleet  before  Charleston,  April  7,  1863. 


Location. 


No. 


Kind  of  gun. 


Projectile. 


Shots. 


Fort  Sumter ; 810  shots ; east 
and  northeast  faces ; bar-  < 
bette. 

First  tier  casemate ^ 

Second  tier  casemate 

Fort  Moultrie,  868  shots | 

Battery  Bee,  283  shots | 

Battery  Beauregard,  157  ^ 
shots.  ^ 

Cummings  Point,  65  shots  . . | 

Battery  Wagner,  26  shots. ..  < 


2 

4 

4 

5 
2 
3 
2 
2 
8 
1 
.9 
5 
5 
2 
5 
1 

1 

2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 


7- inch  Brooke  rifles 

10-inch  columbiads 

8- inch  columbiads 

42-pounder  rifles 

9- inch  Dahlgrens 

10- inch  sea-coast  mortars. . 
8-inch  shell  guns  (navy) . . 

8-inch  guns  (navy) 

32-pounders  

42-pounder  rifle 

8-inch  columbiads 

32-pounder  rifles 

32-pounders 

10-mch  sea-coast  mortars. . 

10-inch  columbiads 

8-inch  columbiad 

8-inch  columbiads 

32-pounder  rifle 


10-inch  columbiad 
9-inch  Dalilgren.. 
32-pounder  rifle... 
24-pounder  rifle  .. 
32pounders 


Wrought-iron  bolts 

86 

Solid  shot . 

120 

160 

Solid  shot 

Shot  and  bolts 

138 

Shot 

54 

Shells  filled  with  melted  iron. . 
Shot ... 

40 

60 

Shot 

50 

Shot 

100 

Sb  ot,  

2 

Shot  and  5 incendiary  shells. . . 
192  bolts  • 38  shells 

344 

230 

Sbnt,  . 

243 

Shells 

51 

Shot 

225 

Shot 

58 

Shot 

64 

41  bolts  (75  pound) ; 45  shots. . 

7 shells  ... ........ 

93 

Shot 

37 

Shells 

28 

Shells  

9 

Shells 

1 

Shot 

16 

Humber  of  guns,  69 : total  number  of  shots  fired,  2,209. 

WILLIAM  H.  ECHOLS, 
Major , Engineers, 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


257 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First 
r , Military  District. 

Tort  Sumter,  April  7,  1863. 

Have  visited  Fort  Sumter.  One  10-incli  gun  carriage  and  chassis  dis- 
abled • one  8 inch  burst;  two  rifled  dismounted  and  now  replaced, 
walls  badly  shaken  in  two  or  three  places;  4 men  badly  wounded. 
The  engineers  should  look  out  and  have  material  and  laborers  toi  re- 
nairs  as  soon  as  possible.  Colonel  Bhett,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates, 
and  Maior  Blanding  are  doing  all  that  can  be  done  to  repair.  Do  send 
us  something  for  sandbags  to  fortify  shaken  places— if  the  people  send 
their  petticoats  and  pillow-cases — at  once.  One  steamer  should  be  sent 
downPwith  what  can  be  furnished  to  carry  ammunition  to  Morns  Island. 
Some  of  the  enemy  have  been  badly  hurt.  The  Keokuk  is  probably 
for  sale  Whether  the  attack  will  be  renewed  or  not  I cannot  judge, 
the  probability  is  that  it  will,  and  the  men  will  shoot  better  to-morrow 
than* to-day.  The  big  torpedo  did  not  explode ; I do  not  kno w why 
Shall  go  to  Morris  Island  in  an  hour  or  so  and  find  out.  I don  t think 
we  had  better  say  it  is  over,  but  will  let  you  know  in  the 

Brigadier-General  Jordan. 


Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , April  13,  1863. 

General  : Upon  the  1st  instant  the  increase  of  the  enemy’s  force 
iu  the  Stono  and  information  from  North  Edisto  gave  warning  that 
the  long  threatened  combined  movement  upon  Charleston  was  about  to 
take  place.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  commanding  first  sub  division  of  this 
district  James  Island,  and  Saint  Andrew’s,  took  prompt  measures  for 
the  observation  and  repulse  of  any  attack  iu  that  direction.  Co  . 
r F.  Graham,  commanding  third  sub-division,  occupied  the  shore  d 
Morris  Island,  on  Light-House  Inlet,  to  control  the  passage  from  Folly 
Island,  and  a strict  watch  has  been  kept  up  to  the  present  time  on  the 

1 a On^the  5th  the  iromclad  fleet  of  the  Abolitionists,  consisting  of  seven 
monitors  and  one  double-turreted  vessel,  hove  m sight  from  Fort  Sum- 
ter and  came  to  anchor  outside,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Ironsides  frigate, 
then  a part  of  the  blockading  squadron.  The  6th  was  apparently  spent 
by  the  enemy  in  preparation  and  by  our  artillerists  in  verifying  t 

condition  of  tficir  material.  . . , , oil  uia 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  the  enemy  was  inside  the  bar  with  all  his 

ironclads,  including  the  frigate,  but  from  his  proximity  to  the  shoals 
and  the  haze  of  the  atmosphere  his  position  could  not  be  wn  onThe 
The  various  works  of  preparation  were  progressed  with  both  on  the 
exterior  and  interior  lines  of  defense  until  about  2 o’clock  p.  m.,  when 
the  euemv  steamed  directly  up  the  channel,  the  Weehawken,  with  a 
false  prow  for  removing  torpedoes  attached,  leading,  followed  by  three 
monitors,  the  Ironsides  (flag-ship),  three  other  monitors;  the  Keokuk, 
double-turret,  bringing  up  the  rear, 

17  R R — VOL  XIV 


258 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  FAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

At  each  fort  and  battery  officers  and  men  made  preparation  for  im- 
mediate action,  while  the  enemy  came  slowly  and  steadily  on.  At  3 
o’clock  Fort  Moultrie  opened  fire.  At  five  minutes  past  3 the  leading 
vessel,  having  arrived  at  1,400  yards  of  Fort  Sumter,  opened  upon  it 
with  two  guns.  The  eastern  battery  of  Fort  Sumter  replied.  Bat- 
teries Bee,  Beauregard,  Wagner,  and  Cummings  Point  opened  about 
this  time  and  the  action  became  general,  the  four  leading  monitors  clos- 
ing np  on  the  Weehawken,  and  taking  position  at  an  average  distance 
from  the  forts  and  batteries  of  about  1,500  yards. 

In  accordance  with  instructions,  the  fire  from  the  different  points  was 
concentrated  upon  the  leading  vessels,  and  the  effect  was  soon  apparent 
from  the  withdrawal  of  the  leading  monitor  from  action,  her  false  prow 
having  been  detached  and  she  otherwise  apparently  injured.  The  re- 
maining monitors,  in  advance  of  the  flag  ship  held  their  position,  direct- 
ing their  fire  principally  at  Fort  Sumter,  but  giving  occasional  shots  at 
Fort  Moultrie  (of  which  the  flag-staff  was  shot  away),  Batteries  Beaure- 
gard and  Bee. 

The  Ironsides  meantime  opened  fire,  and  drew  the  attention  ot  Forts 
Moultrie  and  Sumter  and  the  Cummings  Point  Battery.  A tew  heavy 
and  concentrated  discharges  caused  her  to  withdraw  out  of  range,  where 
she  was  soon  followed  by  two  other  monitors. 

At  five  minutes  past  4 the  Keokuk  left  here  consorts  and  came  to 
the  front,  approaching  to  within  900  yards  of  Fort  Sumter,  1,200  from 
Battery  Bee,  and  1,000  of  Fort  Moultrie.  Her  advance  was  character- 
ized by  more  boldness  than  had  hitherto  been  shown  by  any  of  the 
enemy’s  fleet,  but  receiving  full  attention  from  the  powerful  batteries 
opposed  to  her  the  effect  was  soon  apparent.  The  10-inch  shot  and 

7- inch  rifle  bolts  crashed  through  her  armor;  her  hull  and  turrets  were 
riddled  and  stove  in,  her  boats  were  shot  away,  and  in  less  than  forty 
minutes  she  retired  with  such  speed  as  her  disabled  condition  would 
permit. 

The  remaining  monitors  kept  their  positions  for  a time,  but  soon  one 
by  one  dropped  down  the  channel  and  came  to  anchor  out  of  range, 
after  an  action  of  two  hours  and  twenty-five  minutes,  at  ranges  varying 
from  900  to  1 ,500  yards. 

The  full  effect  of  our  batteries  upon  the  enemy  could  not  be  precisely 
ascertained,  and  as  our  strength  had  not  been  entirely  put  forth  it  was 
believed  that  the  action  would  soon  be  renewed.  The  monitor  which 
had  led  into  the  action,  however,  proceeded  south  inside  of  the  bar  on 
the  same  evening. 

Before  the  commencement  of  the  affair  I was  proceeding  in  a boat  to 
Battery  Bee,  and  watched  the  progress  of  the  cannonade  from  that 
point.  The  guns  were  worked  with  as  much  precision  as  the  range 
would  admit.  There  were  no  damages  or  casualties.  Visiting  Fort 
Moultrie,  the  damaged  flag-staff  was  being  replaced  and  every thiug 
prepared  for  the  renewal  of  the  fire  should  the  enemy  approach  again. 
One  man  had  been  mortally  wounded  by  the  falling  of  the  staff.  Cross- 
ing the  channel  to  Fort  Sumter,  the  effect  of  impact  of  the  heavy  shot 
sent  by  the  enemy  against  the  fort  which  they  are  so  anxious  to  repos- 
sess, greater  in  caliber  and  supposed  distinctive  force  than  any  hitherto 
used  in  war,  was  found  to  have  been  much  less  than  had  been  antici- 
pated. Five  men  had  been  injured  by  splinters  from  the  traverse,  one 

8- inch  columbiad  had  exploded,  one  10-inch  carriage  had  its  rear  tran- 
som shot  away,  and  one  rifled  42-pounder  had  been  temporarily  disabled 
from  the  effect  of  recoil  on  defective  carriages. 

The  garrison  was  immediately  set  to  work  to  repair  damages,  and 


Chap  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  259 

the  strength  of  the  enemy’s  projectiles  having  been  ascertained,  to  guard 
such  points  as  might  be  exposed  to  their  effect  should  the  attack  be  re- 
newed. 

Cummings  Point  Battery  and  Battery  Wagner  were  uninjured,  ex- 
cept from  the  accidental  explosion  of  an  ammunition  chest  in  Battery 
Wagner. 

During  the  night  of  the  7th  stores  were  replenished,  threatened  points 
upon  land  re-enforced,  working  parties  from  the  Forty-sixth  Georgia  Begi- 
ment  brought  to  Fort  Sumter,  and  the  renewal  of  the  struggle  in  the 
morning  awaited  with  confidence. 

When  day  dawned  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  the  enemy’s  fleet  was 
discovered  in  the  same  position  as  noticed  on  the  previous  evening. 
About  9 o’clock  the  Keokuk,  which  had  been  evidently  the  most  damaged 
in  the  action,  went  down  about  3£  miles  from  Fort  Sumter  and  three- 
fourths  of  a mile  from  Morris  Island.  The  remainder  of  the  fleet  were 
repairing  damages.  Preparations  for  repulsing  a renewed  attack  were 
progressed  with  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  commanding 
general,  who  visited  Fort  Sumter  on  that  day.  A detachment  of  sea- 
men under  Flag  Officer  W.  F.  Lynch  arrived  from  Wilmington,  and  on 
the  9th  temporarily  relieved  the  artillerists  in  charge  of  the  Cummings 
Point  Battery.  The  operations  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  consisted  only  in 
supply  and  repair. 

Toward  evening  of  the  9th  a raft,  apparently  for  removing  torpedoes 
or  obstructions,  was  towed  inside  of  the  bar.  Nothing  occurred  of  im- 
portance during  the  10th. 

During  the  night  of  the  10th  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dargan,  of  Colonel 
Graham’s  command,  crossed  Light-House  Inlet,  drove  back  the  enemy’s 
pickets  with  loss,  and  returned  with  1 prisoner. 

On  the  11th  there  were  indications  that  the  attacking  fleet  was-about 
to  withdraw ; and  on  the  12th,  at  high  water,  the  Ironsides  crossed  the 
bar  and  tookuphei  position  with  the  blockading  fleet,  and  the  monitors 
steamed  and  were  towed  to  the  southward,  leaving  only  the  sunken  Keo- 
kuk as  a monument  of  their  attack  and  discomfiture. 

In  this  the  first  trial  of  the  Abolition  iron  fleet  against  brick  fortifica- 
tions and  their  first  attempt  to  enter  the  harbor  of  Charleston,  in  which 
they  were  beaten  before  their  adversaries  thought  the  action  had  well 
commenced,  they  were  opposed  by  seventy-six  pieces  in  all,  including 
mortars.  Thirty-seven  of  these,  exclusive  of  mortars,  were  above  the 
caliber  of  32-pounders.  The  expenditure  of  shot  against  the  fleet  was 
2,229  projectiles,  of  which  over  1,600  were  over  the  caliber  of  32-pounders. 

The  guns  which  the  enemy  brought  to  bear  were,  if  their  own  account 
is  to  be  believed,  30  in  number,  including  8 inch  rifled  and  11  and  15 
inch  guns,  yffiich  would  make  their  weight  of  metal  at  one  discharge 
nearly,  if  not  quite,  equal  to  that  thrown  by  the  batteries. 

During  the  action  Brigadier  General  Trapier,  commanding  second 
sub-division  of  this  district,  was  present  at  Fort  Moultrie ; Brigadier- 
General  Gist,  commanding  first  sub  division,  at  Fort  Johnson  ; Col.  B. 
F.  Graham,  commanding  third  sub  division,  on  Morris  Island,  and  Col. 
L.  M.  Keitt,  commanding  Sullivan’s  Island,  at  Battery  Bee,  attending 
to  these  duties  and  awaiting  the  development  of  the  attack.  The  ac- 
tion, however,  was  purely  of  artillery ; forts  and  batteries  against  the 
iron-clad  vessels  of  the  enemy ; other  means  of  defense,  obstructions 
and  torpedoes,  not  having  come  into  play. 

Fort  Sumter  was  the  principal  object  of  the  enemy’s  attack,  and  to  that 
garrison,  under  its  gallant  commander.  Col.  Alfred  Bhett,  ably  seconded 
by  Lieut.  Col.  J.  A.  Yates  and  Maj.  Orinsby  Blanding,  and  all  the  offi- 


260 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


cers  and  men,  special  credit  is  due  for  sustaining  the  shock  and  with 
their  powerful  armament  contributing  principally  to  the  repulse. 

The  garrison  of  Fort  Moultrie,  under  Col.  William  Butler,  seconded  by 
Major  Baker  and  the  other  officers  and  soldiers,  upheld  the  historic  rep- 
utation of  that  fort  and  contributed  their  full  share  to  the  result.  The 
powerful  batteries  of  Battery  Bee  were  commanded  by  Lieut.  Col.  J.  C. 
Simkins,  and  were  served  with  great  effect. 

Battery  Wagner,  under  Maj.  C.  K.  Huger;  Cummings  Point  Battery, 
under  Lieutenant  Lesesne,  and  Battery  Beauregard,  under  Captain  Sit- 
greaves,  all  did  their  part  according  to  their  armament. 

Indeed,  from  the  reports  of  the  commanders,  it  is  hard  to  make  any 
distinction  where  all  did  their  duty  with  devotion  and  zeal.  Those 
cases  which  have  been  ascertained  will  be  found  in  the  reports  of  the  | 
subordinate  commanders.  The  steady  preparation  for  receiving  a re  j 
newed  attack  by  the  officers  and  the  good  conduct  and  discipline  of  the 
troops,  especially  in  the  garrison  of  Fort  Sumter,  where  the  labor  was 
necessarily  great,  have  been  quite  as  creditable  as  their  conduct  under 
fire. 

While  service  in  immediate  action  is  that  which  is  most  conspicuous, 
after  such  a result  as  has  been  accomplished,  the  greatest  credit  is  due 
to  that  long,  patient,  and  laborious  preparation  by  which  our  works 
and  material,  never  originally  intended  to  withstand  such  an  attack  as 
has  been  encountered,  have  been  so  resecured  as  to  enable  our  gallant 
and  well-instructed  officers  and  men  to  obtain  their  end  with  compara- 
tively small  loss.  In  that  preparation  the  late  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  M. 
Wagner  contributed  much  on  both  sides  of  the  channel,  and  Colonel 
Bhett,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates,  Major  Blanding,  and  other  officers  of 
Fort  Sumter  have  been  more  or  less  engaged  since  the  fort  fell  into  our 
hands  t wo  years  since. 

Colonel  Butler,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Simkins,  and  other  officers  of  the 
First  South  Carolina  Infantry  have  been  for  more  than  a year  engaged  . 
at  the  works  on  Sullivan’s  Island. 

Besides  these,  various  officers  of  engineers  and  other  branches  of  the 
department  staff,  known  to  the  commanding  general,  have  been  at  dif- 
ferent times  principal  contributors  in  the  work,  and,  although  in  the  limits 
of  this  report  it  is  impossible  to  mention  all  to  whom  credit  is  due,  it  is 
well  that  works  like  these,  without  which  in  such  emergencies  as  the  pres- 
ent personal  gallantry  avails  naught,  should  be  appreciated. 

During  the  seven  days  while  the  presence  of  the  fleet  threatened  ac- 
tion Capt.  William  F.  Nance,  principal  assistant  adjutant- general  on  the 
district  staff,  performed  his  difficult  duties  in  the  admiuistration  of  a 
command  of  20,000  men  in  a prompt,  judicious,  and  efficient  manner. 
He  was  assisted  by  Lieuts.  H.  H.  Bogers  and  W.  H.  W^agner,  aides-de- 
camp. 

Capt.  F.  B.  DuBarry,  district  ordnance  officer,  was  especially  active 
and  euergetic  in  the  supply  of  ammunition  and  material  for  the  batteries. 
He  was  assisted  by  Lieut.  C.  C.  Pinckney. 

Capt.  B.  H.  Bead,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Col.  Edward Manigault, 
and  Lieut.  Col.  St.  Clair  Dearing,  volunteers  upon  the  staff,  were  present 
during  the  action  at  Fort  Sumter. 

Capt.E.  M.  Seabrook,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  and  Lieutenant  Schnierle, 
enrolling  officer  and  acting  aide-de-camp,  were  generally  with  me  during 
the  active  period,  and  all  were  energetic  and  prompt  in  the  discharge  of 
the  duties  required  of  them. 

Capt.  John  S.  Byan  acted  on  my  immediate  staff. 

To  Maj.  Motte  A.  Pringle  and  Norman  W.  Smith,  post  and  district 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  261 

quartermasters,  and  Captain  McClenahan,  acting  commissary  of  sub- 
sistence, many  thanks  should  be  rendered.  The  duties  of  the  quarter- 
master’s department  were  excessively  laborious  on  account  of  the  limited 
means  of  transportation,  and  it  is  a matter  of  congratulation  that  with 
such  means  they  were  so  well  performed. 

The  reports  of  engineer  officers  will  inform  the  commanding  general 
of  the  condition  of  the  various  works,  as  well  as  of  the  acts  of  officers  in 
that  branch  of  the  service. 

I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a sketch  of  the  position  of  the 
enemy’s  fleet  at  4.15  p.  m.  on  the  7th;  a return  of  the  guns  engaged;  a 
return  of  ammunition  expended;  a numerical  return  of  casualties,  and 
the  reports  of  different  commanders.  To  the  last  I beg  respectfully  to 
refer  for  such  information  as  is  not  included  in  this  report.  * 

I have  also  to  transmit  herewith  two  Abolition  ensigns  obtained  from 
the  Keokuk,  as  she  lies  off  Morris  Island  Beach,  by  Lieutenant  Glassell, 
0.  S.  Kavy,  one  of  which  is  evidently  the  ensign  under  which  she  fought 
and  was  worsted. 

Kone  of  the  iron  clads  flew  large  flags,  the  object  having  doubtless 
been  to  avoid  presenting  a mark  to  our  artillery. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff . 


See  pp.  1015-1017. 


262 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XX V% 


[Inclosure.] 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  263 

Return  of  guns  and  mortars  at  forts  and  batteries  in  Charleston  Harbor  engaged  with 
Abolition  iron-clads  April  7,  1863. 


Fort  or  battery. 

10-inch  columbiads. 

9-inch  Dahlgrens. 

7-inch  Brooke. 

8-inch  columbiads. 

42-pounders,  rifled. 

32-pounders,  rifled. 

32-pounders,  smooth. 

10  inch  mortars. 

| Grand  total. 

1 

TT/vrfr.  Qmnt,6r  

4 

2 

2 

8 

9 

1 

1 

7 

1 

5 

13 

5 

7 

2 

"O  — Xi.  "O  rt  rt  ® 

5 

1 

1 

1 

Battery  at  Cummings  Point 

1 



10 

3 

2 

19 

7 

8 

18 

9 

76 

Return  of  ammunition  expended  at  forts  and  batteries  in  Charleston  Harbor  in  action  with 
Abolition  iron-clads  April  7,  1863. 


Fort  or  battery. 

Bound  shot. 

Bound  shell. 

Bifle  shot. 

32-pounder  rifle  bolts. 

Friction  tubes. 

Pounds  of  cannon  powder 
used. 

10-inch  columbiad. 

8-inch  columbiad. 

d 

© 

So 

1 

fi 

■g 

_d 

C5 

32-pounder. 

10-inch  mortar. 

8-inch  columbiad,  in- 
cendiary. 

7-inch  Brooke. 

© 

'C 

» 

p 

o 

p< 

N 

^ 1 

32-pounder. 

| 32-pounder  shell. 

F ort  Sumtet  

120 

270 

54 

100 

40 

86 

140 

21 

1,  047 

7,  620 

339 

243 

51 

5 

38 

192 

1,200 

7,  375 

225 

58 

350 

3,  940 

Battery  Bee 

22 

27 

132 

64 

45 

7 

41 

157 

1,  155 

40 

26 

73 

860 

Battery  Cummings  Point 

2 

2 

11 

Total 

385 

731 

I 

80 

| 

343 

93 

5 

86 

140 

88 

45 

233 

2,  856 

21,  093 

Return  of  casualties  at  different  forts  and  batteries  in  Charleston  Harbor  in  action  with 
Abolition  iron-clads  April  7,  1863. 


Fort  or  battery. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Total  killed. 

Total  wounded. 

Bemarks. 

Mortally. 

Dangerously. 

Severely. 

Slightly. 

-U,a**+  Qninf  Ar 

1 

4 

5 

1 

5 

By  splinters  from  traverse. 
By  fall  of  flag-staff. 

By  explosion  of  ammunition 
chest. 

1 

Battery  Wagner 

Grand  total 

3 

2 

3 

3 

3 

1 

3 

7 

3 

11 

284 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.j  GA.,  AND  MiD.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.XXVI. 
No.  5. 

Reports  of  Col.  Alfred  Rhett , First  South  Carolina  Artillery , commanding 

Fort  Sumter. 


Fort  Sumter,  April  7, 1863. 

The  nearest  iron-clad  to  Sumter,  the  Keokuk,  came  within  900  yards; 
the  others  from  that  to  1,000  yards. 

ALFRED  RHETT, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

Gapt.  John  M.  Otey, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Kegiment  South  Carolina  Artillery, 

Fort  Sumter , April  13,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report : 

The  Abolition  iron-clad  fleet,  consisting  of  the  frigate  New  Ironsides 
and  eight  monitors,  appeared  in  sight  on  Sunday  morning,  April  5 
instant;  crossed  the  bar  the  same  evening,  and  anchored  in  the  main 

Ship  Channel.  , , n ^ _ , 

At  2 o’clock  p.  in.,  April  7 instant,  the  whole  iron -clad  fleet  advanced 
to  the  attack  in  the  following  order,  viz : Four  monitors  were  in  ad- 
vance, led  by  the  Passaic.  The  Ironsides  came  next,  followed  by  three 
other  single-turreted  monitors,  and  the  Keokuk,  a double-turreted  moni- 
tor bringing  up  the  rear. 

At  thirty  minutes  past  2 p.  m.  the  long  roll  was  beaten  and  every 
disposition  made  for  action. 

At  fifty-five  minutes  past  2 p.  m.  the  garrison,  regimental,  and  Pal- 
metto flags  were  hoisted  and  saluted  by  thirteen  guns,  the  band  play- 
ing the  national  air. 

At  3 o’clock  p.  m.  the  action  was  opened  by  a shot  from  Fort  Moultrie. 

At  three  minutes  past  3 p.  m.  the  leading  vessel  having  approached  to 
within  about  1,400  yards  of  the  fort  she  fired  two  shots  simultaneously, 
one  a 15-inch  shrapnel,  which  burst;  both  passed  over  the  fort.  The 
batteries  were  opened  upon  her  two  minutes  later,  the  firing  being  by 
battery.  The  action  now  became  general,  and  the  four  leading  monitors 
taking  position  from  1,300  to  1,400  yards  distant,  the  fire  was  changed 
from  fire  by  battery  to  fire  by  piece,  as  being  more  accurate.  The  fire 
by  battery  was  again  resumed  as  occasion  offered.  The  Ironsides  did 
not  approach  nearer  than  1,700  yards.  The  whole  fire  of  the  batteries 
engaged  was  concentrated  on  the  Passaic  for  thirty  minutes,  when  she 
withdrew  from  the  engagement,  apparently  injured.  The  other  ships 
each  in  its  turn  received  our  attention.  The  fire  of  both  Fort  Moultrie 
and  this  fort  being  now  directed  against  the  Ironsides  she  immediately 
withdrew  out  of  effective  range. 

The  other  turreted  monitors  came  under  our  fire  in  like  manner  as 
the  preceding,  slowdy  passing  in  front  of  the  fort  in  an  ellipse;  one 
only,  the  last,  approaching  to  about  1,000  yards. 

At  five  minutes  past  4 p.  in.  the  Keokuk  left  her  consorts  and  ad- 
vanced bow  on  gallantly  to  within  900  yards  of  our  batteries.  She 
received  our  undivided  attention,  and  the  effect  of  our  fire  was  soon 
apparent.  The  wrought-iron  bolts  from  7-inch  Brooke  gun  were  plainly 


Chap.  XXVT.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  265 

seen  to  penetrate  her  turret  and  hull,  and  she  retired  in  forty  minutes, 
riddled  and  apparently  almost  disabled. 

At  twenty-five  minutes  past  5 p.  m.  the  whole  fleet  withdrew.  The 
iron  clads  had  been  under  our  fire  for  two  hours  and  twenty -five  minutes. 

The  Keokuk  has  sunk  ; one  monitor  was  towed  south  on  the  morning 
of  the  8th  April,  instant ; several  were  apparently  injured,  and  the  fact 
has  been  demonstrated  that  iron  clads  of  the  monitor  class  are  not  in- 
vulnerable. 

The  enemy’s  fire  was  mostly  ricochet  and  not  very  accurate ; most  of 
their  shot  passed  over  the  fort  and  several  to  the  right  and  left.  The 
greater  portion  of  their  shots  were  from  1,300  to  1,400  yards  distant, 
which  appeared  to  be  the  extent  of  their  effective  range.  Some  shots 
were  from  a greater  distance,  and  did  not  reach  the  fort  at  all. 

For  the  effect  of  the  fire  of  the  enemy  upon  the  fort  I would  respect- 
fully refer  to  report  of  engineer. 

One  8-inch  columbiad,  old  pattern  chambered  gun,  exploded.  This 
gun  was  being  fired  at  about  1°  elevation,  and  it  is  my  opinion  that  its 
bursting  was  caused  by  the  shot  rolling  forward  when  the  gun. was  run 
into  battery.  In  firing  at  low  degrees  of  elevation  and  at  depression  sabot 
shot  should  be  used.  One  42-pounder  rifled  gun  was  dismounted  by  re- 
coil and  temporarily  disabled.  One  10-inch  columbiad  was  disabled  by 
having  the  rear  transom  of  its  carriage  shot  away.  Both  guns  were 
again  ready  for  action  in  a few  hours.  The  garrison  flag  received  a shot 
through  the  union.  The  regimental  flag  was  much  torn  by  fragments 
of  shell. 

The  garrison,  consisting  of  seven  companies  First  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  were  disposed  as  follows,  viz : 

1.  Capt.  D.  G.  Fleming,  with  Company  B,  78  men,  in  command  of  east 
parapet  battery,  assisted  by  Lieuts.  F.  D.  Blake  and  Iredell  Jones. 
Lieut.  J.  M.  Bhett,  Company  A,  although  on  sick  report,  was  assigned 
temporarily  to  Company  B. 

2.  Capt.  F.  H.  Harleston,  with  Company  b,  74  men,  in  command  of 
northeast  parapet  battery,  assisted  by  Lieuts.  McMillan  King  and  W.  S. 
Simkins. 

3.  Capt.  J.  G.  King,  with  Company  F,  in  command  of  northwest  par- 
apet battery,  assisted  by  Lieuts.  A.  S.  Gaillard,  John  Middleton,  and  W. 
H.  Johnson. 

4.  Capt.  J.  C.  Mitchel,  with  Company  I,  78  men,  in  command  of  west 
parapet  battery,  assisted' by  Lieut.  J.  S.  Bee. 

5.  Capt.  J.  R.  Macbeth,  with  Company  E,  77  men,  in  command  of  mor- 
tar battery  and  east  casemate  battery,  assisted  by  Lieut.  J.  J.  Alston. 

6.  Capt.  W.  H.  Peronneau,  with  Company  G,  77  men,  in  command  of 
northeast  casemate  battery,  assisted  by  Lieut.  E.  S.  Fickling. 

7.  Capt.  C.  W.  Parker,  with  detachment  Company  C,  55  men,  and  de- 
tachment Company  E,  in  command  of  northwest  casemate  battery, 
assisted  by  Lieuts.  G.  E.  Haynsworth  and  K.  Kemper. 

8.  Lieut  W.  H.  Grimball,  with  regimental  band,  15  men,  in  command 
of  second  tier  casemate  battery. 

9.  Lieutenant  Clarkson,  with  detachment  of  25  men  of  Company  B, 
Charleston  Battalion,  posted  in  second  tier  of  casement  as  sharpshoot- 
ers. Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates,  having  reported  for  duty  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  7th  April,  was  assigned  to  the  immediate  command  of  the 
parapet  batteries.  The  casement  batteries  were  under  the  immediate 
command  of  Maj.  Ormsby  Blanding. 

The  following  is  the  number  of  guns  brought  into  action  : Two  7 -inch 
Brooke  guns,  four  10-inch  columbiads,  two  9-inch  Dahlgrens,  four  8-inch 


266 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MLD.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

columbiads,  four  8-inch  navy  guns,  seven  banded  and  rifled  42-pounders, 
one  banded  and  rifled  32-pounder,  thirteen  smooth-bore  32-pounders, 
and  seven  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars. 

The  following  were  the  officers  of  the  staff:  Lieut.  S.  G.  Boyleston, 
adjutant;  Capt.  T.  M.  Barker,  assistant  quartermaster;  Capt.  S.  P. 
Bavenel,  acting  chief  of  staff;  Bev.  N.  Aldrich,  chaplain;  Sergt.  Maj. 

O.  P.  Grundshig,  and  Quartermaster  Sergt.  William  Nicoll.  Lieut. 
Charles  Inglesby  was  officer  of  the  day ; Lieut.  J.  G.  Heyward  was  offi- 
cer of  the  guard ; Lieut.  E.  P.  Bavenel  was  acting  ordnance  officer, 
assisted  by  Lieut.  James  B.  Heyward,  lieutenant  of  ordnance. 

The  medical  department  was  under  charge  of  Surg.  M.  S.  Moore, 
assisted  by  Asst.  Surg.  Samuel  Muller.  Mr.  Edward  White  was  pres- 
ent as  acting  engineer  officer. 

The  members  of  the  Signal  Corps  were  T.  P.  Lowndes,  Arthur  Gnm- 
ball,  and  Joseph  Seabrook.  . 

Several  officers  of  General  Bipley’s  staff  were  present  during  the  en- 
gagement, and  in  the  absence  of  General  Bipley  tendered  their  services 
to  me.  Capt.  Benjamin  Bead,  assistant  adjutant- general,  Col.  Edward 
Manigault,  and  Col.  St.  Clair  Dearing;  were  present,  having  tendered 
their  services  also.  Mr.  LaCoste  also  was  present  and  rendered  efficient 

service.  . .. , _ , 

With  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  garrison  it  is  impossible  tor  me  to  | 
draw  any  distinction.  Officers  and  men  were  alike  animated  with  the 
same  spirit,  and  I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  their  coolness  and 
gallantry  throughout  the  action.  All  acted  as  though  they  were  en- 
gaged in  'practice,  and  the  minutest  particulars  of  drill  and  military 
etiquette  were  preserved.  For  expenditure  of  ammunition  I would  re- 
spectfully refer  to  inclosed  report  of  ordnance  officer.  For  a list  ot 
casualties  I would  also  refer  to  inclosed  surgeon’s  report. 

At  9 o’clock  a.  m.  April  8th  the  Keokuk  was  seen  to  sink  near  Mor- 
ris Island  Beach,  where  she  now  lies. 

Eespectfully  submitted.  ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Military  District. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Return  of  killed  and  wounded  in  the  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery  in  the  action  of 

the  7th  of  April,  1863. 


'a 

£ 

W 

Wounded. 

Total  wounded. 

Dangerously. 

Severely. 

Slightly. 





2 

1 

1 

2 

1 

2 

Non  commissioned  officers 

1 

4 

5 

Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR.  S.  C. 


267 


Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.,  April  13, 1863. 

Lieut.  S.  0.  Boyleston, 

Adjutant  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  above  list  of  casualties  in  this 
garrison  on  7th  of  April,  1863.  „ 

Your  obedient  servant, 

M.  S.  MOORE, 

Surgeon , Provisional  Forces  Confederate  States, 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Regt.  South  Carolina  Artillery, 

Fort  Sumter , April  11  [?],  1863. 

W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copy  of  dispatches  received 
from  Ironsides  during  the  last  few  days. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  RHETT, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

[Sub-inclosures.] 

April  9, 1863. 

1st.  Captain  G. : He  is  in  bad  condition,  having  been  days 

out  in  a gale. 

2d.  Captain  G. : A good  steamer  had  abetter  watch  BulPs  Bay,  as  it 
is  now  the  principal  approach  to  Charleston.  Send  raft. 

Adm’r’l  D. 

3d.  If  Captain  Reynolds  desires  to  come  in  by  the  tug  to  the  Ironsides 
to  do  so. 

4th.  Captain  G. : Send  schooner  immediately  to  Port  Royal. 

Adm’r’l  D. 

5th.  “Be  there  an  attack  this  p.  m.  Question  from  the  Powhatan 
to  the  Ironsides.  Answer.  “No  attack  to-day 


April  10, 1863. 

1st.  Report  vessel  Wunkoin  [?]  when  sailed  for  Port  Royal. 

2d.  Get  hawsers  for  ordnance  schooner. 


f 3d.  Detain  provision  schooner. 


Adm’l  D. 
Adm’l  D. 


4th.  Captain  G. : I learn  that  our  mail  was  forwarded  by  an  army 
steamer.  Send  Bibb  for  it  to  Stono. 

Adm’l  D. 


5th.  Captain  G. : Send  aid  immediately  to  ordnance 
signals.  Send  all  ordnance  schooners  to  North  Edisto. 


-,  making 


Adm’l  D. 


6th. 


was  sent  from  Port  Royal. 


Rodgers. — G.  R.  S. 


7th. 


any  means  of  finding  out  by  W.  S.  A.  T. 


268 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVi. 


1st.  Captain  L. : Where  is  the  Bibb  ? 
want  her  this  morning  near  the  bar. 


April  11, 1863. 
Shall  want  her  near.  Shall 

Capt.  B. 


2<t.  Captain  G. : Send  the  Ha to  Port  Boyal. 

Admiral  DuPont. 

Fort  Sumter,  April  12, 1863. 

Captain  Nance  : 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  Ironsides  moving  toward  the  bar  in 
tow  of  a steam-tug.  Copy  of  dispatch  from  Ironsides  : “James  Adger 
and  Bibb  at  bar  at  12  o’clock,  to  render  assistance a tow.— Ad- 

miral D.” 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Lieut.  E.  Prioleau  Ravenel , First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 


Fort  Sumter,  April  13,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  expenditure  of  ammu- 
nition on  the  7th  instant,  viz  : 


Powder,  in  pounds 


7, 620 


10-inch  columbiad  shot 

8- ineh  columbiad  shot 

9- inch 

32  pounder 

7- inch  rifle 

42-pounder  rifle 


120 

270 

54 

100 

86 

140 


Total 

10-inch  mortar  shell,  filled 


770 

40 


810 


I would  state  that  in  two  of  the  above  items  (viz,  8-inch  columbiad  shot 
and  32-pounder  shot)  I have  been  compelled  to  approximate,  in  conse- 
quence of  some  of  each  kind  having  been  covered  up  in  the  haste  by 


the  traverses. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  PEIOLEAU  RAVENEL, 

First  Lieut.,  First  8.  0.  Artillery , and  Acting  Ordnance  Officer. 


Lieut.  S.  C.  Boyleston, 

Adjutant  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 


No.  7. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Oen.  J.  E.  Trapier , C.  S.  Army , commanding  on  Sulli- 
van’s Island. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Sub-Division,  First  Military  Dist., 

Sullivan’s  Island , April  13,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 


Chap.  XX VI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


269 


action  of  the  7th  instant  between  the  enemy’s  fleet  of  iron-clad  war 
vessels  and  the  fort  and  batteries  on  this  island : 

At  about  2 o’clock  p.  m.  on  that  day  it  was  reported  to  me  that  the 
movements  of  the  fleet  which  had  been  for  some  hours  anchored  within 
the  bar  were  suspicious,  and  that  some  of  the  vessels  appeared  to  be 
advancing.  So  stealthily  did  they  approach,  however,  that  not  -until 
2.30  o’clock  did  1 become  convinced  that  the  intentions  of  the  enemy 
were  serious,  and  that  the  long-threatened  attack  was  about  to  begin. 
I immediately  repaired  to  Fort  Moultrie,  where  I had  previously  de- 
termined to  make  my  headquarters  during  the  action.  Slowly,  but 
steadily,  the  iron  clads  approached,  coming  by  the  Middle  or  u Swash” 
Channel  in  single  file,  the  Passaic  (it  is  believed)  in  the  van,  followed  by 
the  rest  (eight  in  number)  at  equal  distances,  the  flag-ship,  New  Iron- 
sides, occupying  the  center.  At  3 o’clock  Col.  William  Butler,  com- 
manding in  the  fort,  reported  to  me  that  the  leading  ship  was  in  range. 
I ordered  him  immediately  to  open  his  batteries  upon  her,  which  was 
done  promptly,  and  the  action  began.  Fearing  that  the  range  was 
rather  long  for  effective  work,  the  firing  after  a few  rounds  was  sus- 
pended for  a short  time ; but  finding  that  the  enemy  refused  closer 
quarters,  there  was  no  alternative  but  to  engage  him  at  long  range  or 
not  at  all.  We  decided  upon  the  former,  and  Fort  Moultrie  again 
opened  her  batteries.  Batteries  Bee  and  Beauregard  had  also  by  this 
time  opened  fire,  and  the  action  had  become  general.  It  soon  became 
obvious  that  the  enemy’s  intention  was  to  fight  and  not  to  run  by,  and 
orders  were  given  to  u train”  on  vessels  nearest  in  and  to  fire  by  bat- 
tery. Volley  after  volley  was  delivered  in  this  way,  but  although  it 
was  plain- that  our  shot  repeatedly  took  effect — their  impact  against 
the  iron  casing  of  the  enemy  being  distinctly  .heard  and  seen — yet  we 
could  not  discover  but  that  the  foe  was  indeed  invulnerable. 

At  about  5.30  o’clock  p.  m.,  or  after  the  action  had  lasted  about  two 
hours  and  ahalf,  the  enemy  slowly,  as  he  had  advanced,  withdrew  from 
the  contest,  apparently  unharmed,  so  far  at  least  as  his  powers  of  loco- 
motion went.  Subsequent  events  have  happily  revealed  the  fact  that 
one  at  least  of  our  enemy’s  “invulnerables”  has  given  proof  that  brick 
walls  and  earthern  parapets  still  hold  the  mastery. 

The  nearest  that  the  enemy  ventured  at  any  time  to  Fort  Moultrie  was 
estimated  at  1,000  yards ; to  Battery  Bee,  1,600  yards  ; to  Battery  Beau- 
regard, 1,400  yards. 

Fort  Moultrie  was  garrisoned  by  a detachment  from  the  First  Begimeut 
South  Carolina  Regular  Infantry,  Col.  William  Butler  commanding,  as- 
sisted by  Maj.  T.  M.  Baker,  and  consisted  of  the  following  companies : 
Company  A,  Capt.  T.  A.  Huguenin;  Company  E,  Capt.  R.  Press.  Smith, 
jr.:  Company  F,  Capt.  B.  S.  Burnet;  Company  G,  First  Lieut.  E.  A. 
Erwin  commanding;  Company  K,  Capt.  C.  H.  Rivers. 

Battery  Bee  was  garrisoned  by  another  detachment  from  the  same 
regiment,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  Simkins,  and  consisted  of  the 
following  companies : Company  C,  Capt.  Robert  De  Treville ; Company 
H,  Capt.  Warren  Adams;  Company  I,  Capt.  W.  T.  Tatom.  Col.  L.  M. 
Keitt,  Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  by  my  consent, 
took  post  at  Battery  Bee  and  remained  there  during  the  action. 

Battery  Beauregard  was  under  the  command  of  Capt.  J.  A.  Sitgreaves, 
First  South  Carolina  Regular  Artillery,  and  was  garrisoned  by  the  fol- 
lowing companies : Company  K,  First  South  Carolina  Regular  Artillery, 
First  Lieut.  W.  E.  Erwin  commanding ; Company  B,  First  South  Caro- 
lina Regular  Infantry,  Capt.  J.  H.  Warley  commanding. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  report  that  not  a single 


270  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai*.  XXVI. 

casualty  occurred  among  any  of  these  troops,  with  the  exception  only  of 
one  in  Fort  Moultrie.  Early  in  the  action  our  flag-staff  was  shot  away, 
and  in  falling  struck  private  J.  S.  Lusby,  Company  F,  inflicting  a severe 
wound,  from  which  he  died  in  a short  time.  Neither  the  fort  itself  nor 
its  material  was  in  the  least  injured. 

It  is  due  to  the  garrison  of  Fort  Moultrie  and  their  soldierly  and 
accomplished  commander,  Colonel  Butler,  that  I should  not  close  this 
report  without  bearing  testimony  to  the  admirable  skill,  coolness,  and 
deliberation  with  which  they  served  their  guns.  They  went  all,  men 
as  well  as  officers,  to  their  work  cheerfully  and  with  alacrity,  showing 
that  their  hearts  were  in  it.  There  was  enthusiasm,  but  no  excitement. 
They  lost  no  time  in  loading  their  guns,  but  never  fired  hastily  or  with- 
out aim.  The  reports  of  Colonel  Keitt,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Simkius, 
and  Captain  Sitgreaves  give  me  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  garri- 
sons of  Batteries  Bee  and  Beauregard  acquitted  themselves  equally 
well,  and  are  equally  entitled  to  the  thanks  and  gratitude  of  their  com- 
mander and  their  country.  Colonel  Butler  makes  honorable  mention 
of  the  following  officers : 

Capt.  William  H.  Wigg,  A.  C.  S.,  when  the  flag-staff  was  shot  away, 
promptly  mounted  a traverse  and  placed  the  regimental  flag  in  a con- 
spicuous place  upon  it.  Capt.  G.  A.  Wardlaw,  assistant  quartermaster, 
and  Lieut,  and  Adjt.  Mitchell  King  and  First  Lieut.  D.  G.  Calhoun 
were  likewise  prompt  in  placing  the  battle  and  garrison  flags  in  con- 
spicuous positions.  Lieutenant  Williams,  ordnance  officer,  is  also  fav- 
orably mentioned. 

To  Capts.  William  Greene  and  B.  G.  Pinckney,  of  my  staff,  and  First 
Lieut.  A.  H.  Lucas,  my  aide-de-camp,  I am  indebted  for  valuable  assist- 
ance; and  my  thanks  are  also  due  to  Lieut.  Col.  O.  M.  Dantzler  and 
Dr.  G.  W.  Westcott,  volunteer  aides  for  the  occasion. 

I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a statement  in  tabular  form 
showing  the  expenditure  of  ammunition  by  Fort  Moultrie  and  the  bat- 
teries during  the  action. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

J.  H.  TRAPIEE, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure.] 

Return  of  ammunition  expended  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C.,  during  the  action  of  7th  April , 

1S63. 


Fort  Moultrie. 

^ Battery  Bee. 

1 

Battery  Beau- 
regard. 

*3 

© 

H 

225 

58 

225 
461 
5 
243 
45 
45 
233 
51 
1,  707 
12,  470 

q n nl  1 1 vn Li q fl  rontul  sh ot  

339 

5 

243 

38 

64 

1 I ^11  ttt  n Vi  / QO  TkAliml  AT*  T»1  fl  A flTl  T1  \ _ 

7 

45 

41 

Conical  shot  (3ii-pounder  rifle  gun) 

"DAlta  (QO  t ' nn  nrl  at*  T*i  fl  A 0*1111 1 ..  

192 

51 

1, 200 
7,  375 

350 

3.940 

157 
1. 155 

1 

Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


271 


Hdqrs.  Second  Sub-Division,  First  Military  Dist., 

Sullivan’s  Island , April  10,  1863. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  H.  TRAPIER, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Sub-Diyision,  First  Mil.  Dist.  S C., 

Sullivan’s  Island.  April  15,  1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Mil.  Dist.  S.  C .,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Captain  : I respectfully  request  that  the  paragraph  immediately  pre- 
ceding that  which  covers  my  report  of  the  action  of  the  7th  may  be 
altered  to  read  as  follows  : 

“To  Capts.  William  Greene  and  B.  G.  Pinckney,  of  my  staff,  and  First 
Lieut.  A.  H.  Lucas,  my  aide-de-camp,  I am  indebted  for  valuable  assist- 
ance; and  my  thanks  are  also  due  to  Lieut.  Col.  O.  M.  Dantzler  and  Dr. 
G.  W.  Westcott,  volunteer  aides  for  the  occasion.” 

I beg  leave  also  to  invite  the  attention  of  the  brigadier-general  com- 
manding the  district  to  the  heroic  conduct  of  Private  Joseph  Harri- 
son, Company  G,  First  South  Carolina  Regular  Infantry,  as  related  by 
Colonel  Butler  in  his  report.  The  haste  with  which  my  report  was  pre- 
pared under  the  stringent  order  from  district  headquarters  must  be 
my  excuse  for  inaccurate  phraseology  and  inadvertent  omissions. 

Yery  respectfully,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TRAPIER, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Sullivan’s  Island,  April  18,  1863. 

Dear  General:  If  my  report  of  the  late  action  is  to  be  published 
will  you  be  kind  enough  to  correct  for  me  a slight  error  in  it. 

I say  “Colonel  Keitt,  as  previously  arranged  between  us,  made  his 
headquarters  at  Battery  Bee,”  &c.  This  is  not  expressed  precisely  as 
it  should  be.  After  I had  taken  post  at  Fort  Moultrie  Colonel  Keitt 
reported  to  me  and  said  that  with  my  consent  he  would  go  to  Battery 
Bee.  Of  course  I consented. 

The  alteration  which  I would  like  to  have  made  is  this.  For  the  sen- 
tence quoted  above  substitute  the  following: 

“Colonel  Keitt,  by  my  consent,  took  post  at  Battery  Bee  and  remained 
there  during  the  action.” 

The  phraseology  more  exactly  describes  what  actually  took  place. 

My  report  was  prepared  very  hastily,  under  a very  stringent  order 
from  the  brigadier-general  commanding  the  district,  and  is  not  what  it 
ought  to  be;  but  so  long  as  it  tells  the  story  truly  I am  willing  to  let  it 
stand  as  it  is. 

With  great  respect  and  esteem,  I am,  very  sincerely,  yours, 

J.  H.  TRAPIER. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Col.  Lawrence  M.  Keitt , Twentieth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Sullivan’s  Island,  April  13,  1863. 
Captain  : I had  the  honor  this  morning  to  send  to  you  the  reports  of 


272 


COASTS  OF  S.  c.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 


the  commandants  of  the  various  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  engaged 
in  the  action  of  7th  instant  with  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  fleet. 

The  action  began  at  3 o’clock  by  Fort  Moultrie,  and  in  a short  time 
thereafter  was  general  throughout  all  the  batteries.  Immediately  after 
the  opening  of  the  engagement  I left  Fort  Moultrie  (where  Brigadier- 
General  Trapier  had  stationed  his  headquarters  and  was  overlooking 
the  conflict)  and  repaired  to  Battery  Bee. 

At  this  battery  I found  the  garrison  alert  and  ready  to  direct  their 
fixe  against  the  invading  fleet.  Their  guns  were  promptly  trained  and 
fired  with  rapidity  and  great  precision. 

I saw  very  distinctly  a large  number  of  10-inch  shot  from  this  battery 
strike  the  Keokuk,  and  also  two  of  the  monitor  vessels,  which  alter- 
nately advanced  to  the  front.  They  struck  turrets,  decks,  and  hull. 
The  injury  inflicted  could  not  be  accurately  estimated,  but  I believe 
that  it  was  severe.  The  officers  of  the  garrison  were  cool,  vigilant,  and 
energetic,  and  the  men  were  prompt,  active,  and  thoroughly  familiar 
with  their  duties.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Simkins  overlooked  the  manage- 
ment of  the  battery,  and  I testify  to  his  vigilance,  skill,  and  the  ener- 
getic discharge  of  his  duties. 

The  firing  I thought  a little  too  rapid,  but  I have  no  doubt  that  iu  the 
end  it  subserved  a good  purpose.  The  storm  of  shot  and  bolts  which 
fell  around  the  enemy  confused  if  it  did  not  appall  him. 

The  Beauregard  Battery  directed  its  fire  with  great  precision  against 
the  Ironsides  and  the  two  monitors  which  were  nearest  to  it.  The  shot 
from  this  battery  struck  those  vessels  repeatedly. 

The  officers  and  men  behaved  with  the  highest  coolness  and  gallantry. 
Fort  Moultrie  was  under  General  Trapier’s  own  eye,  and  he  can  best 
tell  how  worthily  she  vindicated  her  historical  reputation.  The  com- 
panies of  the  Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  which 
were  upon  the  island  were  drawn  up  to  protect  the  upper  batteries  and 
to  repel  a land  attack  if  such  were  attempted.  They  were  eager  to  join 
their  brethren  in  arms  in  the  conflict,  but  the  prudent  abstinence  of  the 
foe  from  an  attempt  to  land  prevented  them.  They  were  under  com- 
mand of  Capt.  P.  A.  McMichael,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler  having 
been  invited  by  General  Trapier  to  act  as  his  special  aide  on  the  occa- 
sion ; and  had  a land  attack  been  made  Lieutenant- Colonel  Dantzler 
could  easily  have  reached  the  portion  of  his  regiment  drawn  up  on  the 
island  and  have  taken  command  of  it,  which  he  intended  to  do. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  your  obedient  servaDt, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post . 


Captain  Greene, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  William  Butler , First  South  Carolina  Infantry , command- 
ing Fort  Moultrie. 

Headquarters, 

Fort  Moultrie , S.  C .,  April  13,  1863. 
Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  statement  of  the  part 
taken  by  this  fort  in  the  action  with  the  iron-clad  fleet  of  the  Abolition- 
ists on  the  7 th  of  this  month : 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  273 

On  the  5th  the  attacking  fleet,  consisting  of  eight  turreted  gunboats 
and  the  steam-frigate  Ironsides,  crossed  the  bar  and  took  a position 
about  3 £ or  4 miles  from  this  fort. 

On  the  7th  it  advanced  in  the  direction  of  the  harbor,  one  of  the  tur- 
ret boats  some  distance  in  advance. 

As  soon  as  the  leading  boat  came  within  range  I reported  the  fact  to 
the  brigadier-general  commanding,  and  received  orders  from  him  to 
commence  the  action. 

Thinking  that  it  was  the  object  of  the  enemy  to  run  by  Fort  Sumter 
I permitted  the  firing  to  be  rapid  at  the  commencement,  using  every 
precaution,  however,  to  encourage  deliberation  in  aiming.  The  boats 
engaged  were  at  all  times  during  the  action  within  range  of  the  guns 
of  this  fort. 

About  three-quarters  of  an  hour  after  the  first  gun  was  fired  the 
frigate  Ironsides  steamed  up  to  within  1,600  yards,  and  took  a position 
apparently  with  a view  of  taking  a prominent  part  in  the  action.  All 
the  guns  that  could  be  brought  to  bear  were  trailed  upon  her  and  fired, 
and  she  in  a few  moments  afterward  moved  out  of  range. 

The  fire  was  generally  directed  upon  the  boat  in  advance,  and  I think 
with  some  effect,*  shots  were  seen  to  strike  frequently,  many  of  them 
breaking  to  pieces. 

The  guns  engaged  were  manned  by  Companies  A,  E,  F,  and  G,  First 
South  Carolina  Infantry,  commanded  respectively  by  Capts.  F.  A.  Hu- 
guenin  and  R.  Press.  Smith,  First  Lieut.  E.  A.  Erwin,  and  Capt.  B.  S. 
Burnet;  the  mortars  by  Company  K,  Capt.  C.  H.  Rivers,  were  fired 
with  creditable  accuracy. 

Officers  and  men  performed  their  duties  with  spirit  and  celerity. 

During  the  action  the  flag-staff  was  cut  down  by  a shot  from  the 
enemy,  which  in  falling  struck  Private  Lusby,  Company  F,  First  South 
Carolina  Infantry,  causing  his  death  in  a few  minutes.  This  was  the 
only  casualty  of  any  importance.  One  gunner,  Private  Harrison,  Com- 
pany G,  lost  a finger  by  some  inadvertence  in  running  a gun  into  bat- 
tery, but  returned  to  his  post  after  getting  his  wound  dressed. 

When  the  flag  was  struck  down  Capt.  W.  H.  Wigg,  A.  C.  S.,  promptly 
placed  the  regimental  flag  in  a conspicuous  place  upon  a traverse. 
Capt.  G.  A.  Wardlaw,  acting  quartermaster,  and  Lieut,  and  Adjt. 
Mitchell  King  and  First  Lieut.  D.  G.  Calhoun  were  likewise  prompt  in 
placing  the  battle  and  garrison  flags  in  conspicuous  positions.  Maj.  T. 
M.  Baker,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry,  was  wherever  his  service 
would  be  most  useful. 

The  ordnance  officer,  Second  Lieut.  Thomas  Williams,  was  at  his  post 
at  the  magazine.  Much  credit  is  due  to  him  for  the  good  condition  of 
the  gun-carriages  and  other  ordnance  stores. 

I have  already  submitted  a report  of  the  amount  of  ammunition  ex- 
pended. 

The  guns  engaged  consisted  of  nine  8-iuch  columbiads,  five  32-pounder 
rifled  and  banded  guns,  five  smooth-bore  32-pounders,  and  two  10-inch 
mortars. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  BUTLER, 

Colonel  First  South  Carolina  Infantry , Commanding . 

Lieut.  W.  C.  Hane, 

Adjutant  Forces  Sullivan1  s Island . 

18  R R — VOL  XIV 


274  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

No.  10. 

Beport  of  Lieut,  Col.  J.  C.  Simkins , First  South  Carolina  Infantry , com- 
manding Battery  Bee. 

Headquarters  Detachment  of  First  Infantry, 

Battery  Bee , April  13,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  about  2.30  p.  m.  on 
Tuesday,  the  7th  instant,  the  officer  of  the  day  reported  to  me  that  the 
monitor  fleet  of  the  enemy,  accompanied  by  the  Ironsides,  was  approach- 
ing. I immediately  ordered  the  long  roll  beat,  the  guns  were  manned, 
and  everything  got  in  readiness  for  action. 

On  reaching  the  battery  nine  iron-clads,  including  the  Ironsides,  were 
observed  slowly  making  their  way  up  Ship  Channel.  At  times  four  of 
the  monitors  proper  were  in  line  of  battle  in  advance,  the  Ironsides  and 
others  in  rear.  While  waiting  the  nearer  approach  of  the  enemy  in- 
structions were  given  that  the  left  section  of  battery,  commanded  by 
Capt.  Warren  Adams,  should  commence  firing  on  an  order  from  me,  to 
be  followed,  first,  by  Capt.  William  T.  Tatom,  commanding  center  sec- 
tion, and  finally  by  Capt.  Robert  De  Treville,  commanding  section  on 
extreme  right,  and  that  the  fire  should  be  concentrated  on  the  leading 
vessel  until  otherwise  directed. 

The  advance  vessels,  still  numbering  four,  took  their  positions,  alter- 
nately ranging  from  1,800  to  2,000  yards  from  this  battery. 

At  3 o’clock  p.  m.  Fort  Moultrie  opened  on  the  enemy,  followed  by 
Fort  Sumter.  Ten  minutes  later  (3.10  p.  m.)  this  battery  opened  fire. 
At  this  time  the  fire  became  general  from  all  the  outer  forts  and  bat- 
teries in  the  harbor  and  the  advanced  iron-clads  of  the  enemy,  which 
fired  slowly,  directing  their  fire  principally  at  Fort  Sumter.  An  occa- 
sional shot  was  fired  at  this  battery,  none  of  them  doing  any  injury. 
As  it  was  believed  that  the  object  of  the  enemy  was  to  pass  the  bat- 
teries and  enter  the  harbor  the  firing  at  first  was  rapid,  but  at  all  times 
deliberate  and  well  directed.  When  it  became  evident  that  such  was 
not  his  intention,  the  firing  from  this  battery  became  slower  and  con- 
tinued so  until  the  Keokuk  advanced  in  closer  range  to  Fort  Sumter 
and  this  battery,  at  which  time  the  order  was  given  to  fire  more  rapidly 
and  to  concentrate  it  on  her. 

Two  hundred  and  eighty -three  solid  shots  were  fired  from  this  bat- 
tery, Captain  Adams  firing  126;  Captain  Tatom.  84,  and  Captain  De 
Treville,  73.  Of  this  number  many  were  distinctly  seen  to  strike  the 
vessels  aimed  at,  and,  it  is  believed,  doing  serious  damage  in  many 
instances. 

At  5.30  p.  m.  the  enemy’s  fleet  withdrew  and  all  firing  ceased. 

The  officers  and  men  of  this  command  did  their  duty. 

I am  happy  to  state  that  no  casualties  occurred  at  this  battery,  and 
believe  the  command  to  be  as  effective  as  it  was  prior  to  the  engage- 
ment. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  SIMKINS, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding . 

Capt.  William  Greene, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


275 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  A.  Sitgr  eaves,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery , com- 
manding Battery  Beauregard . 

Beauregard  Battery,  Sullivan’s  Island , April  13,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  about  2 o’clock  p.  m.  on 
Tuesday,  the  7th  instant,  it  was  reported  to  me  that  the  enemy’s  iron- 
clads, which  have  previously  taken  a position  inside  the  bar,  were 
steaming  up  main  Ship  Channel.  I ordered  the  long  roll  sounded  and 
all  the  guns  of  this  battery  to  be  manned  forthwith,  placing  those 
men  who  were  not  engaged  at  the  guns  in  a position  so  as  to  be  pro- 
tected from  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 

As  soon  as  the  leading  boat  came  within  range  and  after  Moultrie 
and  Sumter  had  opened  I directed  the  fire  of  two  rifle  guns  and  an 
8-inch  columbiad  on  that  boat,  and  continued  to  fire  on  her  until  I was 
satisfied  that  it  was  not  her  intention  to  pass  the  forts. 

I fired  rapidly  at  first,  because  I saw  that  she  would  soon  reach  a 
point  on  which  my  rifled  guns  could  not  be  brought  to  bear.  About 
this  time  the  Ironsides  came  up  and  exposed  her  broadside,  when  I 
immediately  directed  the  fire  of  the  same  guns  on  her,  and  paid  more 
attention  to  her  than  any  other  boat  during  the  fight.  I occasionally- 
fired  a shot  at  the  Keokuk  or  on  one  of  them  that  offered  a fair  mark 
to  the  guns  used.  About  4.30  I found  that  my  supply  of  rifled  projec- 
tiles and  8-inch  solid  shot  were  getting  short.  I ordered  the  firing  to 
cease  and  sent  a messenger  to  the  fort  to  know  if  I could  be  supplied, 
but  received  a message  from  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  in  the  mean  time 
to  cease  firing  altogether. 

The  guns  that  were  engaged  were  manned  alternately  by  detachments 
from  Company  K,  First  South  Carolina . Artillery,  Lieut.  W.  E.  Erwin 
commanding,  and  from  Company  B,  First  Infantry,  Capt.  J.  H.  Warley 
commanding. 

I am  satisfied  that  the  Ironsides  was  struck  several  times  by  shot 
from  this  battery,  and  I think  one  or  two  others  were  also  struck,  with 
what  effect  it  is  impossible  to  say  except  from  reports  since  the  engage- 
ment, which  lead  us  to  believe  that  the  enemy  were  considerably  dam- 
aged. 

I have  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  firing  and  the  cool,  deliberate, 
and  determined  aspect  which  characterized  both  men  and  officers  during 
the  engagement. 

I inclose  a tabular  statement  of  the  amount  and  kinds  of  ammunition 
expended. 

The  enemy  fired  several  rounds  at  us,  none  of  which  took  effect.  There 
were  no  casualties  from  any  cause  whatever. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SITGREAVES, 

Captain , Commanding . 

Capt.  William  Greene,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  T.  JDargan , Twenty -first  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

Morris  Island,  April  7, 1863. 

Considerable  damage  apparently  done  to  the  iron-clads.  Marks  of 


276 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


shot  are  visible  on  their  decks  and  through  smoke-stacks ; decks  of  one 
considerably  torn  up.  Two  men  mortally  wounded  in  Battery  Wagner, 
1 since  dead,  2 seriously ; 2 slightly  wounded  by  explosion  of  ammuni- 
tion chest. 

A.  T.  DARGAN, 
Lieutenant-  Co  lonel . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  C.  K.  Huger , South  Carolina  Artillery , commanding  Artillery 

on  Morris  Island. 

Battery  Wagner,  Morris  Island , April  8, 1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  during  the  engagement 
yesterday  this  battery  fired  twenty-two  shots  and  the  one  at  Cum- 
mings Point  sixty-six ; nobody  hurt  at  Cummings  Point ; but  I regret 
to  have  to  report  that  from  the  accidental  explosion  of  an  ammunition 
chest  I have  had  at  this  battery  eight  casualties,  viz : Killed,  Sergt.  G. 
W.  Langley,  Privates  Amos  Fitzgerald  and  Jerry  Dyer;  wounded,  Sec- 
ond Lieut.  G.  E.  Steedman,  not  dangerously ; Corpl.  Mathew  Martin 
slightly  ; Private  Samuel  Red  seriously,  Marion  Quillan  slightly,  and 
Thomas  Prince  slightly.  Total,  3 killed  and  5 wounded=8 ; all  of  the 
Mathewes  Artillery,  Capt.  J.  Raven  Mathewes. 

There  was  no  opportunity  for  any  display  of  gallantry,  but  all  did 
their  duty  with  cheerfulness  and  promptness.  The  guns  of  this  bat- 
tery were  of  too  light  a caliber  to  be  of  much  service,  but  those  at  Cum- 
mings Point,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Lieutenant  Lesesne,  of 
First  Artillery,  were  much  heavier,  and  the  firing  was  particularly  good. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  K.  HUGER, 

Major , Commanding  Artillery , Morris  Island. 

Col.  R.  F.  Graham,  Commanding , Morris  Island . 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Col.  A.  D.  Frederick , Second  South  Carolina  Artillery , com- 
manding Fort  Johnson , James  Island. 

Headquarters  at  East  Lines, 

April  12,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  one  of  my  companies — 
Company  I,  Captain  Humbert — stationed  at  Fort  Johnson,  had  a small 
share  in  the  glorious  little  fight  of  the  7th  instant  with  the  turreted 
iron-clads  in  Charleston  Harbor. 

About  2.30  o’clock  of  that  afternoon  eight  iron- clads  were  seen  ap- 
proaching for  the  purpose  of  engaging  Fort  Sumter,  and  when  within 
easy  range  they  opened  fire  upon  her.  My  guns  of  heavy  caliber  at 
that  post,  being  so  placed  as  to  bear  only  upon  the  inner  harbor,  could 
not  be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  iron-clads ; but  in  our  anxiety  to  “have 
a place  in  the  picture,”  and  in  order  somewhat  to  test  the  range  of  a 
10-inch  mortar  in  that  direction,  I authorized  Lieutenant  Boliver,  in 
charge,  to  open  fire  from  it,  which,  after  being  fired  twice  with  shell, 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  277 


filled  and  plugged,  and  the  object  sought  attained,  was  ordered  to  be 
discontinued. 

The  officers  and  men  were  all  eagerly  anxious  to  play  a part  in  the 
engagement,  and  we  only  regret  that  our  position  was  such  as  to  pre- 
vent our  having  a more  prominent  place  in  an  engagement  which  does 
so  much  credit  to  all  concerned. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully, 

A.  D.  FREDERICK, 

Colonel  Second  Regiment  Artillery , South  Carolina , Comdg » 
Col.  C.  H.  Stevens,  Comdg . Eastern  Div .,  James  Island. 


[Indorsement.] 


Hdqrs.  James  Island  and  Saint  Andrew’s, 

McLeod’s,  April  14,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded. 

I reached  Fort  Johnson  some  twenty  minutes  after  the  engagement  be- 
tween the  monitors  and  the  forts  and  batteries  had  commenced  on  the 
7th  instant,  and  finding  that  the  mortar  located  at  Fort  Johnson  was 
not  effective,  the  range  being  too  great,  ordered  the  firing  discontinued 
after  two  shells  had  been  thrown.  Battery  Glover  was  not  engaged  at 
any  time. 

Respectfully, 


S.  R.  GIST, 
Brigadier - General. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Lieut.  W.  T.  Glassell , C.  S.  Navy , commanding  C.  S.  S.  Chicora • 

C.  S.  Gunboat  Chicora, 
Charleston  Harbor,  April  13,  1863. 
General:  Having  made  a visit  to  the  Keokuk  this  morning  with  a 
view  to  observing  the  effect  of  your  batteries  upon  her  iron  turrets  I 
succeeded  in  procuring  the  trophies,  which  it  affords  me  much  pleasure 
to  forward  to  you,  viz,  two  United  States  flags,  two  pennants,  and  three 
signal  flags.  Several  other  articles  were  also  obtained — a rammer, 
springs,  lanterns,  &c. — which  are  on  board  the  Chicora. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  T.  GLASSELL, 

C.  S.  Navy. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley. 


No.  16. 

Thanks  of  the  South  Carolina  Legislature. 

RESOLUTIONS  OF  THANKS  TO  THE  TROOPS  FOR  THE  DEFENSE  OF 
CHARLESTON  HARBOR. 

Resolved  unanimously,  That  the  gallant  defense  made  by  our  officers 
and  men  in  Charleston  Harbor  against  the  first  onset  of  the  foe  entitle 
them  to  the  thanks  of  the  whole  country,  and  under  the  blessings  of  a 
kind  Providence  is  hailed  as  the  harbinger  of  a still  more  glorious  vic- 
tory. 


278 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap,  XXVL 


Resolved , That  a copy  of  these  resolutions  be  sent  to  the  general  com- 
manding this  department. 


In  the  Senate,  April  9,  1863. 

Resolved , That  the  Senate  do  agree  to  the  resolutions. 

Ordered , That  they  be  sent  to  the  House  of  Representatives  for  con- 


currence. 
By  order: 


WM.  E.  MARTIN, 

Cleric  of  the  Senate . 


In  the  House  of  Representatives,  Apl.  10, 1863. 
Resolved , That  the  House  do  concur  in  the  resolutions. 

Ordered , That  they  be  returned  to  the  Senate. 

By  order : 

JOHN  T.  SLOAN, 
Cleric  of  the  House  of  Representatives . 


No.  17. 

Report  of  Capt.  Henry  S.  Tafft , TJ.  S.  Signal  Corps , Chief  Signal  Officer 
Department  of  the  South. 

Office  of  Chief  Signal  Officer  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  <7.,  April  14,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  following  report  of  signal 
operations  in  connection  with  the  recent  attack  upon  the  works  of  the 
enemy  near  Charleston.  Officers  were  assigned  to  the  different  com- 
mands and  naval  vessels  in  the  order  stated  below. 

Capt.  H.  S.  Tafft  on  flag-ship  Ben  De  Ford;  Lieut.  H.  Clay  Snyder 
with  Major-General  Hunter;  Lieut.  G.  S.  Dana  with  General  Seymour; 
Lieut.  C.  F.  Cross  with  General  Terry;  Lieut.  T.  L.  Hatfield  with 
Colonel  Metcalf;  Lieut.  E.  H.  Hickok  with  Colonel  Guss;  Lieut.  Will- 
iam Reynolds  with  Colonel  Putnam ; Lieut.  T.  C.  Yidal  with  chief  quar- 
termaster; Lieut.  F.  E.  Town,  Admiral  DuPont,  on  Ironsides;  Lieut. 
George  Stroop  on  sloop  of  war  Canandaigua ; Lieutenants  Keith  and 
Moffat  with  General  Heckman ; Lieutenants  Schouler  and  Richardson 
with  General  Stevenson;  Lieutenant  Pierce  with  Colonel  Davis;  Lieu- 
tenants Fletcher  and  Gibbs  with  General  Ferry;  Lieutenant  Holbrook 
with  Colonel  Howell;  Lieutenant  Davis  with  Colonel  J.  J.  De  Forest; 
Lieutenant  Cooley  on  gunboat  Sebago. 

Admiral  DuPont  sailed  from  Hilton  Head  on  the  morning  of  the  2d 
instant  for  Charleston  Bar.  Major-General  Hunter  and  staff  sailed 
the  following  morning,  reached  Edisto,  and  anchored  inside  the  bar,  re- 
maining until  the  5th.  Arrived  off  Stono  Bar  same  evening  and  com- 
municated with  army  fleet  inside.  Morning  of  the  6th  moved  up  to 
Charleston  Bar,  where  were  lying  at  anchor  the  naval  blockading  fleet 
and  the  irou-clads. 

Communication  was  immediately  opened  between  the  headquarters 
of  General  Hunter,  the  flag-ship,  and  the  sloop  of  war  Canandaigua. 
During  the  preceding  night  the  column  of  our  forces  under  command  of 
Colonel  Howell  arrived  at  the  head  of  Folly  Island.  The  signal  officer 
with  them  opened  communication  at  once  with  the  flag-ship,  thus  giving 
the  first  information  to  the  commanding  general  by  signals  of  our  pos- 
session of  the  island. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


279 


At  3 p.  m.  7th  instant  the  attack  upon  Fort  Sumter  by  the  iron-clads 
was  made,  our  fleet  remaining  in  action  about  two  and  a half  hours 
under  the  most  terrific  fire.  Immediately  after  the  conclusion  of  the 
attack  the  admiral  reported  by  signals  to  General  Hunter  the  result 
of  the  engagement  as  follows : 

To  General  Hunter: 

Delayed  in  getting  under  way  by  accident,  orders  not  reaching  the  leading  ship. 

We  attempted  to  pass  into  the  inner  channel,  hut  were  obliged  to  anchor  to  prevent 
going  ashore.  Engaged  the  forts,  but  found  it  too  late  to  continue.  Casualties  few. 
One  iron-clad  disabled;  two  partially  so.  Ironsides  very  slightly;  struck  very  often. 
Please  inform  senior  naval  officers. 

DuPONT. 

The  succeeding  day  General  Hunter  was  informed  by  signals  that  the 
attack  would  be  renewed  as  soon  as  the  disabled  iron-clads  were  in  order. 
We  awaited  such  movements  until  the  afternoon,  when  I received  from 
Lieutenant  Town  a confidential  dispatch  to  the  effect  that  no  further 
engagement  would  take  place  for  the  present.  This  information  I gave 
unofficially  to  General  Hunter,  being,  I suppose,  the  first  notice  he  had 
received  of  such  determination  on  the  part  of  the  admiral.  In  the  after- 
noon General  Hunter  left  the  Ben  De  Ford,  and  in  a small  boat  went  to 
Stono. 

* Morning  of  the  9th  the  Ben  He  Ford  also  sailed  for  Stono  with  dis- 
patches for  the  general.  From  this  date  to  the  11th  we  remained  out- 
side Stono  Bar,  communication  by  signals  being  constantly  kept  up  with 
the  troops  upon  Folly  Island  and  with  the  troops  outside  the  Stono. 

On  the  11th  the  general  again  came  on  board  the  Ben  He  Ford  and 
sailed  for  Port  Boyal,  followed  by  all  the  land  forces  with  the  exception 
of  one  brigade  left  in  possession  of  Folly  Island  and  one  brigade  at 
Edisto.  Signal  officers  remained  with  these  forces.  A line  is  estab- 
lished from  one  end  of  Folly  Island  to  the  other  at  Edisto  between  the 
gunboats  and  land  forces. 

Officers  and  men  without  exception  performed  their  duty  during  this 
expedition  to  my  entire  satisfaction. 

Lieutenant  Town,  upon  the  Ironsides,  was  at  all  times  diligent,  and 
rendered  much  valuable  service  to  the  naval  forces.  The  accompanying 
copy  of  a letter  from  the  admiral  sufficiently  vouches  for  his  efficiency. 

Lieutenant  Stroop,  upon  the  Canandaigua,  was  also  energetic  and 
faithful  in  the  performance  of  his  duties.  Copy  of  letter  from  Admiral 
HuPont  to  him  also  inclosed. 

Lieutenant  Snyder  upon  the  Ben  He  Ford,  Hana  with  General  Sey- 
mour, Cross  with  General  Terry,  evinced  by  prompt  attention  to  duty 
their  appreciation  of  the  responsibility  of  their  positions.  Other  officers 
perhaps  were  equally  diligent,  but  their  positions  not  such  as  to  bring 
their  energies  into  requisition. 

No  brilliant  service  was  performed  by  either  officers  or  men.  Lieu- 
tenant Town  showed  much  bravery  under  fire,  and  his  men,  Cornelius 
Colter  and  John  McLaughlin,  Fiftieth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teers, are  deserving  of  credit  for  the  faithful  performance  of  duty. 

Accompanying  this  I forward  sketch  of  the  position  of  our  iron-clads 
and  the  batteries  of  the  enemy.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  S.  TAFFT, 

Captain  and  Chief  Signal  Officer , Department  of  the  South . 
Maj.  A.  J.  Myer, 

Signal  Officer , U.  S.  Army. 


Not  found. 


280 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Flag-Ship  James  Adger, 

Port  Royal , April  13,  1863. 

Lieut.  F.  E.  Town, 

Acting  Signal  Officer , Department  of  the  South  : 

Sir:  Your  services  being  no  longer  required  afloat,  you  will  please 
report  accordingly  to  Lieutenant  Tafft,  chief  signal  officer. 

I avail  myself  of  this  occasion  to  express  my  warm  commendation  at 
the  zealous  and  most  efficient  manner  in  which  you  performed  your 
almost  ceaseless  duties  in  keeping  up  communication  between  the  re- 
serve squadron  outside  and  the  fleet  of  iron  clads  inside  the  Charleston 
Bar,  in  whose  attack  upon  the  works  of  the  enemy  you  participated. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  F.  DuPONT, 

Rear-Admiral , Comdg.  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron . 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Flag- Ship  James  Adger, 

Port  Royal , April  13,  1863. 

Lieut.  George  Stroop, 

Acting  Signal  Officer , Department  of  the  South : 

Sir  : Your  services  being  no  longer  required  afloat,  you  will  please 
report  accordingly  to  Lieutenant  Tafft,  chief  signal  officer. 

I avail  myself  of  this  occasion  to  express  my  warm  commendation  at 
the  zealous  and  most  efficient  manner  in  which  you  performed  your 
almost  ceaseless  duties  in  keeping  up  communication  between  the  re- 
serve squadron  outside  and  the  fleet  of  iron-clads  inside  the  Charleston 
Bar. 

I am,  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  F.  DuPONT, 

Rear-Admiral , Comdg.  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron . 


APRIL  9,  1863. — Destruction  of  steamer  George  Washington,  near  Beau- 
fort, S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  Beaufort. 

No.  2. — Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley,  Seventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Military  District. 

No.  4. — Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  Beaufort  (S.  C.)  Artillery. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton , U.  S.  Army , commanding  District  of 

Beaufort , S.  C. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  April  9,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  total  loss  of  the  steamer 
George  Washington  this  morning  opposite  the  Brick  yard  under  the 
following  circumstances : 

On  yesterday  she  started  in  company  with  the  U.  S.  gunboat  Hale  for 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


STEAMER  GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 


281 


Whale  Branch,  where  the  latter  boat  was  ordered  to  take  her  station. 
The  Hale  ran  aground  at  the  Brick-yard,  while  the  Washington  went  on 
her  way  to  the  ferry.  Finding  that  the  Hale  did  not  succeed  in  getting 
off  she'returned  to  her  assistance.  The  two  vessels  anchored  opposite 
the  Brick-yard  until  4 o’clock  this  morning,  when  the  Hale  started  for 
her  station.  The  Washington,  instead  of  starting  as  she  should  have 
done,  remained  at  her  anchorage  until  daylight  this  morning,  when  the 
rebels  opened  fire  upon  her  from  a light  battery  of  six  rifle  guns,  which 
they  had  brought  there  during  the  night.  The  battery  was  about  1-J  miles 
from  the  boat.  One  shot  struck  the  rudder  of  the  boat  and  another, 
a shell,  set  the  magazine  and  boat  on  fire,  exploding  directly  in  the 
magazine.  The  vessel  is  completely  destroyed. 

As  far  as  I can  ascertain  but  2 lives  were  lost;  6 men  were  wounded, 
4 of  them  slightly.  The  rest  all  escaped. 

It  is  my  opinion  that  the  conduct  of  the  officers  in  command  of  the 
two  boats  is  deserving  of  the  severest  censure—that  of  the  Hale  for 
starting  off  before  daylight  without  giving  notice  to  the  officer  in  com- 
mand of  the  Washington,  and  of  the  latter  for  laying  all  night  within 
gun-shot  of  the  rebels’  lines,  giving  them  ample  time  to  bring  their 
light  battery  from  the  railroad  station. 

From  all  that  I can  learn  the  enemy  is  in  considerable  force  in  our 
immediate  vicinity,  and  an  attack  may  be  expected  at  any  moment. 

Colonel  Elwell  has  applied  to  Captain  Moore  for  the  steamer  Darling- 
ton, which  I had  just  repaired,  now  the  Washington  is  lost.  This 
vessel  is  absolutely  essential  until  the  present  emergency  is  over.  She 
can  only  use  wood,  and  is  totally  unfit  to  go  to  sea,  and  would  be  use- 
less should  she  reach  Charleston.  I respectfully  request  that  I may  be 
allowed  to  retain  her. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 

Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley , Seventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Headquarters  IT.  S.  Forces, 

Hilton  Head , S.  C.,  April  10,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  certain  facts  concerning  the 
loss  of  the  armed  steamer  George  Washington. 

I most  respectfully  declined  obeying  the  peremptory  order  of  General 
Saxton  to  send  the  Washington  to  Beaufort  before  she  had  completed 
the  task  assigned  her  by  yourself,  as  I supposed,  in  protecting  Captain 
Graef’s  operations.  General  Saxton,  on  board  the  Flora,  went  to  Sea- 
brook’s  and  commanded  the  Washington  to  follow  him  to  Beaufort, 
and  Lieutenant  Blanding  felt  obliged  to  obey. 

On  the  8th  the  E.  B.  Hale  and  Washington  started  to  go  around  Port 
Royal  Island  on  a reconnaissance,  conducted  by  Captain  Briggs,  Third 
Rhode  Island  Artillery.  Before  reaching  the  ferry  the  Hale  got  aground. 
At  night  she  got  off,  and  about  4.30  a.  m.  of  the  9th  started,  without 
the  knowledge  of  the  officers  of  the  Washington.  The  latter  started 


282 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

about  5 or  5.30  a.  m.  to  follow  her,  and  bad  proceeded  a mile  or  two 
when  a turn  in  the  channel  revealed  a rebel  light  battery  directly  astern, 
perhaps  a mile  distant,  which  instantly  opened  lire.  The  Washington 
had  only  a howitzer  astern,  and  could  not  turn  to  reply.  The  second 
shot  exploded  the  magazine,  which  was  in  the  afterpart  of  the  vessel, 
unshipped  the  rudder,  broke  the  steering  gear,  ripping  up  the  deck, 
tumbling  the  howitzer  into  the  hold,  and  destroying  all  the  ammunition 
for  the  James  rifle  forward.  The  vessel  took  fire  and  began  to  fill 
rapidly.  The  master  backed  her  toward  the  marsh  on  our  side.  Cap- 
tain Briggs  ordered  a white  flag  raised — against  the  protests  of  the 
master,  Campbell,  who  continued  his  attempt  to  escape.  They  put  the 
wounded  on  the  marsh  and  all  scrambled  off.  The  rebels,  seeing  this, 
resumed  their  fire,  of  course,  and  with  great  accuracy,  though  it  is 
not  known  that  any  were  struck  while  crossing  the  wide  marsh.  The 
wounded  lying  on  the  bank  were  captured  by  a boat  party  of  rebels. 

The  E.  B.  Hale,  somewhere  near  Broad  River,  was  informed  by  some 
one  (she  having  heard  the  firing,  it  is  said)  and  went  back  and  sent  or 
received  a flag  of  truce  and  took  the  wounded.  The  Washington  burned 

to  the  water’s  edge.  . 

The  total  loss  is  14,  all,  it  is  supposed,  from  the  explosion.  Two  were 
killed  instantly ; 2 seriously  (probably  fatally)  wounded,  8 slightly,  and 
2 missing.  Some  of  the  men  were  hours  scrambling  through  the  marsh. 
Ho  officers  were  hurt.  . 

Ho  unusual  movements  of  the  enemy  have  been  perceived.  All  is 

quiet.  1 .. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  R.  HAWLEY, 

Colonel  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers , Commanding  Post 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  Seymour, 

Chief  of  Staff \ Department  of  the  South. 


Ho.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Third  Mili- 
tary District. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District,  South  Carolina, 

Pocotaligoy  S.  0.,  April  16,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  daylight  on  the  9th 
instant  I attacked  the  armed  steamboat  George  Washington,  in  Coosaw 
River,  with  two  guns  of  the  Helson  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Lamkin 
commanding,  and  four  from  the  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery,  under 
Lieut.  H.  M.  Stuart.  Six  companies  of  the  Forty-eighth  Horth  Carolina, 
Col.  R.  C.  Hill,  and  five  companies  cavalry,  Col.  B.  H.  Rutledge  com- 
manding, and  two  pieces  light  artillery,  drawn  by  mules,  under  Capt. 
W.  L.  Campbell,  Company  I,  Eleventh  Regiment  Infantry,  were  ordered 
to  the  neighborhood  of  Port  Royal  Ferry  and  Chisolm’s  Island  as  a 

support.  _ ..  , 

After  a few  discharges  the  steamer  was  set  on  fire  by  a shell  and 
burned  to  the  water’s  edge.  The  enemy  raised  the  white  flag  and  our 
cannonade  ceased.  They  availed  themselves  of  the  cessation  of  our  fire 
to  escape  to  the  shore. 

Capt.  Stephen  Elliott  visited  the  wreck  and  found  her  armed  with 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


STEAMER  GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 


283 


two  24-pounder  brass  howitzers  and  a 20-pounder  James  rifle  gun. 
Two  men  of  the  crew  were  found  mortally  wounded  and  1 dead.  The 
wounded  reported  that  1 was  burned  up  with  the  wreck,  and  among 
those  who  escaped  several  were  wounded. 

A detachment  of  Captain  Cooper’s  battery,  three  Parrott  guns,  and 
Capt.  Stephen  Elliott’s  battery,  two  guns,  had  been  sent  to  intercept  a 
gunboat  moving  toward  Port  Eoyal  Ferry.  She  passed  the  ferry,  how- 
ever, before  the  batteries  arrived.  The  Parrott  guns  were  then  used  in 
shelling  the  pickets  on  the  opposite  shore,  and  exhibited  great  range 
and  accuracy  of  fire. 

Upon  the  night  of  the  10th  two  pieces  of  heavy  artillery  and  nine  of 
light,  supported  by  three  companies  of  infantry  and  three  companies  of 
cavalry,  the  whole  under  command  of  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  were  sent 
to  Chisolm’s  Island  with  boats  for  the  purpose  of  raising  the  guns  of 
the  burnt  steamer.  It  was  found  that  the  enemy  had  raised  one  gun, 
a 24-pounder  howitzer.  Captain  Elliott,  with  a section  of  the  Beaufort 
Artillery,  raised  and  brought  to  shore  one  brass  24-pounder  howitzer, 
several  Enfield  rifles,  and  some  portions  of  the  vessel’s  equipments. 
With  the  means  at  his  disposal  he  found  it  impracticable  to  raise  the 
20-pounder  James  gun.  The  enemy  shelled  the  wreck  from  the  opposite 
shore,  making  it  dangerous  to  work. 

There  were  no  casualties  in  either  affair  on  our  side. 

I take  pleasure  in  stating  that  the  artillery  practice  was  excellent,  and 
the  whole  command  showed  great  promptitude  and  alacrity  throughout 
the  enterprise. 

Capt.  Stephen  Elliott  exhibited  his  characteristic  coolness  and  skill 
as  an  artillery  officer.  Lieut.  E.  H.  Barnwell,  Capt.  John  H.  Screven, 
and  Lieut.  George  L.  Washington,  of  my  staff,  were  zealous  in  the  dis- 
charge of  their  duties,  and  rendered  efficient  service. 

I inclose  the  report  of  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKEB, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff , &c. 


Ho.  4. 

Report  of  Capt . Stephen  Elliott , Jr .,  Beaufort  (S.  C.)  Artillery . 

‘Hdqrs.  Arty.,  Third  Mil.  Dist.  of  S.  C., 

April  14,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  the  capture  of  the  armed 
steamer  George  Washington  by  a portion  of  the  artillery  of  this  com- 
mand on  the  morning  of  the  9th  instant. 

At  5 o’clock  on  the  8th  instant  a gunboat  and  a steamer  were  reported 
near  Chisolm’s  Island,  the  former  aground  and  the  latter  making  efforts 
to  get  her  off.  The  following  artillery  forces  were  ordered  to  report  at 
the  causeway  leading  to  the  island,  viz : Beaufort  Artillery,  Lieutenant 
Stuart,  six  guns;  Nelson  Artillery,  Captain  Lam  kin,  four  guns ; Cooper’s 
North  Carolina  battery,  three  10-pounder  Parrott  guns,  and  Company 
I,  Eleventh  Begiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Captain  Campbell, 
two  guns. 

While  the  batteries  were  being  brought  into  position  the  gunboat, 
which  had  now  been  set  afloat  by  the  rising  tide,  moved  off  toward  Port 
Royal  Ferry.  General  Walker  then  directed  me  to  divide  the  guns  and 


284  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

to  take  one  portion  to  the  ferry  with  the  view  of  intercepting  her,  and 
to  order  the  other  portion  to  open  fire  on  the  steamer  as  soon  as  she  should 
attempt  to  move.  I directed  Captain  Lamkin  with  two  guns  and  Lieu- 
tenant Stuart  with  four  guns  to  remain,  and  sent  forward  the  rest  to  the 
other  point.  At  5 o’clock  a.  m.  the  steamer  gave  indications  of  moving, 
and  these  guns  were  rapidly  placed  in  battery  by  their  commanding  offi- 
cers and  a brisk  fire  opened  upon  her  with  6-pounder  shot  and  12-pounder 
shell.  After  two  rounds  it  was  evident  that  she  was  disabled.  She 
raised  a white  flag  and  drifted  up  the  river  and  across  to  the  opposite 
shore. 

Upon  hearing  the  firing  I returned,  and  observing  that  her  crew  were 
attempting  to  escape  into  the  marsh  opposite  I directed  the  commanders 
of  batteries  to  reopen  fire  upon  them,  and  continued  it  until  they  had 
disappeared.  She  was  now  evidently  on  fire,  and  as  soon  as  the  explo- 
sion of  shell  and  powder  on  board  had  subsided  I boarded  her  and  found 
that  she  had  sunk  in  4 feet  of  water,  was  burnt  to  the  water’s  edge,  and 
had  carried  two  24-pounder  howitzers  aft  and  20-pounder  Parrott  pivot 
gun  forward.  There  were  3 men  in  her  yawl,  which  lay  astern,  2 of  them 
severely  wounded  and  the  third  dead.  They  Vere  taken  ashore.  Efforts 
were  made  to  bring  off  one  of  the  howitzers,  which  from  want  of  proper 
means  were  unsuccessful.  Attracted  by  the  cries  of  wounded  men  in 
the  marsh  I entered  it,  but  the  reappearance  of  the  gunboat  rapidly  ap- 
proaching rendered  it  unsafe  to  remain  any  longer.  As  the  wounded 
men  had  been  left  where  they  would  not  be  perceived  by  the  enemy  and 
could  not  be  assisted  by  us,  I rode  back  with  a flag  of  truce  and  directed 
the  attention  of  the  captain  of  the  gunboat  to  them,  and  after  some  un- 
important conversation  with  him  returned.  No  information  of  impor- 
tance was  elicited  from  the  prisoners  while  in  our  possession. 

The  practice  of  our  batteries  reflected  great  credit  on  the  gunners, 
conducted  as  it  was  at  early  dawn  and  at  a rapidly  moving  object  half 
a mile  distant. 

The  expedition  sent  down  two  days  afterward  succeeded  in  getting 
off  from  the  wreck  a 24-pounder  howitzer  (which  was  buried  on  shore 
until  it  could  be  brought  off  with  safety),  the  bell,  and  a small  kedge 
anchor.  A heavy  and  continuous  shelling  of  the  wreck  from  the  oppo- 
site shore  forbade  all  further  attempts  to  secure  the  pivot  gun.  The 
enemy  had  already  moved  the  other  howitzer. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  Captain  Earle,  of  the  Furman  Light  Artillery, 
a volunteer,  who  rendered  efficient  aid  during  the  attack  upon  the  boat, 
and  also  to  Captain  Barnwell,  of  General  Walker’s  staff,  who  upon 
both  expeditions  afforded  me  the  most  valuable  assistance. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 

Chief  Artillery , Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina . 

Capt.  James  Lowndes, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APRIL  10,  1863 — Skirmish  on  Folly  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  George  B.  Dandy , One  hundredth  New  York  Infantry . 

Headquarters  North  End  Folly  Island,  S.  C., 

April  11,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit,  for  the  information  of  the  general 


Chap.  XX VI.] 


SKIRMISH  ON  FOLLY  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


285 


commanding,  the  following  report  of  an  attack  made  last  night  by  a 
detachment  of  the  enemy  upon  my  pickets  at  the  extreme  northern 
point  of  this  island. 

When  my  regiment  first  took  this  advanced  position,  on  the  night  of 
the  6th  instant,  the  enemy  probably  knew  nothing  of  our  having  occu- 
pied the  island,  as  the  advance  was  made  in  the  night.  On  the  8th  in- 
stant I received  the  following  order  from  Brigadier-General  Seymour, 
chief  of  Major-General  Hunter’s  staff : 

Orders.]  April  8,  1863. 

To  the  Commanding  Officer  at  north  end  Folly  Island  : 

I.  Withdraw  every  officer  and  man  to  the  woods  (keeping  the  movement  concealed 
by  passing  along  the  beach  at  low  tide)  except  yourself  and  10  good  men.  The 
signal  party  to  go  back  also.  Show  not  a sign  of  occupation ; watch  closely,  but  keep 
perfectly  concealed. 

II . When  the  guns  come  up  at  night  keep  perfectly  quiet ; make  all  the  artillerymen 
keep  concealed,  and  send  all  back  not  absolutely  required  to  the  woods  until  further 
orders. 

T.  SEYMOUR, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

% 

I complied  with  the  order,  sent  the  regiment  back,  and  remained  with 
10  men  on  the  extreme  point  of  the  island.  Ou  the  night  of  the  10th 
nine  pieces  had  been  placed  behind  the  sand  hills  at  the  poiut  of  the 
island  where  our  pickets  rested,  six  of  which  were  12-pounder  rifled 
Wiard  field  guns  and  the  remaining  three  12-pounder  Wiard  howitzers 
(rifled)  for  marine  service.  The  same  evening  a detachment  of  about  30 
of  the  Marine  Artillery  were  brought  up  by  Lieutenant  Sands,  of  that 
corps,  to  serve  the  three  howitzers  in  case  of  an  attack.  All  the  pieces 
and  caissons  were  carefully  concealed  by  piling  bushes  around  them. 
During  the  day  I had,  with  the  assistance  of  Captain  McFarland,  TJ.  S. 
Engineers,  carefully  reconuoitered  the  spot  and  the  works  of  the  enemy 
on  the  opposite  bank  of  Light-House  Inlet.  The  result  of  our  investi- 
gations made  us  apprehensive  of  an  attack  by  troops  landed  by  means 
of  boats  or  pontoons  through  one  of  the  water-courses  traversing  the 
marshes  and  communicating  with  the  enemy’s  forces. 

I finally  decided  to  send  for  another  company,  which  reached  our 
post  about  10  p.  m.  This  made  our  force  on  the  point  about  60  men. 
Our  lookouts  ..nd  pickets  were  all  instructed,  in  accordance  with  Gen- 
eral Seymour’s  orders,  to  keep  concealed,  to  watch  carefully,  and  each 
picket  was  instructed  to  communicate  to  me  by  one  of  their  number 
information  of  any  movement  of  the  enemy.  Captain  McFarland  and 
myself  had  taken  a position  easily  reached  by  any  of  the  pickets,  with 
which  and  the  route  leading  thereto  they  were  all  well  acquainted. 

At  about  11  p.  m.  an  attack  was  made  by  a detachment  of  the  enemy, 
variously  estimated  by  the  pickets  at  from  200  to  500  men.  The  night 
was  exceedingly  dark.  After  having  examined  closely  every  person 
who  saw  them,  my  own  impression  is  that  there  was  not  less  than 
two  companies,  perhaps  120  men,  composing  the  attacking  party.  They 
must  have  landed  on  the  marsh  by  means  of  boats  or  pontoons  (from 
one  of  the  creeks  before  mentioned  communicating  with  Light-House 
Inlet),  which  marsh  is  at  times  passable  by  infantry. 

Having  passed  to  the  rear  by  the  edge  of  the  woods  skirting  the  long 
sand  bar  separating  us  from  the  regiment  they  met  and  attacked  our 
extreme  left  picket  (numbering  3 men  and  a corporal),  dispersing  them 
and  mortally  wounding  the  corporal,  Charles  Sabine,  Company  II,  and 
taking  prisoner  Private  John  McDonald,  of  Company  H. 

No  information  was  given  me  by  any  of  the  pickets  of  the  approach 


286 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

of  the  enemy.  They  were  first  perceived  by  the  detachment  of  Marine 
Artillery,  who  disgracefully  abandoned  their  pieces,  leaving  their  officer, 
Lieutenant  Sands,  alone  with  them.  Having  deserted  their  pieces  this 
detachment  ran  over  a picket  of  my  regiment  stationed  near  there,  and 
they  also  abandoned  their  posts  without  giving  any  information  of  the 
approach  of  the  enemy.  . _ 

The  enemy,  having  accomplished  their  object,  retired  before  1 could 
bring  either  my  guns  or  men  to  bear* on  them. 

While  the  attack  was  being  made  on  the  pickets  the  enemy  assembled 
on  the  opposite  shore  (Morris  Island)  and  fired  heavy  volleys  of  mus- 
ketry, no  doubt  to  attract  us  in  that  direction.  After  the  attack  was 
over  6 of  the  Marine  Artillery  men  could  not  be  found,  and  the  same 
was  the  case  in  the  morning  ensuing. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  B.  HANDY, 

Colonel  One  hundredth  New  York  Volunteers . 

Lieutenant  McHenry, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


APRIL  12,  1863.— Destruction  of  the  steamer  Stonewall  Jackson. 


Report  of  Capt.  Charles  T.  Haskell,  jr.,  C.  S.  Army . 

Battery  Marshall,  April  12, 1863. 

Captain:  The  steamer  Stonewall  Jackson,  just  from  Nassau,  was 
fired  into  last  night  and  chased  ashore  on  Long  Island  by  the  Abolition- 
ists. She  was  set  on  fire  at  daylight  by  her  captain,  and  will  prove  a 
total  loss.  Her  passengers,  officers,  and  crew  are  now  at  this  post,  54 
in  number. 

It  is  a pity  that  she  was  fired,  as  she  was  under  the  protection  of  my 
battery. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  T.  HASKELL,  JR., 

Captain , Commanding . 

Capt.  William  Greene, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APRIL  27,  1863.— Affair  at  Murray’s  Inlot,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates , First  South  Carolina  Artillery , 
commanding  Fourth  Military  District. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Military  District, 

Georgetown , April  29,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the  27th, 
at  sunrise,  two  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  appeared  off  Murray’s  Inlet,  and 
after  shelling  for  two  hours  landed  about  70  or  80  men,  under  protection 
of  their  guns,  on  a small  island,  and  set  fire  to  a schooner  lying  in  the 
inlet  and  near  the  shore  of  this  island,  but  out  of  reach  of  our  rifles. 
They  immediately  retired  to  their  boats,  leaving  one  of  their  men,  who 


Chap.  XXVI. ] 


AFFAIR  AT  MURRAY'S  INLET,  S.  C. 


287 


was  captured  by  our  pickets.  There  were  four  other  vessels  in  the  in- 
let, which  they  continued  shelling  nearly  all  day,  but  without  effect. 

I immediately  concentrated  all  the  force  I could  spare  from  other 
points,  and  am  prepared  to  resist  them  when  they  return,  which  I sup- 
pose will  be  very  soon,  to  destroy  the  other  vessels.  I sent  a section 
of  artillery  (two  rifle  guns)  immediately  up ; also  ordered  down  one  of 
the  companies  of  State  troops,  under  Captain  Boykin,  who  are  stationed 
near  Little  River.  Although  not  under  my  command  ostensibly,  yet 
are  virtually  so,  they  being  within  the  limits  of  this  district.  At  the 
time  of  their  landing  an  effort  would  have  been  made  to  capture  their 
party,  but  Major  Emanuel  had  but  one  company  at  that  point  and  one- 
third  of  those  were  on  picket  at  the  time ; he  consequently  took  posi- 
tion near  the  four  vessels  which  were  higher  up  the  creek,  hoping  that 
they  would  attempt  to  come  up  in  their  barges  to  destroy  them,  but 
which  they  failed  to  do.  They  are  not  aware  of  our  present  force  at 
that  point,  and  no  doubt  will  make  another  effort.  If  they  do,  I have 
so  arranged  it  that  I am  in  hopes  of  capturing  the  party. 

The  prisoner  I send  under  guard  by  to-morrow’s  train  subject  to  your 
order.  From  his  statements  (which  circumstances  render  almost  im- 
possible) I have  good  reason  to  believe  he  was  intentionally  left  as  a 

spy- 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Artillery , Comdg.  Fourth  Military  District, 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MAY  4,  1863. — Affair  at  Murray’s  Inlet,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Lieut . Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates , First  South  Carolina  Artillery 7 
commanding  Fourth  Military  District. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Military  District, 

Georgetoion , May  5,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday  at  sunrise 
two  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  appeared  off  Murray’s  Inlet,  commenced  and 
continued  shelling  until  11  a.  m.,  when  they  sent  a boat  ashore  with  7 
men,  5 of  whom  landed  on  the  beach,  for  the  purpose,  we  suppose,  of 
burning  the  vessels  now  lying  there.  Our  men  attacked  them,  killing 
1 and  wounding  3,  apparently  seriously,  as  they  had  to  be  assisted  into 
the  boat.  It  appears  that  some  of  our  men  were  discovered  by  them 
too  soon  to  admit  of  the  capture  of  the  others.  Major  Emanuel",  in  his 
report,*  mentions  Private  T.  G.  Britton  as  having  behaved  with  great 
gallantry.  Arms  of  the  man  killed  and  3 wounded  I have  turned  in. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


* Not  found. 


288  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

MAY  18-21,  1863. — Torpedo  operations  in  Skull  Creek  and  skirmish  at 

Pope’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  H.  Mickler , Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

Bltjffton,  S.  C.,  May  25,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I avail  myself  of  the  earliest  opportunity  to  report  the 
services  of  my  command,  which  has  been  engaged  from  time  to  time  for 
several  weeks  in  arranging  for  the  sinking  of  torpedoes  in  Skull  Greek, 
with  the  view  of  destroying  the  enemy’s  vessels,  which  are  constantly 
passing  through  this  thoroughfare.  The  labor  was  very  great,  and  the 
work  of  locating  them  after  they  were  got  ready  proved  to  be  both  dif- 
ficult and  dangerous.  1 am  happy  to  report,  however,  that  in  conjunc- 
tion with  Captain  Gray,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  work,  the  torpedoes 
were  placed  in  position  on  Tuesday  night  last,  18th  instant,  without 
any  casualty  whatever.  On  Wednesday  night,  with  three  boats  and  28 
men,  I attempted  a landing  on  Pope’s  Island,  opposite  Buckingham, 
more  with  a view  to  cover  the  operation  of  sinking  the  torpedoes  and 
draw  a gunboat  through  from  Broad  River  to  test  our  experiment  than 
otherwise.  When  within  50  yards  of  the  shore  the  foremost  boat 
was  hailed  by  a picket,  to  which  I replied  with  a few  rounds  of  buck- 
shot, which  caused  them  to  retire  precipitately.  I was  fired  upon  in 
turn  from  the  next  post  to  the  left,  with  whom  I had  a sharp  skirmish 
for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  from  my  boats  as  I withdrew.  I could 
distinctly  hear  the  commotion  on  the  island.  I then  reconnoitered 
the  shore  line  nearly  as  far  down  as  Braddock’s  Point,  frequently  ex- 
changing shots  with  the  enemy.  We  kept  up  our  feint  for  several 
hours  and  returned,  without,  however,  bringing  about  the  desired 
result. 

On  Thursday  night  I secreted  myself  and  4 men  in  a hammock,  known 
as  Buck  Island,  where  I remained  all  day  Friday.  I had  ample  oppor- 
tunity of  noticing  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  On  Thursday  night 
and  Friday  could  hear  the  grand  rounds  halted  apparently  every  hun- 
dred yards;  heard  the  officer  enjoining  the  utmost  vigilance  on  the  part 
of  the  sentinels,  and  from  observations  on  Friday  I should  say  that  they 
have  largely  increased  their  outposts.  The  shore  line  of  Hilton  Head 
seems  to  be  closely  guarded ; the  sentinels  walking  post  from  one  to 
the  other  as  regularly  as  a camp  guard.  They  also  have  re-enforce- 
ments near  at  hand,  as  we  could  see  their  tents  in  some  places.  On  Fri- 
day, about  3 o’clock  p.  m.,  a large  barge  with  a pleasure  party  came  in 
near  and  stood  directly  for  our  place  of  concealment  (which  is  a part 
of  the  Spanish  Wells  tract,  between  Broad  Creek  and  Calibogue  River). 
I fully  expected  to  get  the  fine  boat  and  crew ; but  unfortunately  the 
regular  dispatch  steamer  Island  City  was  approaching  from  Skull  Creek, 
both  boats  passiug  about  the  same  time,  and  I was  compelled  to  remain 
quiet.  A more  favorable  opportunity  1 hope  may  offer  very  soon.  I 
venture  to  suggest  that  a rified  cannon  of  sufficient  range  be  jdaced  at 
Buckingham,  with  the  view  of  firing  upon  and  sinking,  if  possible,  the 
enemy’s  light-draught  steamers  that  carry  dispatches  from  post  to  post. 
This  would  certainly  bring  a gunboat  through  Skull  Creek  of  sufficient 
draught  to  explode  our  torpedoes,  and  might  produce  some  advanta- 
geous results  to  us. 

The  men  of  my  command  were  always  prompt  and  energetic  in  the 
discharge  of  the  most  exposed  duties,  and  I am  happy  that  I have  not 


AFFAIR  ON  JAMES  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


Chai\  XXVI.] 


289 


any  casualties  on  our  side  to  report,  and  think  it  likely  that  the  picket 
who  hailed  my  boat  was  killed. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  H.  MICKLER, 

Captain  Company  E,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 
Adjt.  C.  F.  Davis,  Post  Hardeeville , S.  C. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Third  District  South  Carolina, 

Pocotaligo , S.  C.,  May  26,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  the  general  commanding.  The  necessary 
measures  are  being  taken  to  induce  a gunboat  to  come  up  Skull  Creek 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


MAY  31,  1863. — Affair  on  James  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  C.  E.  Simonton , Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  First  Sub-Div.  First  Military  District, 

Secessionville , May  31,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  morning  about  ten 
minutes  after  4 o’clock  a.  m.  a small  party  of  the  enemy,  numbering 
about  200  at  the  most,  effected  a landing  on  James  Island  at  the  upper 
causeway,  nearly  opposite  and  against  Legar^’s  house.  Lieutenant 
Lancaster,  in  charge  of  the  cavalry  picket,  as  soon  as  the  alarm  was 
given,  collected  his  picket  and  advanced  to  meet  them.  He  was  between 
them  and  Battery  Island.  He  found  them  around  Legard’s  house.  As 
soon  as  they  discovered  him  they  advanced  in  his  direction,  attempting 
to  outflank  him.  He  fell  back  to  the  causeway  between  Grimball’s  and 
Battery  Island,  and  there  protecting  his  flank  took  position.  The 
enemy  ceased  advancing  upon  him,  and  as  he  in  turn  advanced  on 
them  they  retreated  toward  Battery  Island.  Some  of  the  party  escaped 
m boats  toward  Folly  River  through  Schooner  Creek,  and  the  rest 
went  to  Battery  Island,  where  they  were  taken  off  by  a steamer  in 
Stono.  During  this  retreat  the  enemy  shelled  our  men  and  fired  grape 
from  a gunboat  in  Schooner  Creek  as  well  as  from  a battery  on  Folly 
Island.  The  cavalry  pickets  were,  at  first  10  in  number,  increased  to  18. 

As  soon  as  the  news  was  sent  to  me  I at  once  sent  forward  four  com- 
panies of  Twenty-fifth  Regiment,  under  Major  Glover,  with  orders  to 
engage  the  enemy  in  front,  and  at  the  same  time  sent  Major  Abney 
with  his  battalion  around  through  the  wood  in  front  of  Grim  ball’s  with 
instructions  to  proceed  along  the  causeway  from  Grimball’s  to  Battery 
Island  and  there  attack  the  enemy  on  the  flank  and  rear.  My  object 
was  to  cut  off  their  retreat  to  Battery  Island.  My  orders  were  promptly 
obeyed,  but  the  bird  had  flown.  The  skirmishers  from  both  parties  sent 
out  by  me  met  at  the  old  house  nearest  to  Battery  Island,  and  then 
drove  down  to  Battery  Island,  finding  none  of  the  enemy.  Nearly  every 
man  had  left  Battery  Island.  A large  gunboat  (the  Pawnee)  lying 
above  Battery  Island  commanded  every  approach  to  it. 

19  R R — VOL  XIV 


290 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


This  expedition  of  the  enemy  removes  all  fear  of  onr  supposed  bat- 
teries on  Stono,  and  no  doubt  we  will  have  visits  from  them  often. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding . 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


JUNE  2,  1863. — Union  raid  on  the  Combahee  River,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Military  District. 
No.  2. — Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel,  Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

No.  3. — Capt.  H.  Godbold,  Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  P.  L.  Breeden,  Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

No.  5. — Lieut.  A.  E.  Gilchrist,  Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  William  E.  Hewitt,  Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

No.  7. — Capt.  W.  L.  Trenholm,  Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles  and  Horse  Artillery. 

No.  8. — Capt.  John  F.  Lay,  C.  S.  Army,  Inspector  of  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  8.  Walker , C.  8.  Army , commanding  Third  Mili- 
tary District. 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonvillej  June  17,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  2d  instant  I re- 
ceived a telegram  at  about  9 a.  m.  that  the  enemy  had  landed  200  or 
300  men  at  Field’s  Point  and  that  a gunboat  was  destroying  the  pon- 
toon bridge  at  Combahee  Ferry.  I immediately  ordered  the  entire  com- 
mand to  proceed  to  Pocotaligo  Station  and  await  further  orders.  1 at 
once  galloped  to  the  station  (3  miles  distant)  to  put  myself  in  telegraphic 
-communication  with  the  threatened  point  and  to  inform  department 
headquarters. 

Upon  the  arrival  of  my  command  I ordered  three  companies  of  the 
Eleventh  South  Carolina  Infantry  and  Captain  Trenholm’s  squadron 
of  cavalry  (one  company  dismounted)  to  proceed  by  my  special  train  to 
Green  Pond  the  whole  under  the  command  of  Captain  Trenholm,  who 
was  instructed  to  be  governed  in  his  operations  by  the  last  reports  of 
the  enemy’s  movements. 

I sent  with  Captain  Trenholm  an  excellent  map  of  the  country  and 
two  guides. 

One  company  of  cavalry  and  a section  of  a battery  were  sent  to 
Salkehatchie  Bridge ; one  company  and  a section  to  Combahee  Ferry. 

This  force  I considered  amply  adequate  to  repel  any  advance  of  the 
enemy.  Receiving,  however,  two  successive  telegrams  from  Major 
Emanuel  that  the  enemy  were  still  advancing  from  Field’s  Point,  and 
fearing  they  might  have  been  re-enforced  without  the  knowledge  of  our 
pickets,  who  had  retired  immediately  on  their  approach,  I telegraphed 
to  Charleston  for  some  field  rifled  pieces  with  an  infantry  support,  and 


291 


Chap.  XXVI.]  UNION  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C. 

proceeded  n>yself  to  Green  Pond  to  await  the  re-enforcements  and  ac- 
company  them. 

Upon  my  arrival  at  Green  Pond  I learned  that  the  gunboats  had  left 
the  ferry,  and  reports  from  detached  men  arriving  at  the  post  satisfied 
me  that  the  raid  had  been  successfully  accomplished  and  that  the  enemy 
had  retired.  J 

At  11  o’clock  p.  m.  the  Twentieth  Begiment  South  Carolina  Infantry, 
Colonel  Keitt  commanding,  arrived  at  Green  Pond,  and  about  the  same 
time  I received  an  official  note  from  Captain  Trenholm  stating  that  the 
enemy  had  finally  disappeared. 

I refer  to  the  inclosed  reports  for  the  details  of  operations. 

The  enemy  burned  four  fine  residences  and  six  mills,  and  took  oflf 
with  them  about  700  negroes,  who  are  believed  to  have  gone  with  great 
alacrity  and  to  some  extent  with  preconcerted  arrangement. 

Several  intelligent  negroes  had  recently  escaped  to  the  enemy,  among 
them  a pilot  reported  to  be  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  river.  This 
will  account  for  the  boldness  and  celerity  of  the  enemy’s  movements. 

I beg  to  inclose  with  reports  of  subordinate  commanders  certain  in- 
structions and  orders  recently  issued  to  Major  Emanuel*  (to  whom  an 
excellent  map  of  the  country  had  been  sent),  with  a copy  of  a circular 
to  planters,  which  had  been  posted  at  the  railroad  stations  in  my  dis- 
trict, and  copies  of  which  had  also  been  sent  to  two  of  the  gentlemen 
whose  property  has  been  lately  destroyed. 

The  troops  had  been  located  about  3 miles  nearer  to  Field’s  Point 
but  two  successive  commanders,  viz,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jeffords  and 
Captain  Bomar,  had  remonstrated  against  their  troops  being  stationed 
there,  on  account  of  the  extreme  unhealthiness  of  the  locality,  and  they 
were  moved  to  Green  Pond.  J 

Ballouville  is  about  3£  miles  east  of  Combahee  Ferry,  and  I had  pro- 
posed to  station  an  infantry  command  there,  but  its  surgeon  sent  in  an 
official  statement  that  troops  could  not  be  retained  in  that  locality  on 
account  of  malarious  disease. 

As  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  several  non-commissioned  officers 
and  privates  of  this  command  is  to  be  investigated  by  official  examina- 
tion I refrain  from  an  expression  of  opinion  in  regard  to  it. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKEB, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  &e. 


[Inclosure  No.  l.J 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District, 

^°*  50-  S Pocotaligo , February  23,  1863. 

In  case  the  enemy  land  and  advance  from  Port  Eoyal  Ferry  the  pick- 
ets at  Cowpens,  at  Mackay’s  Point,  and  on  Kean’s  Keck  road  near  the 
bridge  over  Chisolm’s  Island,  will  remain  concealed  from  observation-  all 
the  rest  will  retire  in  the  direction  of  the  main  body  at  Leverett’s,  watch- 
ing the  movements  of  the  enemy.  A picket  at  Leverett’s  will  climb  the 
tree  at  that  post  and  send  report  to  headquarters.  Should  the  enemy 
land  at  Mackay’s  Point  only,  all  the  pickets  will  retire  save  those  at  Port 
Koyal  Ferry  and  Chisolm’s  Bridge.  Upon  the  arrival  of  the  pickets  at 


* See  inclosures  to  Lay’s  report. 


292 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  .,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai*.  XXYI. 


Garden’s  Corner  a sqnad  will  be  sent  down  the  Combahee  Ferry  road. 
They  will  conceal  themselves  at  the  side  of  the  road  and  watch.  They 
can  send  report  of  the  enemy’s  advance  up  that  road  by  any  one  of  those 
by-roads  leading  into  Combahee  Kiver  road.  A large  squad  will  also  be 
sent  up  the  Sheldon  Church  road $ the  main  body  will  proceed  by  the 
Stony  Creek  road  over  the  Hospa  Bridge.  Should  the  greater  portion 
of  the  Abolition  forces  proceed  over  the  Hospa  Bridge,  a courier  will  be 
dispatched  by  the  road  from  Camp  Pemberton  at  the  spring  through  the 
parsonage,  to  inform  the  pickets  returning  by  the  Sheldon  Church  road. 
Should  any  portion  of  the  enemy  advance  by  the  Sheldon  Church  road, 
the  larger  number  of  the  squad  will  take  the  Union  road  and  make  a 
close  observation  of  the  enemy  from  the  obstructions  on  that  road.  The 
pickets  will,  whenever  the  cover  permits,  exchange  shots  with  the  enemy, 
but  particularly  at  the  Hospa  Bridge,  at  obstructions  on  Sheldon  Church 
road,  at  Dr.  Henry  Fuller’s,  at  Mrs.  Eustis’  Causeway,  at  obstructions 
on  Union  road.  In  all  contingencies  the  chief  of  the  squad  (who  must 
always  be  designated)  in  observation  will  send  to  headquarters  from  time 
to  time  couriers  with  information  of  the  advance  and  strength  of  the 
enemy. 

These  orders  will  be  read  every  day  for  one  week  in  each  cavalry  com- 
pany. A copy  will  be  supplied  by  every  company  commander  to  all  his 
officers  and  non-commissioned  officers,  to  whose  attention  the  extreme 
importance  of  familiarizing  themselves  with  the  main  roads  and  by-roads 
of  the  country  to  operate  in  is  commanded. 

By  order  of  Brigadier- General  Walker. 

JAMES  LOWNDES, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Incloflure  No.  2.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District, 

No.  112.  ( McPhersonville , May  26,  1863. 

******* 

XV.  The  recent  false  alarm  of  the  pickets  stationed  on  Combahee 
Biver  was  not  justified  by  circumstances.  Before  giving  such  an  alarm 
the  pickets  should  have  ascertained  positively  whether  a boat  had  landed 
or  not  and  how  many  men  were  in  it.  If  only  5 or  6,  it  is  the  duty  of 
the  pickets,  if  only  2 should  be  on  post,  to  engage  them.  If  a large  num- 
ber, it  is  the  duty  of  the  pickets  to  fire  a signal  for  their  comrades  and 
closely  watch  the  enemy’s  movements.  As  these  troops  have  but  recently 
arrived  in  this  district,  and  may  be  ignorant  of  existing  orders,  they  are 
warned  that  if  another  groundless  alarm  is  given  the  pickets  will  be 
court-martialed.  If  sufficient  courage  is  not  shown  in  watching  the 
enemy  pickets  will  be  subject  to  the  charge  of  cowardice  and  to  be  tried 
by  court-martial. 

Bv  order  of  Brigadier-General  Walker: 

JAMES  LOWNDES, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  Xo.  3.] 

Circular.]  Headquarters  Third  Mil.  Dist., 

Pocotaligo , March  27,  1863. 

The  attention  of  planters  and  other  slave-holders  in  this  military  dis- 
trict is  called  to  the  following  communication  from  department  head-i 
quarters : 


Chap.  XXVI.]  UNION  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C.  21' 3 


Hdqrs.  Department  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  March  23,  1863. 

General  : It  is  the  wish  of  the  commanding  general  that  vou  advise  all  planters 
and  owners  of  negroes  in  your  military  district  toremove  their  negroes  as  far  as  prac- 
ticable into  the  interior  of  the  State,  as  otherwise  they  are  liable  to  be  lost  at  any 
moment.  J 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


JNO.  F.  O’BRIEN, 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


By.  order  of  Brigadier-General  Walker : 

JAMES  LOWNDES, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel , Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Troops  between  Ashepoo  and  Combahee, 

« , T June  6,  1863. 

Capt.  James  Lowndes, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : On  the  morning  of  the  2d  of  June  the  pickets  reported  to 
me  that  three  gunboats  had  arrived  at  Field’s  Point  and  were  landing 
a force.  In  a few  minutes  after  a courier  reported  that  a gunboat  wa« 
within  1£  miles  of  the  pontoon  bridge  over  the  Combahee  Kiver.  I im- 
mediately ordered  Captain  Godbold  to  send  a detachment  of  20  men 
under  Lieutenant  Gilchrist,  to  Field’s  Point  to  check  the  advance  of 
the  enemy  and  harass  them  as  much  as  possible.  Captain  Godbold, 
with  the  balance  of  his  men,  was  ordered  to  remain  at  Stokes’  Cause- 
way to  support  two  pieces  of  Captain  Bomar’s  artillery  which  had  been 
ordered  to  take  position  there.  Lieutenant  Breeden  was  ordered  to  take 
his  company  to  Mr.  Heyward’s  plantation,  near  the  pontoon  bridge,  to 
prevent  the  enemy  landing  in  that  direction.  Two  pieces  of  Captain 
Bomar’s  artillery  were  also  ordered  there,  but  before  arriving  there  Lieu- 
tenant Hendrix  informed  me  that  he  had  just  heard  from  a reliable 
source  that  the  gunboat  had  passed  the  bridge  and  was  going  on  up 
toward  the  railroad  bridge.  I immediately  ordered  Lieutenant  Hen- 
dricks to  turn  back  with  two  pieces  and  take  a position  so  as  to  prevent 
the  enemy  from  reaching  the  railroad.  Lieutenant  Breeden  reported 
he  arrived  at  Mr.  Heyward’s  place  within  one  hour  after  the  picket’s  re- 
port froin  the  pontoon  bridge  had  been  received,  and  found  the  build- 
ings on  that  place  and  Mr.  Lowndes’  in  flames,  and  the  enemy,  about 
60  strong  retiring  to  their  boat.  One  gunboat  was  at  that  time  at  the 
bridge.  Lieutenant  Breeden  opened  fire  upon  them,  which  was  kept 
up  until  they  got  under  cover  of  their  guns,  when  he  retired  to  the  cover 
ot  the  woods  from  their  shell.  I arrived  on  the  ground  shortly  after 
and  found  the  enemy  retiring  to  their  boat,  which  was  then  lying  at  the 
bridge.  I also  learned  that  another  party  of  about  the  same  number  had 
landed  from  another  boat  below  on  Mr.  Lowndes’  place.  Mr.  Lowndes’ 
overseer  came  down  and  informed  me  that  some  of  his  negroes  were  trv- 
mg  to  escape.  I immediately  ordered  a portion  of  Lieutenant  Breeden’s 
company  to  go  with  the  overseer  to  prevent  their  leaving,  who  succeeded 
m bringing  back  about  30.  The  balance  of  the  company  remained  at  the 
loot  of  the  causeway  to  watch  the  boat,  which  still  remained  at  the  bridge. 
Alter  moving  down  the  river  about  half  a mile  and  back  to  the  bridge 


294  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

for  several  times  she  finally  moved  down  the  river  about  half  a rtiile 
below  Mr.  Lowndes7  and  anchored,  when  I moved  Lieutenant  Breeden’s 
company  down  to  Mr.  Lowndes7.  Shortly  alter  getting  to  Mr.  Lowndes7 
place  I received  intelligence  from  Captain  Godbold  that  the  enemy  were 
advancing  in  force  toward  Stokes7  Causeway.  I left  Lieutenant  Breeden 
to  follow  the  boats  along  the  banks  of  the  river,  with  instructions  to  join 
the  main  body  after  the  boats  had  passed  below  the  causeway,  and,  pro- 
curing a guide,  I proceeded  to  Stokes7  Causeway.  Before  reaching  the 
causeway  I received  intelligence  that  the  advance  guard  had  driven  those 
of  the  enemy  within  Mr.  Middleton’s  mill.  Arriving  at  the  causeway  I 
found  that  Captains  Godbold  and  Bomar  had  advanced  toward  Middle- 
ton’s mill  to  dislodge  the  enemy.  I overtook  Captain  Bomar’s  battery 
a short  distance  beyond  the  causeway  and  ordered  him  to  proceed  as 
rapidly  as  possible.  Before  reaching  the  mill,  however,  a courier  re- 
ported that  the  enemy  had  evacuated  and  fired  the  mill  and  had  taken 
to  their  boats.  I understood  that  Captain  Godbold  had  gone  to  attack 
them  at  Field’s  Point.  I soon  after  heard  firing  in  that  direction,  and 
I supposed  Captain  Godbold  had  engaged  them.  I ordered  Captain 
Bomar  to  move  down  to  Tar  Bluff.  I and  Captain  Bomar  arrived  there 
in  advance,  when  we  discovered  a boat  lying  not  far  from  the  bluff, 
which  left  just  before  the  artillery  came  up.  I then  ordered  them  to 
Field’s  Point  to  try  to  cut  off  the  boat.  On  arriving  at  the  road  leading 
straight  down  to  Field’s  Point  we  found  ourselves  almost  surrounded 
by  the  enemy,  who  opened  fire  in  every  direction,  except  the  way  we 
came  from.  Thinking  that  Captain  Godbold’s  men  had  fired  into  them 
through  mistake  I rode  into  the  road,  and  looking  down  toward  Field’s 
Point  I discovered  a gunboat  had  taken  a position  so  as  to  command 
the  causeway.  On  turning  around  on  my  horse  to  look  after  Captain 
Bomar,  who  had  been  fired  into,  I and  Lieutenant  Hewitt,  who  were  in 
the  road,  were  fired  into  again  from  almost  every  direction.  Upon  look- 
ing around  I discovered  a good  many  negroes  standing  in  the  edge  of 
the  swamp,  commanded  by  one  white  man.  I ordered  the  artillery  to 
fire  into  them.  After  firing  into  them  several  times,  not  knowing  the 
enemy’s  force  or  position,  the  woods  being  very  dense,  I ordered  the 
artillery  to  move  back  in  the  direction  of  Tar  Bluff  After  arriving  near 
Tar  Bluff  I met  with  Lieutenant  Breeden,  with  his  command,  who  had 
just  arrived.  I immediately  ordered  Lieutenant  Edens  to  take  a part 
of  Lieutenant  Breeden’s  command  and  scour  the  woods  down  to  Field’s 
Point.  Lieutenant  Breeden  was  ordered  around  with  the  remainder  of 
his  command  to  take  the  main  road  leading  to  Field’s  Point,  which  he 
did,  and  arrived  at  or  near  there  about  suudown.  Lieutenant  Edens 
arrived  before  him,  and  on  their  arrival  there  they  could  see  nothing  of 
the  enemy,  as  they  had  retired.  Captain  Godbold  states  that  he  had 
attacked  the  enemy  at  the  same  point  we  were  fired  into  and  had  driven 
them  back,  when  they  commenced  shelling  from  their  boats.  When  he 
moved  back  to  secure  his  horses  the  enemy  advanced  again,  and  I sup- 
pose Captain  Godbold  was  with  his  horses  when  we  were  fired  into. 

In  regard  to  the  number  of  boats  I cannot  say  with  any  certainty,  as 
the  reports  conflict;  some  of  the  pickets  report  they  saw  three,  others 
but  two.  If  there  were  three,  one  must  have  remained  at  Field’s  Point 
all  day.  If  it  had  not  been  for  our  ignorance  of  the  country  and  of  the 
position  of  the  enemy  at  Field’s  Point  we  might  have  succeeded  in 
capturing  the  greater  portion  of  the  enemy  that  landed  there. 

We  only  had  one  man  wounded.  I am  not  able  to  say  what  damage 
was  done  to  the  enemy.  I have  been  informed  that  the  most  of  the 
property  near  the  river  from  Field’s  Point  to  Combahee  Bridge  has 


Chap.  XXVI.]  UNION  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C.  295 

been  burnt,  I cannot  say  with  any  certainty  as  to  the  number  of 
negroes  that  escaped,  but  suppose  it  to  be  between  500  and  600. 

Please  fiud  inclosed  the  officer’s  reports. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  P.  EMANUEL, 

Major , Commanding . 

Oapt.  James  Lowndiss, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  II.  Godbold , Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry , 

Green  Pond,  June  6,  186?. 

Major:  Agreeably  to  orders,  on  the  morning  of  June  2 (instant)  I 
proceeded  to  Stokes’  Causeway  to  meet  the  enemy,  who  was  said  then 
to  be  marching  in  a direction  for  Green  Pond.  I remained  there  until 
about  1 or  2 o’clock,  when  I received  information  that  the  enemy  were 
burning  houses  as  they  advanced,  and  hearing  at  the  same  time  a dis- 
charge of  small-arms  in  a direction  for  Middleton’s  mill,  supposing  the 
tiring  to  be  Lieutenant  Gilchrist,  who  was  sent  with  an  advance  guard, 
I immediately  proceeded  in  that  direction  to  re-enforce  him.  On  arriv- 
ing at  Mr.  Middleton’s  place  I met  with  Lieutenant  Gilchrist,  who  in- 
formed me  that  the  enemy  had  set  fire  to  the  mill  and  gone  aboard  of 
his  boats,  the  boats  moving  down  the  river.  I forthwith  moved  with 
the  command  in  a direction  for  Field’s  Point.  Not  being  acquainted 
with  the  localities  of  the  country  I advanced  with  my  command  mounted. 
I soon  found  that  I was  in  range  of  their  gunboats,  my  picket  at  the  same 
time  encountering  the  enemy’s  pickets,  driving  them  from  their  past. 
Here,  amidst  a furious  fire  of  shell  from  the  enemy’s  gunboats,  I ordered 
my  command  to  secure  their  horses  out  of  the  immediate  range  of  their 
shell,  dismount,  and  advance  on  the  enemy.  Just  about  this  time  I 
received  orders  to  report  with  my  command  at  Tar  Bluff.  Soon  after 
I reported  there  the  enemy  ceased  firing  from  their  boats,  and  I was 
informed  had  moved  off*  and  all  was  quiet. 

I am,  major,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

H.  GODBOLD, 
Captain  Company  F. 

Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut . P.  L.  Breeden , Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

Camp  Gregg,  S.  G.,  June  6, 1863. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  2d  day  of  June,  18(B3, 
about  7 o’clock  a.  m.,  I was  ordered  by  yourself  to  take  my  command 
and  proceed  to  Col.  W.  C.  Heyward’s  plantation,  on  Combahee  Biver, 
near  the  pontoon  bridge,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  advancing  out  on 
the  causeway  to  Colonel  Heyward’s  settlement;  but  on  approaching 
Colonel  Heyward’s  place  I saw  immense  volumes  of  smoke,  and  on 
arriving  at  the  upper  end  of  the  colonel’s  settlement  I discovered  a 


296  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

considerable  number  of  bis  buildings  enveloped  in  flames.  I met  the 
picket  near  the  upper  end  of  Colonel  Heyward’s  settlement.  I inquired 
the  location  and  number  of  the  enemy.  They  could  not  inform  me  of 
the  location,  but  stated  they  were  at  least  60  strong.  I immediately 
threw  out  skirmishers,  when  I took  the  remainder  of  my  command  and 
advanced  cautiously  down  the  main  road,  endeavoring  to  get  a position 
at  a small  breastwork  near  the  end  of  the  causeway,  which  I succeeded 
in  doing;  but  on  my  arrival  there  I discovered  the  enemy  retiring  on 
the  causeway  toward  their  boat,  which  was  lying  near  the  pontoon 
bridge  in  such  a position  as  to  command  the  causeway.  The  enemy’s 
vanguard  was  some  300  yards  distant.  I ordered  my  men  to  open  fire 
on  them,  which  I kept  up  until  they  were  entirely  under  cover  and  pro- 
tection of  their  guns.  When  we  opened  fire  the  enemy  returned  it,  re- 
tiring. The  enemy  proceeded  to  shell  us  rapidly  for  a short  while.  I 
fell  back  under  cover  of  the  woods,  &c.,  at  which  time  you  arrived  on 
the  ground. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  L.  BREEDEN, 

Lieutenant , Comdg.  Company  _E7,  Fourth  Regiment, 
Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Lieut.  A.  F.  Gilchrist , Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

Green  Pond,  S.  C.,  June  6,  1863. 

Major  : Agreeably  to  orders,  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  instant  I pro- 
ceeded with  20  men  as  an  advance  guard  on  the  direct  road  to  Field’s 
Point  until  I arrived  at  Middleton’s  plantation,  some  4 miles  from  the 
Point,  where  I came  up  to  the  last  picket.  I inquired  of  him  of  the 
whereabouts  of  the  enemy.  His  report  to  me  was  that  he  was  within 
1£  miles  of  him,  on  the  main  road  from  Green  Pond  to  Field’s  Point. 
Not  knowing  the  locality  of  the  country,  I dismounted  my  command  and 
took  Mr.  Middleton’s  negro  driver  as  a pilot.  My  design  was  to  get  in 
his  rear  and  cut  him  off  from  his  gunboats.  After  proceeding  about  a 
mile  on  the  right,  from  the  road  that  leads  from  Green  Pond  to  Field’s 
Point,  I found  the  enemy  strongly  posted  in  Mr.  Middleton’s  mill-house, 
on  the  bank  of  the  Combahee.  1 drove  in  all  of  his  pickets  and  ad- 
vanced within  200  yards  of  the  mill-house.  I found  that  his  force  was 
much  superior  to  mine  and  that  I could  not  dislodge  him  from  his  posi- 
tion. I then  posted  a picket  on  the  right,  left,  and  center  of  the  house, 
and  kept  him  in  his  position  until  one  of  the  gunboats  came  down  the 
river  and  took  him  off.  I then  marched  my  command  back  to  the  road 
leading  from  Green  Pond  to  Field’s  Point,  when  in  a few  minutes  Cap- 
tain Godbold  came  up  with  the  remainder  of  his  company  and  took  com- 
mand. In  the  skirmish  at  the  mill  all  of  my  command  behaved  with 
credit  to  themselves  and  their  country’s  cause. 

I am,  major,  with  the  highest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  GILCHRIST, 
Lieutenant , Commanding  Advance  Guard. 


Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  UNION  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C.  297 

No.  6. 

Report  of  Lieut.  William  E.  Hewitt , Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

Chisolmville,  S.  C.,  June  5,  1863. 

On  the  morning  of  the  2d  June  it  was  reported  to  me  by  one  of  the 
men  on  post  at  Field’s  Point  that  two  Yankee  boats  had  anchored  off 
and  in  about  100  yards  of  the  guard-house ; arrived  there  about  4 o’clock 
in  the  morning.  I received  .the  news  from  there  about  5.30  o’clock  and 
immediately  sent  a dispatch  to  report  to  you,  and  before  my  courier  got 
out  of  my  sight  I discovered  a second  one  coming  to  report  and  called 
him  back— that  is  my  courier— and  got  the  report  of  the  second,  which 
was  that  the  Yankees  had  landed  men  and  were  on  the  march,  and  as 
soon  as  my  courier  returned  I left  him  in  charge  of  the  guard-house  at 
Chisolmville  and  at  one  proceeded  to  Field’s  Point  to  ascertain  the 
position  and  strength  of  the  enemy;  but  when  I arrived  at  Middleton’s 
place  I found  that  the  picket  had  fallen  back  to  that  place,  and  ascer- 
tained of  him,  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  of  the  whereabouts  of  the 
enemy,  at  the  same  time  saying  that  the  enemy  was  at  Middleton’s  mill, 
and  as  soon  as  I could  learn  what  they  were  up  to  I immediately  re- 
ported. I also  found  Lieut.  A.  E.  Gilchrist,  with  a detachment  of  20 
men  as  advance  guard,  who  was  in  pursuit  of  them. 

I am,  maior,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ W.  E.  HEWITT, 

Lieutenant , Commanding  Guard. 

Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Capt.  W.  L.  Trenholm , Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles  and  Horse 

Artillery. 

Camp  Rutledge  M’t’d  Kiflemen  and  Horse  Arty., 

McLhersonville , June  4,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the  2d 
instant  I was  ordered  by  the  brigadier-general  commanding  to  proceed 
to  Green  Pond  Station  with  Captain  Wescoat’s  and  my  command,  con- 
sisting of  three  companies  of  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Capt. 
J.  J.  Wescoat  commanding,  150  men  ; two  [companies]  Rutledge  Mount- 
ed Riflemen  and  Horse  Artillery,  of  which  there  were  dismounted,  under 
Lieut.  W.  H.  Jeffers,  57  men,  and  mounted,  under  Capt.  J.  J.  Magee,  3L 
men,  making  in  all,  and  exclusive  of  hospital  attendants,  247  men,  and 
to  co-operate  with  Major  Emanuel  in  whatever  manner  circumstances 
might  point  out  as  most  advisable. 

I reached  Green  Pond  at  about  2 o’clock  p.  m.,  and  learning  that  the 
force  originally  at  that  post  was  disposed  thus,  viz,  two  guns  of  Captain 
Bomar’s  battery  and  one  company  of  cavalry  in  the  direction  of  Stokes’ 
and  Field’s  Point,  two  guns  of  same  battery  at  Salkehatchie  Bridge, 
and  the  other  company  of  cavalry,  under  Major  Emanuel  himself,  near 
Combahee  Ferry,  I ordered  Captain  Magee  to  move  forward  rapidly  to 
Stokes’,  and  to  support  the  forces  opposing  the  enemy’s  demonstration 
from  Field’s  Point.  I put  the  infantry  in  motion  in  the  same  direction, 
and  sent  Captain  He  Saussure,  of  the  brigade  staff,  who  had  been  assigned 


298 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


to  duty  with  me,  to  communicate  with  Major  Emanuel,  and  also  seat  a 
mounted  detachment  to  establish  a line  of  estafettes  between  the  Com- 
bahee  road  and  that  by  which  my  command  was  advancing,  and  took 
post  myself  for  the  time  at  the  terminus  of  that  line,  about  3 miles  above 
Stokes’.  The  latest  information  from  Major  Emanuel  was  that  the 
enemy  was  advancing  in  force  from  Field’s  Point  and  their  vessels  were 
still  lying  near  Oombahee  Ferry.  My  intention  was  to  attack  vigor- 
ously the  force  near  Field’s  Point,  and  if  successful  in  defeating  them 
to  post  the  artillery  at  Tar  Bluff  to  intercept  the  return  of  the  enemy’s 
vessels,  and  to  assist  Major  Emanuel  by  sending  a detachment  up  the 
river  road.  Had  my  command  reached  Green  Pond  at  noon  I have 
reason  to  believe  that  this  could  have  been  done,  and  that  the  enemy 
would  have  been  well  punished  for  his  atrocities.  At  2.45  p.  m.  I re- 
ceived a message  from  Captain  Magee  that  he  had  information  from 
Madame  Tadini  that  there  were  large  fires  in  the  direction  of  Chisolm- 
ville,  and  fearing  that  the  enemy,  while  attracting  our  attention  at  other 
points,  was  arriving  at  the  Ashepoo  Bridge,  I considered  it  proper  to 
delay  the  infantry  and  to  send  Sergeant  Barnwell  with  a mounted  farce 
to  ascertain  the  condition  of  thiugs  beyond  the  Cheeba.  In  this  recon- 
naissance he  experienced  a vexatious  and  unexpected  delay  in  conse- 
quence of  the  removal  of  the  bridges  on  the  most  direct  route,  an(J  it 
was  not  until  5.30  p.  m.  that  he  returned  and  reported  everything  quiet. 
I then  pushed  on,  but  on  reaching  a point  about  a mile  beyond  Stokes’ 
met  Major  Emanuel’s  command  returning  to  camp,  and  learned  tom 
the  officers  that  the  enemy  had  retired  to  their  vessels  and  that  the 
latter  had  gone  below  Field’s  Point.  I accordingly  allowed  my  com- 
mand to  seek  shelter  from  the  descending  rain  around  Stokes’,  and  re- 
mained there  for  the  night,  so  reporting  to  the  brigadier-general  com- 
manding, who  had  meanwhile  arrived  at  Green  Pond,  and  to  whom  I 
had  previously  sent  Captain  De  Saussure  to  explain  the  position*  of 
affairs. 

On  the  3d  instant  I brought  my  command  back  to  McPhersonville, 
where  it  arrived  at  midnight.  I take  pleasure  in  bearing  testimony  to 
the  zeal  and  efficiency  of  the  officers  and  the  very  orderly  conduct  and 
cheerful  endurance  of  the  men  under  my  command.  I made  careful 
inquiry,  and  could  ascertain  no  injury  done  to  private  property  by  their 
presence  except  the  burning  of  a few  rails  at  Mrs.  Girardeau’s  plants 
tion  on  the  night  of  the  2d  instant,  and  this  I consider  fully  authorized 
by  the  state  of  the  weather  and  the  impossibility  of  procuring  other 
fuel.  I felt  my  usefulness  and  security  very  much  increased  by  the 
accurate  information  of  the  country  derived  from  Corpl.  R.  H.  Barn- 
well and  Private  H.  M.  Stuart,  of  B.  V.  A.,  who  accompanied  me,  and 
also  by  the  use  of  an  excellent  map  from  district  headquarters. 

Very  respectfully,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  L.  TRENHOLM, 

E.  M.  E.  and  II.  A.,  Captain , Commanding  Expedition. 

Capt.  James  Lowndes,  A.  A.  A.  G.,  Third  District. 


NTo.  8. 

Eeport  of  Capt.  John  F.  Lay , C.  8.  Army , Inspector  of  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  June  24,  1863. 

General  : In  obedience  to  orders  from  department  headquarters  I 


Chap.  XXVI  ] UNION  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C.  299 

have  visited  the  scene  and  made  investigation  of  the  facts  connected 
with  the  recent  Abolition  raid  upon  the  Combahee  Biver  and  the  atro- 
cious conduct  of  the  enemy  engaged  in  it,  and  have  to  submit  the  fol- 
lowing report  of  facts,  gathered  from  every  available  source: 

Some  three  or  four  weeks  preceding  the  2d  day  of  June,  1863  (the  day 
of  the  raid),  Major  Emanuel,  with  his  squadron  of  cavalry,  of  Butledge’s 
regiment  of  cavalry,  who  had  been  previously  stationed  near  George- 
town, in  the  Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  reported  un- 
der orders  for  duty  with  his  regiment  in  the  Third  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina,  and  was  ordered  by  Brigadier-General  Walker,  com- 
manding, to  take  position  and  command  of  the  post  at  Green  Pond,  on 
the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Bailroad,  between  the  Combahee  and  Aslm- 
poo  Bivers.  He  was  by  special  order  directed  to  acquaint  and  familiar- 
ize himself  and  officers  with  the  localities  and  lines  of  defense  in  the  dis- 
trict of  country  under  his  command,  and  for  that  purpose  was  furnished 
with  an  accurate  map  of  the  country.  (See  Inclosure  A.)  Instructions 
for  picket  duty  were  furnished  him,  ordering  pickets,  even  it*  few  in 
number,  to  engage  the  enemy,  and  at  all  events  to  fire  signals  and  re- 
tire, closely  watching  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  (See  Exhibit  B.)# 
His  special  attention  was  very  soon  thereafter  called  to  an  extract  from 
an  Abolition  paper  giving  intimation  of  some  projected  raid  by  the 
enemy’s  forces  from  Hilton  Head.  He  was  cautioned  to  increased  vigi- 
lance, and  received  general  instructions  in  view  of  an  engagement  with 
them.  (See  Inclosure  C.)  About  this  same  time  a written  notice  was 
given  to  the  adjacent  planters  advising  the  removal  of  their  negro 
property  to  the  interior.  Major  Emanuel  had  also  with  him  Captain 
Bomar’s  company  of  light  artillery. 

On  the  morning  of  the  2d  of  June,  1863,  Major  Emanuel  being  with  his 
command  at  Green  Pond,  and  having  a picket  force  at  Field’s  Point  of 
6 men,  in  charge  of  Corpl.  H.  H.  Newton,  Company  E,  and  another  force 
at  Combahee  Ferry,  on  the  pontoon  bridge,  of  5 men,  in  charge  of  Corpl. 
W.  D.  Wall,  Company  F,  about  7 a.  m.  a courier  from  Lieutenant  He  wit, 
commander  of  outposts,  stationed  at  Chisolmville,  reached  the  camp, 
informing  Major  Emanuel  that  three  gunboats  were  at  Field’s  Point 
landing  troops,  and  a few  moments  after  another  courier,  stating  that 
a gunboat  was  steaming  up  the  Combahee  Biver  and  was  within  1 to  1^ 
miles  of  the  pontoon  bridge. 

Lance-Corporal  Newton,  chief  of  the  Field’s  Point  picket,  states  that 
about  3 a.  m.  of  the  2d  June,  1863,  he  first  saw  two  steamers  about  2 
miles  in  the  river  or  sound  below  Field’s  Point;  that  the  night  was  bright 
and  he  could  see  a long  distance;  he  watched  them  until  they  came  near; 
he  then  mounted  his  men  and  fell  back  about  300  yards,  dismounted,  and 
leaving  the  horses  went  back  to  the  Point.  He  saw  them  land  from  8 
to  12  men,  who  went  up  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  he  also  heard  them 
launch  other  boats.  He  immediately  sent  off  a courier  with  the  informa- 
tion to  Lieutenant  Hewitt,  commander  of  outposts  at  Chisolmville,  about 
10  miles  distant,  and  soon  after  sent  off  another  courier.  The  party 
which  had  landed  then  took  a road  leading  to  the  rear  of  him,  and  hav- 
ing only  5 men  left  with  him  he  felt  compelled  to  retire,  especially  as 
their  arms  were  inferior  and  unreliable.  He  fell  back  some  300  yards. 
The  enemy,  being  re-enforced,  saw  him  and  advanced  up  the  causeway, 
having  2 white  men  in  advance,  the  others  marching  by  fours,  but  can- 
not say  how  many  there  were.  Sending  off  another  courier,  he  still  re- 
tired, the  enemy  following  for  1J  miles  to  the  cross-roads,  he  keeping 
them  in  sight.  There  was  no  firing  on  either  side.  Beyond  this  point 

* See  Inclosure  No.  2 to  Walker’s  report,  p.  292. 


300  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

the  enemy  did  not  advance,  and  lie,  continuing  to  fall  back,  lost  sight  of 
them  and  saw  them  no  more.  Soon  he  was  met  by  the  detachment  un- 
der Lieutenant  Gilchrist  and  reported  to  him.  Lieutenant  Gilchrist 
then  went  on  toward  Tar  Bluff,  leaving  him  in  charge  of  ihe  horses, 
and  soon  after  he  heard  firing  from  that  direction. 

Corporal  Wall,  chief  of  picket  at  Coinbahee  Ferry,  states  that  about 
6 or  6.30  a.  m.  on  the  2d  June,  1863,  a steamer  came  in  sight  of  his  post 
at  the  pontoon  bridge;  that  be  immediately  sent  a courier  to  Major 
Emanuel  at  his  camp;  he  mounted  his  men,  and  as  they  crossed  the 
bridge  he  saw  a fire  some  distance  down  the  river,  but  upon  whose  plan- 
tation he  cannot  say.  As  they  passed  over  the  long  causeway  leading 
from  the  bridge  to  Col.  W.  C.  Heyward’s  they  were  fired  on  twice  from 
the  boat;  when  they  reached  the  upper  end  of  the  causeway  they  saw 
the  boat  approach  the  bridge  and  land  a force.  He  then  sent  another 
courier  to  Major  Emanuel  to  inform  him  that  the  enemy  were  landing. 
A party  of  25  or  30  who  had  landed  did  not  approach  the  causeway,  but 
marched  up  and  down  the  bank  under  a flag.  He  sent  one  of  his  men 
around  to  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Charles  Lowndes  to  ascertain  if  any 
party  had  landed  there,  and  leaving  one  man  at  the  head  of  tliecauseway, 
near  to  a breastwork,  he  galloped  to  Colonel  Heyward’s  residence  to  in- 
form him  and  to  ask  if  he  could  render  any  assistance  to  get  his  ne- 
groes off.  He  then  returned  and  saw  the  enemy  marching  up  the  cause- 
way, 50  or  60  strong,  of  which  number  about  10  were  whites  only.  He 
remained  on  horseback  until  they  came  within  500  yards,  and  then  re- 
tired with  his  comrade  to  dismount,  tie  their  horses,  return  to  the  breast- 
work, and  fire  on  them,  but  hearing  the  picket  sent  to  Mr.  Lowndes’  fire, 
and  supposing  that  a party  was  in  his  rear,  ho  did  not  return,  but  fell 
back,  and  was  joined  by  another  man  from  camp,  who  took  charge  of 
the  horses.  He  watched  and  saw  the  party  come  up  nearly  to  the  breast- 
work and  turn  in  at  the  gate  leading  to  the  residence  of  Colonel  Hey- 
ward, and  also  saw  them  when  they  commenced  firing  the  buildings. 
A party  of  them  went  on  toward  the  negro  houses;  lie  followed  with 
his  comrade  and  was  fired  on  by  them,  and  he  returned  the  fire  at 
about  300  yards.  (This  picket  was  armed  with  Enfield  rifles,  and  this 
was  the  first  time  that  they  had  fired  at  all,  except  Corporal  Wall 
states  that  when  fired  on  from  the  boat  as  he  crossed  the  bridge  he 
fired  in  return.  Colonel  Heyward  states  that  this  is  not  a fact.)  He 
retired  back  upon  the  road  and  saw  the  company  under  Lieutenant 
Breeden  approaching;  leaving  his  comrade  he  dashed  to  meet  him,  to 
urge  him  to  come  up  at  full  speed.  He  (Lieutenant  Breeden)  came  up 
promptly  to  where  he  (Wall)  had  left  his  comrade,  dismounted  his  men, 
and  sent  out  scouts,  delaying  some  twenty  minutes,  and  then  moved  on 
cautiously  to  the  breastwork;  when  he  reached  there  the  enemy  were 
retreating  down  the  causeway,  some  300  yards  distant,  with  the  stolen 
negroes  in  advance  of  them  (Capt.  L.  De  Saussure,  of  staff  of  Brigadier- 
General  Walker,  states  that  WTall  told  him  the  stolen  negroes  were  in 
rear  of  them,  scattered  along  the  causeway,  and  that  when  they  fired 
these  negroes  scattered  to  the  right  and  left).  Lieutenant  Breeden  fired 
on  them;  they  ran,  then  rallied  and  returned  the  fire.  He  did  not  ad- 
vance or  pursue  them.  Very  soon  the  boat  left,  and  Lieutenant  Breeden 
with  his  command  moved  toward  Field’s  Point.  As  we  approached  we 
heard  firing  there,  and  when  we  reached  there,  riding  slowly,  the  enemy 
had  gone. 

Corporal  Wall  denies  a conversation  as  reported  to  have  been  held 
by  him  with  Mr.  Hughes,  the  overseer  of  Colonel  Heyward,  as  will  be 
hereinafter  given,  but  says  that  he  told  Mr.  Hughes  that  when  Lieu- 


Chap.  XXVI.)  UNION  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C.  301 

tenant  Breeden  approached  to  within  500  yards  of  the  breastworks  his 
scouts,  whom  he  had  sent  on  from  the  field,  called  to  him  to  rush  on  ; 
they  could  see  the  enemy  leaving  the  premises  of  Colonel  Heyward  ; 
that  the  lieutenant  looked  sick,  ready  to  vomit,  and  said  to  his  men,  “I 
am  given  out;  I can’t  run that  he  also  stated  that  they  had  not  been 
far,  and  that  they  knew  nothing  of  the  Country  or  course  of  the  river, 
and  that  they  had  no  sabers  with  them. 

John  D.  Sanders  (who,  with  Privates  Lumpkin  and  Leightley  and 
Lieutenant  Brunson,  of  Capt.  T.  G.  Allen’s  company  of  State  troops, 
the  Combahee  Bangers,  was  at  the  farm  of  Mr.  William  Middleton,  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  river  from  Colonel  Heyward’s  and  immediately 
at  the  ferry)  states  that  Lieutenant  Brunson  went  to  the  stable  about 
6.20  a.  m.  on  the  2d  June,  1863,  and  called  to  us  that  a gunboat  was  in 
sight ; we  could  see  it  from  the  stable.  We  saddled  up,  and  Lieutenant 
Brunson,  leaving  us,  rode  off  to  inform  Mr.  Blake.  Leightley,  who  had 
charge  of  the  negro  dogs,  also  rode  off*  with  them.  Lumpkin  and  I re- 
mained until  the  boat  came  to  the  bridge  and  landed  some  men  upon 
the  plantation.  He  saw  the  picket  from  the  ferry  crossing  the  bridge 
just  before  the  boat  came  up,  which  discharged  two  small  pieces,  sup- 
posed to  be  6-pounder  guns.  About  30  or  40  who  landed  took  a path 
across  the  field  to  the  house — chiefly  white  men  ; indeed  noticed  no  ne- 
groes— and  none  of  them  had  arms.  We  were  only  300  yards  from 
them,  and  they  must  have  seen  us.  We  retired  and  rode  off:  toward 
Mr.  Blake’s,  through  the  woods,  and  met  Lieutenant  Brunson,  Mr. 
Blake,  and  a few  others.  We  remained  three  or  four  hours,  endeavor- 
ing to  keep  between  Blake’s  negroes  and  the  gunboat.  While  there 
we  could  see  the  Yankees  and  negroes  crossing  the  road,  until,  seeing 
none,  some  of  us  rode  back  to  Mr.  Middleton’s.  The  enemy  had  all 
left,  but  the  boat  was  still  at  the  bridge.  We  saw  some  of  Blake’s  ne- 
groes endeavoring  to  get  to  the  ferry  ; we  went  back  to  the  road  to  get 
the  dogs  and  cut  them  off ; some  of  the  negroes  turned  back.  The  en- 
emy had  burned  all  the  buildings  at  Mr.  Middleton’s  and  taken  off  the 
negroes.  When  we  returned  the  boats  had  left.  We  went  down  with 
Bell,  the  scout,  and  when  we  had  passed  the  ferry  we  saw  that  the 
bridge  was  on  fire,  but  not  badly ; we  turned  back  and  put  it  out,  and 
endeavored  to  collect  the  scattered  negroes  of  Mr.  Blake.  At  6 a.  m. 
two  of  the  pickets  came  up  from  the  ferry  to  water  their  horses  at  the 
well.  They  gave  us  no  notice,  and  we  knew  nothing  further  from  them 
until  we  saw  them  crossing  the  bridge.  The  Cotton  Hope  picket  had 
a few  moments  before  they  crossed  the  bridge  informed  the  ferry  picket 
that  a boat  was  in  the  river ; we  saw  the  other  steamers  lovrer  down  in 
the  river.  Mr.  Lumpkin,  Leightley,  and  Lieutenant  Brunson  support 
this  statement.  (See  Inclosure  E.) 

Mr.  Hughes  (overseer  for  Col.  W.  C.  Heyward)  states  that  he  had  a 
conversation  with  Corporal  Wall  on  the  Wednesday  succeeding  the 
raid ; that  he  accused  the  picket  at  the  ferry  of  having  been  asleep ; 
that  Wall  denied  this,  but  admitted  that  they  ought  to  have  discovered 
and  reported  the  steamers  sooner  than  they  did.  Wall  also  stated  that 
when,  after  the  enemy,  20  in  number,  all  negroes  except  one  had 
marched  up  the  causeway,  he  dashed  back  to  meet  the  troops  he  sup- 
posed were  coming  down.  By  that  time  he  found  them,  tender  Lieuten- 
ant Breeden,  about  three-fourths  of  a mile  back  upon  the  road  halted 
near  to  Colonel  Heyward’s  corn  field ; that  he  at  once  stated  all  the 
facts  to  Lieutenant  Breeden,  and  told  him  if  he  would  charge  down  the 
road  to  the  gate  he  would  bag  the  whole  party ; that  it  wmild  be  impos- 
sible for  them  to  escape;  to  which  the  reply  was,  “Well,  I don’t  know;” 


302 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


that  he  (Wall)  remained  and  urged  him  and  offered  to  ride  in  advance 
and  show  him  ; that  he  marched  his  command  down  the  road  slowly 
and  carefully,  halting  every  few  steps;  that  he  then  dismounted  and 
moved  on  slowly,  peeping  over  the  fences,  &c.  The  lieutenant  (Breeden) 
finally  said  to  his  men,  u Men,  if  you  choose,  you  can  go  down.”  After 
a little  they  went  down  to  the  breastwork.  The  buildings  were  on  fire 
and  the  enemy  and  negroes  gone  down  the  causeway  some  300  yards  ; 
they  fired  on  them,  and  the  fire  was  returned  by  the  party  on  shore  and 
from  the  boat.  To  an  expression  of  disgust  employed  by  me  Wall  re- 
plied, “ If  Captain  Godbold  and  his  company  had  been  here  the  prop- 
erty would  have  been  saved.” 

Mr.  Pipkin  (overseer  for  Mr.  Charles  Lowndes)  states  that  about  6 a. 
m.  on  the  2d  June,  1863,  a negro  from  the  barn  came  to  him  and  told 
him  that  two  boats  were  in  the  river  and  nearly  up  ; he  looked  and  saw 
them  near  to  the  steam-mill.  They  anchored  at  month  of  Jack’s  Creek 
(2  miles  by  water  from  the  ferry) ; they  landed  a party  of  some  25  or  30, 
a portion  of  whom  came  toward  the  mill  and  settlement  and  a portion 
toward  the  causeway  leading  to  Colonel  Heyward’s.  I ordered  the 
stock  to  be  driven  out  to  pine  land  and  followed  it  out.  I had  ordered 
the  negroes  to  the  woods,  but  they  refused  to  obey,  and  scattered.  I 
remained  out  until  I saw  the  troops  coming  down  from  Green  Pond,  and 
coming  very  slowly.  (This  was  after  they  had  been  met  by  Colonel 
Heyward,  according  to  his  statement,  and  hurried  by  him.)  They  rode 
up  faster  when  they  saw  me  and  came  up  to  me.  Lieutenant  Breeden 
asked  if  I had  any  report  from  the  Yankees  ? I told  him  the  facts,  and 
that  I knew  the  place  well,  and  would  guide  him  anywhere  he  wanted 
to  go.  He  went  on  at  a slow  lope  and  halted  at  the  corner  of  Colonel 
Heyward’s  fence.  While  there  one  of  the  pickets  came  up  and  stated  to 
him  as  reported  in  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Hughes  just  given  in.  After  a 
long  talk  he  sent  a scout  of  6 men,  not  toward  Colonel  Heyward’s,  but 
at  right  angles  to  the  Combahee  road,  down  Mrs.  Smith’s  avenue ; he 
then  went  on  to  Colonel  Heyward’s  draw-bars,  at  his  first  settlement 
(about  one-fourth  mile  on),  and  dismounted  his  men,  and  sent  10  men 
through  bars  and  street  of  the  negro  settlement  to  Colonel  Heyward’s 
residence.  By  this  time  the  houses  were  burned  and  the  enemy  and  most 
of  the  negroes  had  left  the  premises.  The  remainder  of  his  command 
he  moved  slowly  down  the  road  toward  the  breastwork,  looking  cau- 
tiously over  the  fences.  He  stopped  (Pipkin)  at  Mr.  Lowndes’  gate,  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  road,  with  the  horses  left,  to  guide  any  party 
which  they  might  send  in  that  direction.  As  soon  as  the  boats  com- 
menced shelling  Lieutenant  Breeden  retreated  with  his  command  back 
to  the  horses  and  his  men  stopped  in  the  shade.  (The  distance  from 
the  breastwork  to  the  bridge  where  the  boats  were  lying  is  1J  miles, 
over  a causeway,  with  rice  fields  and  marsh  on  either  side,  and  by  this 
narrow  causeway  the  enemy  were  compelled  to  approach  and  retire  in 
coming  to  Colonel  Heyward’s.  The  breastwork  commands  the  cause- 
way, and  the  whole  position  is  a very  strong  and  safe  one,  and  might 
be  held  by  a small  force  successfully  against  large  odds.)  He  asked 
Lieutenant  Breeden  for  a party  to  go  into  Mr.  Lowndes’  plantation  with 
him.  He  gave  2 men  only.  He  (Pipkin)  went  then  within  400  yards  of 
the  barn-yard,  and  there  met  2 negroes  coming  away,  who  told  him  that 
the  enemy  and  all  of  the  negroes  were  then  at  the  barn-yard.  He  left 
the  2 men  to  take  these  negroes  to  the  street  and  guard  them  and  others, 
and,  putting  spurs  to  his  horse,  went  back  at  full  speed  to  Lieutenant 
Breeden  and  found  him  in  the  same  place,  and  told  him  what  he  (Pip- 
kin) had  seen,  and  that  if  he  would  take  his  men  in  that  he  (Pipkin) 


303 


C«Ar.  XXVI.]  UNION  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C. 

cotfld  pilot  him  through  a thick  piece  of  woods  around  to  the  barn-yard 
without  being  seen,  thereby  cutting  off  the  enemy  and  saving  the  ne- 
groes. Lieutenant  Breeden  replied  that  he  was  then  under  the  orders 
of  Major  Emanuel  and  could  not  send  them,  but  that  he  must  go  to  the 
major,  down  at  the  head  of  the  causeway  (he  had  passed  while  Pipkin 
was  absent  in  the  plantation).  He  went  at  full  speed  to  Major  Emanuel 
and  stated  all  the  facts  to  him.  Major  replied  he  expected  the  enemy 
to  land  on  the  causeway  and  that  he  wanted  all  his  forces.  After  a 
few  moments’  delay  he  told  me  to  go  back  and  tell  Lieutenant  Breeden 
to  give  me  6 men,  but  to  return  them  as  soon  as  I could.  He  went  back 
and  got  these  men.  They  went  with  him  very  slowly.  He  could  not 
get  them  out  of  a walk.  When  inside  of  the  plantation  he  met  Sergeant 
Smith  and  1 man,  which,  with  his  party  and  the  2 men  he  had  left,  gave 
him  10  in  all.  He  still  left  2 to  guard  the  street  and  went  on  with  the 
8,  Sergeant  Smith  being  in  command.  When  he  reached  the  point  at 
which  to  leave  their  horses  only  5 of  the  8 were  with  him  ; others  had 
dropped  off.  Here  1 remained  to  hold  the  horses,  and  another,  riding 
a stallion,  could  not  link  him,  and  refusing  to  tie  him,  he  also  remained. 
With  the  3 men  left  him  he  (Pipkin)  went  on  to  within  150  yards  of  the 
barn.  The  enemy  and  greater  portion  of  negroes  had  left  and  were  on 
their  way  to  the  boat.  Here  another  man  left,  although  the  sergeant 
ordered  him  to  remain.  With  the  remaining  2 he  turned  on  to  the  canal 
and  went  to  the  flood-gate,  from  which  was  a straight  path  to  the  boat 
which  was  taking  in  the  negroes,  and  another  bank,  at  right  angles  from 
the  mill,  upon  which  were  a good  many  negroes  then  passing.  He  wanted 
to  go  down  and  cut  off*  these  negroes,  but  Sergeant  Smith  and  comrade 
advised  against  it,  saying  he  would  be  killed  from  the  boat.  Here  he 
picked  up  5 negroes  going  down,  and  as  soon  as  the  boat  moved  off  from 
the  landing  he  saw  a negro  girl  going  down.  He  left  the  sergeant  and 
comrade  with  these  negroes  and  ran  down  within  125  yards  of  the  land- 
ing and  within  90  yards  of  this  girl,  and  saw  25  or  30  negroes  who  had 
not  been  taken  on  board,  but  who  were  making  toward  the  boat  at  Mr. 
Mckol’s  landing.  He  ordered  the  girl  to  stop ; she  refusing,  he  shot  her 
down;  she  got  up  and  ran  to  where  the  others  were;  they  all  stopped; 
he  ran  up  to  them  and  brought  them  back  to  the  sergeant.  When  he 
fired  he  was  fired  upon  from  the  boat  with  small-arms.  The  horses  and 
men  were  then  sent  for;  the  horses  came,  but  men  reported  back  to 
the  lieutenant.  He  then,  with  assistance  of  Sergeant  Smith  and  com- 
rade, carried  these  negroes  back  to  the  street,  and  after  riding  about 
the  plantation  for  some  time,  looking  for  any  scattered  negroes,  he  re- 
turned, and  found  Lieutenant  Breeden  and  command  at  the  stable  in 
the  shade.  Major  Emanuel  here  came  up  and  sent  Mr.  Lowry  (over- 
seer for  Mrs.  Mason  Smith)  as  a guide,  with  Lieutenant  Breeden,  order- 
ing him  with  his  command  to  keep  close  to  the  river  and  watch  the 
movements  of  the  boats,  keeping  on  toward  Field’s  Point.  Major 
Emanuel  took  him  (Pipkin)  as  a guide  with  him  to  Stokes’  Causeway 
and  thence  to  Field’s  Point,  and  on  the  way  met  a courier  from  Lieu- 
tenant Hewit  and  passed  beyond  the  causeway  about  2 miles  into  Mr. 
Middleton’s  field,  where  were  some  old  works;  here  they  found  a piece 
of  artillery,  under  Captain  Bomar,  halted.  (One  piece  was  at  Stokes’ 
Causeway.)  Captain  Bomar  stated  that  he  had  received  a note  from 
Lieutenant  Hewitt,  stating  that  he  had  run  a party  of  the  enemy  into 
Mr.  Middleton’s  mill,  about  1 mile  above  Tar  Bluff,  and  that  he  wanted 
a piece  of  artillery  to  run  them  out.  Captain  Bomar  also  stated  that 
he  had  not  advanced  because  he  was  entirely  unsupported  and  feared 
to  risk  his  piece  without  support.  At  this  point  a courier  came  up  and 


304  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 

reported  that  two  gunboats  had  dropped  down  to  the  mill,  taken  their 
men  on  board,  and  were  then  lying  oh’  Tar  Bluff.  Major  Emanuel  then 
moved  the  piece  of  artillery  to  Mr.  Middleton’s  gate  and  left  it  there, 
and  with  his  party  (4  in  number)  moved  on  to  Tar  Bluff  (distance,  2 
miles).  As  they  went  down  heard  shelling  at  Field’s  Point;  went  on 
the  bluff,  and  found  Lieutenant  Hewitt  and  Fripp  watching  the  boat, 
which  was  lying  in  the  river,  distant  about  150  yards.  Major  Emanuel 
sent  back  for  the  piece  of  artillery,  but  just  as  the  courier  started  the 
boat  moved  off  down  the  river;  waited  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  and 
artillery  came  up.  Major  Emanuel  then  took  it,  unsupported  except  by 
his  small  party,  and  took  a rear  road  to  Field’s  Point;  when  about  half 
way  found  he  was  surrounded  by  the  enemy  in  ambush  on  both  sides 
of  the  road,  delivering  a cross-fire  and  wounding  Fripp  (who  has  since 
died  from  his  wounds).  The  piece  of  artillery  fired  four  shots,  and  then 
Major  Emanuel  ordered  a retreat  and  fell  back  to  Tar  Bluff.  A few 
moments  after  reaching  there  Lieutenant  Breeden  and  his  command 
came  up.  After  a delay  of  fifteen  minutes  a squad  of  his  men  were 
sent  down  to  Field’s  Point  by  the  rear  road,  while  the  rest  marched  by 
the  main  road.  Here  Mr.  Pipkin  states  that  he  left  them,  but  was  told 
when  the  party  reached  the  point  the  enemy  had  left. 

From  these  statements,  and  from  the  reports  sent  in,  it  appears  that 
on  the  2d  June,  1863,  at  7 a.  in.,  Major  Emanuel  received  notice  of  the 
presence  of  these  boats  in  the  Oombahee  River;  that  he  at  once  com- 
municated vTith  district  headquarters  and  made  the  following  disposi- 
tion of  the  troops  at  his  command : Captain  Godbold  was  ordered  to 
send  Lieutenant  Gilchrist  with  a detachment  of  20  men  to  Field’s  Point, 
whilst  he  with  the  rest  of  his  company  would  repair  to  Stokes’  Cause- 
way to  support  two  pieces  of  Bomar’s  artillery,  ordered  to  take  position 
there.  Lieutenant  Breeden,  with  his  company,  was  ordered  to  the  plan- 
tation of  Colonel  Heyward,  near  to  Combahee  Ferry.  The  remaining 
two  pieces  of  Bomar’s  artillery  were  also  ordered  to  this  point,  where 
they  would  have  proved  most  serviceable,  but  Major  Emanuel,  influ- 
enced by  incorrect  information,  not  reliable,  reported  to  him  through 
Lieutenant  Hendrix,  and  from  a total  want  of  acquaintance  with  the 
country  and  its  localities  countermanded  this  order  and  sent  these 
pieces  around  16  miles  to  protect  the  Salkehatcliie  Railroad  Bridge, 
which  point  was  only  5 miles  from  the  district  headquarters,  and  en- 
tirely protected  by  those  forces,  from  which  he  (Major  Emanuel)  would 
expect  support  and  re-enforcements.  He  thus  committed  the  serious 
error  of  materially  weakening  his  small  force  to  guard  a point  well  pro- 
tected by  troops  much  uearer.  The  first  disposition  of  his  forces  by  Major 
Emanuel  seems  to  have  been  judicious,  and  should  have  been  attended, 
if  properly  carried  out,  with  better  results,  but  with  the  first  error  re- 
sulted others.  From  this  point  there  seems  to  have  been  confusion  of 
counsel,  indecision,  and  great  tardiness  of  movement,  an  entire  want 
of  active  and  vigorous  enterprise,  without  which,  while  they  followed 
after  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  they  nether  opposed  nor  disturbed 
them  in  their  work  of  wicked  destruction.  The  causes  are  many.  This 
command  of  Major  Emanuel  lias  not  been  properly  drilled,  disciplined, 
or  taught  by  him,  so  as  to  be  effective  upon  an  emergency.  His  system 
of  outposts  is  loose  and  men  and  officers  badly  instructed.  On  this 
occasion  his  pickets  were  neither  watchful  nor  brave;  they  allowed  the 
enemy  to  come  up  to  them  almost  unawares,  and  then  retreated  without 
offering  resistance  or  firing  a gun,  allowing  a parcel  of  negro  wretches,  , 
calling  themselves  soldiers,  with  a lew  degraded  whites,  to  march  un- 
molested, with  the  incendiary  torch,  to  rob,  destroy,  and  burn  a large  i 


Ohap.  tfXYl.j  tMON  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C.  305 

section  of  country.  The  few  men  composing  the  picket  at  Combahee 
Ferry,  taking  position  at  the  breastwork  at  the  head  of  the  causeway 
and  firing  down  it,  would  have  kept  at  bay  a larger  force  than  came  to 
Colonel  Heyward’s,  or  at  least  would  have  delayed  it  until  aid  should 
reach  them  to  drive  them  back  to  their  boats,  and  would,  from  their 
position,  have  been  in  little  actual  danger  from  the  shell  of  the  enemy 
(1J  miles  distant)  5 indeed  this  work  was  almost  a complete  protection 
to  them  and  to  the  party  of  Lieutenant  Breeden,  who,  according  to  his 
report,  retired  from  it  when  the  boats  commenced  shelling.  No  com- 
missioned officer  seems  to  have  been  within  reach  of  them  to  aid  and 
advise  them,  and  Lieutenant  Hewitt,  who,  upon  receiving  notice  from 
the  courier,  should  have  promptly  repaired  to  them  for  that  purpose, 
appears  from  his  own  report  to  have  lost  that  valuable  time  in  await- 
ing the  return  of  his  courier  from  Major  Emanuel.  It  is  difficult  to  get 
at  Any  accurate  history  of  the  detailed  movements  of  the  separate  com- 
mands, except  Lieutenant  Breeden’s;  the  reports  of  the  commanders 
are  very  brief.  The  only  successful  effort  made  seems  to  have  been 
the  driving  of  a party  of  the  enemy  into  Mr.  Middleton’s  mill,  and  they 
were  allowed  to  escape  for  want  of  support  to  an  artillery  piece,  which 
eventually  came  near  losing  that  piece,  and  would  doubtless  have  so 
resulted  had  the  enemy  been  enterprising ; and  Captain  Godbold  re- 
ports having  driven  the  enemy  to  the  cover  of  their  boats,  and  yet  that 
enemy  is  found  in  ambush,  to  fire  upon  a small  party  in  advance  of  the 
position  to  which  Captain  Godbold  had  retired,  too  remote  to  be  in 
sound  of  the  fire,  or  at  least  to  render  assistance  to  the  small  party  of 
Major  Emanuel  in  the  engagement  from  which  he  retired,  and  which 
it  also  seems  started  the  enemy  back  to  their  boats. 

The  statements  of  witnesses,  if  to  be  credited,  reflect  most  severely 
upon  the  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Breeden  and  his  command.  From  an 
accurate  aud  searching  investigation  of  the  facts  from  every  available 
source  and  from  an  accurate  examination  of  the  localities  and  positions 
it  is  my  duty  to  report  the  results  of  this  raid  as  mortifying  and  humili- 
ating to  our  arms,  and  while  I do  not  believe  that  from  the  time  the 
reports  reached  the  camp  the  property  of  Messrs.  Nickols  and  Kirkland 
and  other  gentlemen  low  down  on  the  river  could  have  been  saved,  nor 
could  the  forces  of  Major  Emanuel  have  averted  the  destruction  at  Mr. 
William  Middleton’s,  yet  that  of  Colonel  Heyward  and  Mr.  Charles 
Lowndes,  with  intelligent  and  bold  activity  on  the  part  of  these  forces, 
I think  would  have  been  saved  or  a great  portion  of  it.  The  artillery 
at  Tar  Bluff,  supported  by  one  company  of  cavalry  and  the  other  com- 
pany active  in  squads  against  the  various  small  and  scattered  raiding 
parties,  would  have  resulted,  I am  forced  to  think,  in  ‘the  preservation 
of  much  valuable  private  property  and  in  the  severe  punishment  of  the 
enemy. 

From  reports  which  I could  not  very  clearly  follow  up  it  is  by  no 
means  certain  that  the  Field’s  Point  picket  were  not  aware  of  the  pres- 
ence of  the  boats  the  night  preceding  at  or  about  11  p.  m.,  and  failed 
to  give  the  notice,  alleging  that  they  had  been  cautioned  against  false 
alarms,  and  thought  they  might  be  our  own  boats. 

The  Combahee  Ferry  picket  should  unquestionably  have  seen  these 
boats  and  given  the  notice  from  one  to  two  hours  sooner  than  reported 
had  they  been  alert  and  vigilant  and  properly  instructed  as  to  the  course 
of  the  river  and  the  proper  point  of  lookout. 

Major  Emanuel  seems  to  have  taken  no  fixed  position,  nor  to  have 
commanded  any  portion  of  his  troops,  but  to  have  moved  unattended 

20  R R — VOL  XIV 


306  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

except  by  a small  escort,  too  small  to  improve  any  opportunity  presented 
to  him  for  action. 

In  accordance  with  instructions  from  department  headquarters 
charges  have  been  prepared  by  me  and  preferred  against  Major  Emanuel 
and  Lieutenants  Breeden  and  Hewitt.  Proper  steps  have  also  been 
taken  by  Brigadier-General  Walker  to  bring  to  trial  the  pickets  at  the 
several  points  named.  This  course  I feel  satisfied  will  result  in  public 
good. 

This  raid  by  a mixed  party  of  blacks  and  degraded  whites  seems  to 
have  been  designed  only  for  plunder,  robbery,  and  destruction  of  pri- 
vate property ; in  carrying  it  out  they  have  disregarded  all  rules  of 
civilized  war,  and  have  acted  more  as  fiends  than  human  beings.  For- 
tunately the  planters  had  removed  their  families,  who  thus  avoided 
outrage  and  insult.  The  enemy  seem  to  have  been  well  posted  as  to  the 
character  and  capacity  of  our  troops  and  their  small  chance  of  encount- 
ering opposition,  and  to  have  been  well  guided  by  persons  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  the  river  and  the  country.  Their  success  was  complete, 
as  evidenced  by  the  total  destruction  of  four  fine  residences,  six  valua- 
ble mills,  with  many  valuable  out-buildings  (the  residence  of  Mr.  Charles 
Lowndes  alone  escaped),  and  large  quantities  of  rice.  They  also  suc- 
cessfully carried  off  from  700  to  800  slaves  of  every  age  and  sex.  These 
slaves,  it  is  believed,  were  invited  by  these  raiders  to  join  them  in  their 
fiendish  work  of  destruction.  The  loss  of  Messrs.  Nickols  and  Kirkland 
was  very  great — an  entire  loss,  including  for  the  former  a large  and 
choice  library,  valued  at  $15,000. 

It  is  pertinent  to  "add  in  this  report  that  upon  the  receipt  of  the  dis- 
patch at  district  headquarters  prompt  measures  were  taken  by  the 
brigadier-general  commanding  to  send  troops  to  the  proper  points  of 
support  as  specially  reported  by  him,  and  that  with  reference  to  his 
system  of  outposts  I found  the  most  energetic  measures  in  existence  to 
secure  vigilance  and  to  guard  against  surprise,  both  by  the  issuing  of 
instructions  and  the  regular  visiting  of  the  different  posts  by  Capt. 
L.  D.  DeSaussure,  most  industrious  and  efficient  in  the  discharge  of 
hi%duties  as  inspector  of  outposts. 

Exhibit  F*  is  a copy  of  a report  of  Captain  De  Saussure,  who  had 
made  a partial  investigation  of  this  raid  before  my  arrival $ his  facts  in 
the  main  agree  with  mine. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  F.  LAY, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General  and  Inspector  Cavalry. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff \ &c. 

[Inclosure  A.l 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville , May  19,  1863. 

Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel,  Commanding  at  Green  Pond  : 

Major:  The  brigadier-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that 
you  will  require  the  officers  of  your  detachment  to  familiarize  themselves 
with  the  localities  and  lines  of  defense  in  the  district  of  country  under 
your  command,  a map  of  which  will  be  sent  to  you. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LOWNDES, 
feting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Only  a fragment  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  UNION  RAID  ON  THE  COMBAHEE  RIVER,  S.  C.  307 

[Inclosure  C.] 

Circular.]  Headquarters  Third  Mil.  Dist., 

McPhersonville , May  29,  1863. 

Your  attention  is  respectfully  called  to  the  following  extract  from  a 
late  Yankee  paper  : 

The  New  York  Tribune  saya  that  the  negro  troops  at  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  will  soon 
start  upon  an  expedition,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Montgomery,  different  in 
many  respects  from  any  heretofore  projected. 

The  Yankee  papers  have  frequently  indicated  their  movements,  and 
it  would  be  well  to  be  on  the  lookout  and  consider  your  plan  of  opera- 
tions on  the  various  routes  of  approach. 

Should  any  number  of  negroes  cross  our  lines  for  such  purpose  bold- 
ness and  confidence  will  be  sure  of  success  against  any  disparity  of 
force. 

Maneuver  to  get  a body  of  troops  in  their  rear  to  cut  off  their  retreat, 
and  when  they  are  routed  the  cavalry  will  pursue  at  a gallop,  charging 
as  foragers  should  they  take  to  the  woods.  Those  taken  prisoners  will 
be  closely  guarded  and  watched  night  and  day  by  a large  detail,  and 
turned  over  to  the  State  authorities  as  soon  as  practicable. 

By  order  of  Brigadier- General  Walker: 

JAMES  LOWNDES, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure  D.] 


Extract  from  inspection  report  of  Col.  John  F.  Lay , Inspector  of  Cavalry, 

February  2,  1863. 

******* 


These  two  companies  (F  and  I)  have  composed  for  some  time  a por- 
tion of  the  command  of  Major  Emanuel,  who  was  absent  from  his  com- 
mand upon  the  occasion  of  my  visit  to  his  camp  (to  be  hereafter  re- 
ported). I met  him  in  Georgetown  only  a few  hours.  It  is  evident  that 
the  command  did  not  prosper  under  him $ .they  have  not  improved  as 
they  should  have  done,  nor  are  they  now  actively  engaged  in  the 'work 
of  improvement.  Major  Emanuel  is  not  now  immediately  connected 
with  them.  I am  informed  by  the*  officers  that  they  drill  only  twice  a 
week.  They  alleged  as  excuse  heavy  duties.  Now, ‘it  will  be  seen  from 
this  report  that  the  duty  is  very  light,  and  no  reason  exists  why  a regu- 
lar and  systematic  daily  drill,  mounted  and  dismounted,  should  not  be 
had.  The  companies  are  good  companies,  and  only  need  this,  under 
efficient  officers,  to  take  their  proper  position. 


* * * 
Respectfully  submitted. 


* * * 
JNO.  F.  LAY, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


[In closure  E.] 

Statement  of  William  C.  Heyward  respecting  the  Combahee  raid. 

On  Tuesday,  June  2,  1863,  at  6.15  a.  m.,  servant  knocked  at  door, 
stating  that  the  driver,  who  was  with  the  hands  at  work  in  lower  fields, 
sent  up  word  that  there  were  three  Yankee  boats  coming  up  the  river. 


308 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV* 


Immediately  got  up  and  sent  word  to  him  to  bring  up  the  hands  and 
take  them  back  into  the  woods.  On  first  going  out  could  not  see  the 
boats  in  consequence  of  a bend  in  the  river.  Took  my  glass,  and  on 
going  about  100  yards  from  house  saw  a large  ferry-boat,  with  United 
States  flag  flying,  upper  deck  crowded  with  people.  She  came  up  very 
slowly  5 sent  a small  boat  ashore;  7 men  landed;  walked  to  and  from 
causeway  blowing  a horn  and  waving  a small  flag.  After  standing  and 
watching  boat  and  their  proceedings  for  some  time,  say  fifteen  or  twenty 
minutes,  the  driver  came  up  with  the  hands ; again  gave  the  order 
to  him,  “ Take  the  hands  back  into  the  woods.”  Asked  driver  if 
any  of  the  pickets  had  passed  up  causeway  to  report;  he  replied,  “No 
one  has  passed  up  since  I went  down  to  work  this  morning.”  Exam- 
ined with  glass  carefully  picket  station  at  ferry;  saw  the  horses  stand- 
ing quietly  hitched.  Yankee  boat  at  that  time  within  1J  miles  of  them. 
One  of  my  hands  then  said,  “Here  they  come.”  On  my  asking,  “Who?” 
he  replied,  “The  pickets.”  On  again  looking  down  causeway  saw  4 
men  coming  up,  one  much  ahead  running  his  horse;  two  shots  were  fired 
at  them  from  boat.  He  came  up  to  me  and  reported,  “Yankee  boats  in 
river.”  Told  him  that  fact  was  known  by  me  at  least  one  hour  since. 
Asked  why  they  were  so  slow  in  reporting.  He  said,  “Ordered  not 
to  report  until  we  are  certain  of  facts ; thought  perhaps  they  might  be 
our  boats.”  Asked  if  he  was  the  first  to  start  to  give  information  ; he 
said,  “Yes.”  Asked  if  any  one  had  gone  to  Pocotaligo;  he  said,  “No.” 
Told  him  to  hurry  on  to  Green  Pond  for  troops.  During  this  time  boat 
kept  coming  up,  but  very  slowly ; it  was  about  three-fourths  flood;  she 
passed  safely  the  point  where  the  torpedoes  were  placed,  and  finally 
reached  the  bridge  at  the  ferry,  which  they  immediately  commenced 
cutting  away;  landed,  to  all  appearance,  a small  force  at  Mr.  Middle- 
ton’s, and  in  a few  minutes  his  buildings  were  in  flames.  On  again 
examining  causeway  carefully  saw  a body  of  men  advancing  in  regular 
order,  double-file;  watched  them  closely  and  counted  ten  files,  or  20 
men;  did  not  observe  that  they  were  negroes;  waited  until  they  were 
within  400  or  500  yards  of  gate,  and  no  help  coming,  took  horse  and  left 
for  Green  Pond.  About  3 miles  from  plantation  met  9 men  on  horse- 
back, advancing  slowly ; told  them  the  state  of  things.  Officer  command- 
ing said  he  wished  the  company  was  with  him.  Observing  the  com- 
pany coming  on  about  one-half  mile  off,  told  him  of  it;  went  on  and, 
meeting  the  company,  told  officer  commanding  the  state  of  affairs  below; 
heard  him  give  the  order  to  trot  (5!*  gallop.  Then  went  on  to  Green 
Pond  and  telegraphed  to  General  Walker;  whilst  doing  so  the  artillery 
company  passed  station  on  their  way  down.  In  a very  few  minutes 
two  pieces  of  artillery  returned ; officer  asked  the  road  to  Salkehatchie 
Bridge ; told  him  it  was  14  or  15  miles  distant,  and  that  General  Walker 
was  only  5 or  6 miles  from  it ; said  he  was  ordered  to  go  there,  and 
started.  Returned  to  plantation  as  fast  as  possible  and  found,  as  ex- 
pected, that  the  troops  had  been  too  late  in  getting  down,  the  buildings 
being  in  flames  and  the  negroes  gone  or  going  off  the  causeway  and 
bridge  when  they  arrived.  On  my  return  the  boat  was  about  one- 
half  mile  below  the  bridge ; do  not  think  she  ever  passed  up  beyond  it. 
My  negroes  who  were  left  report  that  the  party  coming  up  causeway 
divided,  part  going  off*  to  burn  the  mill,  the  rest  coming  on  up  to 
dwelling  house;  they  also  state  that  there  was  but  one  white  man,  all 
the  rest  negroes.  They  burnt  every  building  on  plantation  except  the 
negro  quarters. 


WM.  G.  HEYWARD. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  FORT  PULASKI,  GA.  309 

JUNE  4,  1863.— Expedition  from  Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  to  Bluffton,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  H.  Johnson,  Third  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  commanding 
post. 

No.  2.— Capt.  John  F.  Lay,  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  C.  S.  Army,  Inspector  of 
Cavalry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  H.  Johnson , Third  South  Carolina  Cavalry , 

commanding  post. 

Hdqrs.  Detachment  Third  South  Carolina  Cavalry, 

Camp  Lay , June  5,  1863. 

Captain:  I would  respectfully  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the  4th, 
at  7 o’clock  a.  in.,  our  pickets  from  Hunting  Island,  which  is  a part  of 
the  main,  from  1£  to  2 miles  below  Bluffton  by  land  and  several  miles 
by  water,  in  the"  direction  of  Buckingham  Ferry,  reported  the  enemy 
lauding  at  that  place  from  three  gunboats  iu  considerable  force  and 
approaching  toward  Bluffton.  I immediately  ordered  my  force  here 
consisting  of  Companies  A,  B,  and  G,  Third  South  Carolina  Cavalry, 
and  Company  B,  Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  182  men  and  6 officers 
present)  to  get  in  readiness,  and  after  sending  dispatches  to  Captains 
Earle,  Smart,  and  Leadbetter  (stationed  at  different  places  from  6 to  8 
miles  from  here)  for  their  commands  to  proceed  immediately  toward 
Bluffton.  (unless  there  was  a similar  demonstration  about  Red  Bluff), 
I proceeded  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  arrived  near  Bluffton  at  about 
8.30  o’clock,  where  I found  a company  of  the  Eleventh  Regiment,  about 
50  strong.  Bluffton  is  situated  on  May  River,  and  is  said  to  be  8 miles 
from  my  camp.  The  situation  and  localities  of  it  will  be  seen  by  referring 
to  the  map  of  South  Carolina.  Hearing  that  two  gunboats  were  at  the 
bluff  and  the  enemy  in  the  town  I ordered  this  company  (of  the  Eleventh 
Regiment),  under  Lieutenant  Smith,  forward  as  skirmishers,  and  sent 
two  cavalrymen,  dismounted,  in  advance  as  scouts. 

On  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  in  the  road,  they  came  in  contact  with 
a body  of  the  enemy  advancing,  which  they  fired  upon  and  received 
their  fire  in  return.  The  company  of  the  Eleventh  Regiment  advanc- 
ing (while  the  cavalry  were  dismounting  to  support  them),  exchanged 
several  shots,  after  which,  contrary  to  my  instructions,  fell  back,  until 
the  cavalry  could  arrive  in  supporting  distance.  All  then  pressed  for- 
ward; the" company  of  the  Eleventh  Regiment  in  advance,  under  com- 
mand of  Captain  Mickler  (who  had  arrived).  The  smoke  arising  in 
different  parts  of  the  town  showed  that  it  had  been  fired.  He  pushed 
on  by  the  flames  under  a continuous  fire  from  their  gunboats;  arrived 
at  the  bank  of  the  river  as  the  last  of  them  were  passing  the  bend  of 
the  river  below. 

Captain  Mickler,  with  25  or  30  men,  hurried  down  to  cut  them  off,  and 
as  they  would  pass  quite  near  fire  upon  them,  but  he  arrived  too  late ; 
they  had  passed  beyond  reach. 

We  stopped  as  far  as  possible  the  further  progress  of  the  flames.  1 
suppose  one-half  or  two-thirds  of  the  town  has  been  destroyed,  including 
some  of  the  best  buildings,  which  appear  to  have  been  selected. 

A large  portion  of  the  force,  which  as  far  as  we  could  judge  was 
about  a regiment,  disembarked  at  Hunting  Island,  and  marched  across 


310 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.j  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 


that  neck  of  land  to  the  town.  The  boats  followed  around  the  run 
aud  received  them  at  the  bluff,  while  two  other  boats  lay  off  in  shelling 
distance. 

A great  number  of  shell  and  some  grape  were  thrown  from  the  time 
we  fired  on  them.  One  sergeant  of  the  company  of  the  Eleventh  Regi- 
ment was  slightly  injured  by  a shell.  I do  not  know  the  amount  of 
injury  the  enemy  sustained. 

I would  state  that  Captain  Earle’s  battery  and  Captain  Smart’s  com- 
pany were  stationed  about  6 miles  from  my  camp  and  nearly  in  an  op- 
posite direction  from  Bluffton,  to  meet  any  advance  which  might  be 
made  from  Red  Bluff.  Captain  Leadbetter’s  company  was  at  Hardee- 
ville,  8 miles  from  my  camp,  and  in  an  opposite  direction  from  Bluffton. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THUS.  H.  JOHNSON, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Detachment . 

Capt.  James  Lowndes, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Indorsements.] 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Ela.,  Charleston , June  30, 1863. 
Respectfully  forwarded  for  information  of  War  Department.  A court 
of  inquiry  has  been  asked  for  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson,  and  will 
be  given  him,  to  inquire  into  his  conduct  on  this  occasion.* 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Rather  ineffectively  managed,  I fear, 
ever,  determine. 


July  13,  1863. 

The  court  of  inquiry  will,  how- 


J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  F.  Lay , Assistant  Adjutant-General , C.  S.  Army , 

Inspector  of  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Ela.,  Charleston , June  20,  1863. 

General  : In  obedience  to  orders  from  department  headquarters  I 
have  visited  the  scene  and  made  a thorough  investigation  of  the  facts 
connected  with  the  recent  raid  of  the  Abolition  forces  at  Bluffton,  on  the 
South  May  River,  and  the  wanton  and  wicked  destruction  of  valuable 
private  property  there  committed.  I have  to  submit  the  following 
report : 

On  the  1st  day  of  June,  1863,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson,  of  Col- 
cock’s  regiment  of  cavalry,  reached  Camp  Pritchard,  8 miles  from 
Bluffton,  and  relieved  Lieutenant-Colonel  Stokes,  of  Rutledge’s  regi- 
ment of  cavalry,  with  four  companies  of  his  regiment  just  brought 
together,  and  not  previous  to  that  time  under  his  immediate  command. 
He  established  his  camp  and  put  out  his  pickets  under  the  same  in- 
structions given  by  his  predecessor,  not  then  changed  in  any  respect. 

* On  August  17,  1863,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  renewed  application  for  a court 
of  inquiry,  and  in  reply,  August  20,  was  informed  that  no  court  would  be  convened 
until  it  could  be  done  without  detriment  to  the  service. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  FORT  PULASKI,  GA.  311 

It  does  not  appear  that  he  took  any  steps,  by  sending  out  details  under 
commissioned  officers,  to  familiarize  the  command  with  the  localities. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  of  June,  1863,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Johnson 
was  at  his  camp  with  his  command,  having  his  picket  at  Hunting  Island, 
just  below  Bluffton,  and  at  Baynard’s,  nearly  opposite,  but  none  in 
Bluffton. 

In  Bluffton  was  stationed  a company  of  infantry,  under  the  command 
of  Captain  Mickler,  but  Captain  Mickler  had  the  evening  preceding 
gone  up  to  Hardeeville,  16  miles  distant,  the  headquarters  of  Colonel 
Gantt,  commander  of  the  post,  to  communicate  with  him  and  to  seek 
quarters  for  his  family,  leaving  Lieutenant  Smith  in  command  of  his 
company.  From  this  company  a picket  was  placed  on  post  during  the 
night,  but  none  during  the  day.  The  quarters  of  this  company  were 
on  the  bank  of  the  river,  about  300  yards  from  the  wharf. 

Capt.  A.  M.  Lowry,  Company  A,  Colcock’s  regiment,  was  also  in 
Bluffton,  near  to  quarters  of  Captain  Mickler,  having  couriers  with  him, 
as  the  commander  of  outposts,  and  to  him  the  different  pickets  were  or- 
dered to  report. 

Sergeant  Jones,  Company  B,  who  was  stationed  at  Baynard’s,  reports 
that  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  June,  1863,  he  first  saw  a steamer  about  7 
a.  m. ; that  it  was  a foggy  morning ; that  he  at  once  dispatched  a courier 
to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson,  and  in  a few  moments  saw  three  other 
steamers.  They  stopped  at  the  bluff  and  he  thought  made  preparation 
for  landing  troops.  He  sent  another  courier.  Then  the  boats  moved  up 
to  shell  the  town.  He  kept  out  of  reach;  heard  firing  at  Bluffton,  and 
watched  until  the  boats  left,  between  the  hours  of  12  m.  and  1 p.  m.  He 
states  that  he  only  had  general  instructions  for  picket  duty,  with  no  espe- 
cial instructions  for  this  duty,  and  that  he  was  ignorant  of  the  country. 

Private  Savage,  Company  B,  was  stationed  at  Hunting  Island  with 
one  companion.  He  states  that  between  day-dawn  and  sunrise  they 
were  on  post  looking  down  the  river ; about  1 mile  below  could  see  three 
steamers  coming  up.  He  fell  back  about  150  yards  and  sent  his  com- 
rade to  report  in  Bluffton  to  the  commander  of  outposts  and  give  the 
notice  to  any  party  in  the  town.  About  one  and  a half  hours  thereafter 
saw  the  enemy  landing.  He  again  fell  back,  and  soon  the  courier  returned 
to  him  and  reported  that  he  could  find  no  one  in  Bluffton  at  all.  (Either 
this  courier  must  have  been  totally  ignorant  of  the  locality  or  he  failed 
to  penetrate  into  the  village,  else  he  could  not  have  failed  to  find  the 
troops  stationed  immediately  on  the  bank  of  the  river  near  the  wharf.) 
He  asked  the  courier  why  he  did  not  go  on  to  camp;  courier  replied  he 
did  not  know  what  to  do.  He  then  left  this  man  to  watch  and  himself 
went  on  and  reported  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  that  three  steam- 
ers had  come  up  the  river,  and  that  four  companies  had  landed  from 
them  and  were  marching  toward  Bluffton  at  a double-quick.  He  then 
returned  to  his  post;  reached  there  about  2 p.  in.,  and  found  the  boats 
had  all  left.  In  his  absence  his  comrade  had  left,  gone  to  the  command, 
and  was  sent  back  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson. 

Lieutenant  Smith  states  that  in  the  absence  of  Captain  Mickler  he 
was  in  command  of  the  company  stationed  about  300  yards  from  the 
wharf  at  Bluffton,  and  that  as  he  was  sitting  down  to  breakfast,  about 
7 a.  m.,  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  June,  1863,  he  heard  one  of  the  men 
call  to  him  that  a steamer  was  coming  up  the  river.  He  looked  out  and 
saw  two  steamers  lying  off  miles  distant  from  Bluffton,  apparently 
at  anchor,  and  one  of  his  men  reported  that  the  enemy  were  already  in 
the  village.  He  had  heard  no  firing,  and  supposing  that  the  enemy  had 
already  landed  and  were  endeavoring  to  surround  him,  he  ordered  hi& 


312 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  TOhap.  XXVL 


men  to  fall  in  as  quickly  as  possible  (having  first  removed  and  hid  his 
baggage),  and  then  marched  them  out  to  the  public  road  and  fell  back 
on  it  about  1 mile  to  Sandy  Bridge,  leaving  two  men  to  watch  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  and  sending  two  men  in  the  direction  of  Hunting 
Island  to  ascertain  any  movement  of  the  enemy  from  that  direction. 

After  remaining  at  Sandy  Bridge  about  half  an  hour,  having  his  men 
deployed  as  skirmishers  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Johnson,  with  his  forces,  came  up  and  he  reported  to  him. 

(From  this  point  I state  the  facts  as  collected  by  me  from  the  state- 
ments of  various  parties  examined.) 

It  seems  that  about  7 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  of  June,  1863, 
the  courier  from  Hunting  Island  reported  in  camp  first  to  Captain 
Campbell,  Company  B,  and  was  by  him  immediately  sent  to  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Johnson  at  his  quarters  near  by.  The  bugle  was  imme- 
diately sounded  and  the  companies  ordered  to  form  for  a prompt  march. 
Ammunition  was  issued,  arms  inspected,  and  dispatches  sent  off  to  vari- 
ous points — those  to  Captain  Smart  and  adjacent  companies  ordering 
their  commands  toward  Bluffton,  unless  a demonstration  was  being 
made  by  the  enemy  in  the  direction  of  Bed  Bluff. 

About  7.30  the  command  moved  off'  by  companies  as  each  was  ready 
and  without  being  told  off  or  formed  into  squadron.  (It  should  be  men- 
tioned here  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson,  in  the  absence  of  Colonel 
Gantt,  had  been  and  was  the  acting  commandant  of  the  post.) 

About  8 or  8.30  a.  m.  (there  is  very  little  accuracy  as  to  time)  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Johnson,  who  had  waited  to  see  his  command  off  and 
had  overtaken  them  with  his  command,  reached  a point  1 mile  distant 
from  Blufftou,  and  there  found  the  company  of  Captain  Mickler,  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant  Smith,  which  had  retired  from  the  village. 
On  the  way  he  had  been  met  by  a courier  from  Captain  Lowry  with  in- 
formation that  they  had  been  compelled  to  leave  Bluffton  by  the  pres- 
ence of  the  boats.  Up  to  this  point  no  firing  had  been  heard  from  the 
boats  or  from  the  pickets,  and  Captain  Lowry,  with  Lieutenant  McAvoy, 
a courier,  and  6 men  from  Mickler’s  company,  had  remained  at  the  head 
of  one  of  the  streets  of  the  village  in  full  view  of  one  of  the  steamers 
until  compelled  to  fall  back  to  cover  of  the  woods  or  bushes.  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Johnson  continued  to  advance,  ordering  Mickler’s  company 
(50  or  60  strong)  to  follow  after  until  he  came  up  with  Captain  Lowry, 
and  from  him  ascertained  the  position  of  the  enemy  as  far  as  he  knew 
it,  his  report  being  that  two  gunboats  were  at  the  wharf  at  Bluffton. 

Two  reliable  scouts  were  sent  forward  to  reconnoiter  and  ascertain 
position  and  movements  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson, 
with  his  adjutant,  Colcock,  Captain  Lowry,  and  a fewr  others  followed 
immediately  behind  the  scouts,  the  command  being  halted  meantime. 

From  the  beud  of  the  road  near  the  mill,  opposite  the  center  of  the 
town,  the  scouts  saw  the  enemy  in  the  road  at  the  mill — at  first  only  1 
man,  but  very  soon  some  25  or  30  in  number,  whom  they  fired  on,  which 
fire  was  promptly  returned  by  the  enemy,  and  at  this  point  the  gun- 
boats commenced  shelling.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  immediately 
returned  and  ordered  Lieutenant  Smith  with  his  company  forward  as 
skirmishers  to  engage  the  enemy,  and  promising  to  come  to  his  support 
as  soon  as  he  could  dismount  his  cavalry,  and  ordering  him  “not  to  fall 
back  unless  compelled  to  do  so.”  (Here  there  is  an  important  discrep- 
ancy of  statement  between  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  and  Lieuten- 
ant Smith,  the  latter  insisting  that  his  orders  w^ere,  “To  push  forward, 
engage  the  enemy,  and  fall  back  until  he  was  supported,”  &c.) 

Lieutenant  Smith  moved  forward  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  FORT  PULASKI,  GA. 


313 


retired  with  his  command  to  a field  one-half  mile  in  rear  to  form  and 
dismount  his  command.  Halting  here  for  this  purpose  and  finding  that 
the  shells  from  the  enemy’s  boats  at  Baynard’s  (2  miles  distant  by  scale 
of  map)  were  falling,  as  he  thought,  in  dangerous  proximity  to  his  horses, 
he  determined  to  move  them  still  farther  back,  and  that  he  could  accom- 
plish this  more  readily  by  riding  them  back.  He  therefore  moved  his  whole 
command  back  to  a piece  of  woods  1J  miles  distant,  there  dismounted 
them,  and  marched  them  at  a double  quick  over  the  sandy  road  2 miles 
to  the  point  of  support  to  Lieutenant  Smith.  (There  is  a difference  of 
opinion  in  regard  to  the  time  consumed  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  John- 
son in  this  movement,  he  being  of  opinion  not  more  than  thirty  minutes, 
and  others  forty  five  minutes  or  one  hour.  My  own  judgment,  from  an 
accurate  examination  of  the  ground  and  distance,  is  that  to  fall  back 
the  one  half  mile  and  make  the  formation,  then  again  miles  and  dis- 
mount, and 'then  to  march  forward  2 miles  over  a deep  sandy  road, 
granting  that  it  were  done,  as  I have  every  reason  to  believe  it  was 
done,  with  promptitude,  would  consume  all  of  forty-five  minutes  if  not 
one  entire  hour.  Lieutenant  Colonel  Johnson,  however,  is  very  posi- 
tive, and  fixes  his  dates  by  his  first  dispatch  from  camp  at  7 a.  m.,  and 
his  second,  written  after  dismounting  and  returning,  at  9 a.  m.  I rode 
over  this  distance  and  timed  it  twice.) 

The  company  of  Lieutenant  Smith  after  having,  a part  of  them,  fired 
into  the  enemy,  were  ordered  by  him  to  retire,  in  accordance,  as  he  states, 
with  his  construction  of  the  order  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  to 
him.  It  appears  from  the  statement  of  Captain  Lowry  that  during  the 
absence  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  he  had  sent  a courier  to  him  to 
inform  him  that  Lieutenant  Smith  had  engaged  the  enemy  and  that  the 
enemy  were  firing  the  to  wn.  Before  the  return  of  this  courier  he  stated 
that  Lieutenant  Colonel  Johnson  ordered  him  (Lowry)  to  press  the  en- 
emy into  the  fire.  During  the  absence  of  this  courier  Lowry  states  that 
he  heard  Lieutenant  Smith  give  the  order  to  his  command  to  retire,  say- 
ing that  he  was  being  flanked  on  the  left ; that  he  asked  him  who  brought 
him  such  intelligence,  to  which  Smith  replied,  Sergeant  Woods,  of  his 
company.  That  he  then  suggested  to  him  that  he  should  extend  his 
skirmishers  to  the  left  and  ascertain  the  fact  before  retiring,  assuring 
him  that  he  (Lowry)  had  a reliable  scout  out  on  the  left,  who  would  doubt- 
less afford  information  of  any  movement  of  the  enemy  from  that  direc- 
tion; that  Smith  hesitating,  he  told  him  he  was  in  command  of  his 
own  company  and  must  use  his  pleasure,  and  that  Lieutenant  McAvoy 
and  others  agreeing  with  Smith  that  if  flanked  he  ought  to  retire,  Smith 
withdrew  his  command  until  met  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  on  his 
return  with  liis  dismounted  troops.  Lieutenant  McAvoy  and  his  scout 
remaining  with  him,  Captain  Lowry  did  not  retire  with  him,  but  con- 
tinued to  hold  the  position,  and  reports  that  the  enemy  remained  quiet 
and  did  not  advance  after  they  had  been  fired  upon. 

^ Upon  his  return  with  his  dismounted  forces,  retaining  the  company  of 
Captain  Cordes  mounted,  as  they  were  armed  only  with  sabers  and 
pistols,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  met  Smith  retiring  with  his  com- 
pany some  distance  in  rear  of  the  point  from  which  he  had  ordered  him 
to  advance;  inquiring  by  what  authority  he  had  retired,  he  again  or- 
dered him  forward  as  skirmishers,  with  the  dismounted  cavalry  closely 
following  in  support.  (At  this  time  the  steamers  of  the  enemy,  three  at 
Bluffton  and  two  at  Baynard’s,  were  rapidly  shelling,  though  necessa- 
rily firing  uncertainly,  as  our  troops  were  not  in  view.) 

At  this  point  Captain  Mickler  (who  at  Hardee ville  had  seen  a dispatch 
to  Colonel  Colcock  and  had  ridden  at  full  speed  to  join  his  command) 


314  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

came  up.  He  states  that  when  within  1 mile  of  the  village  he  found  the 
command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  in  line  on  foot  and  halted. 
That  he  pressed  on,  and  about  100  yards  beyond  came  up  with  his  own 
company,  under  Lieutenant  Smith,  deployed  as  skirmishers,  but  not  ad- 
vancing. He  ordered  its  advance  at  once,  and  was  informed  that  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Johnson  was  iu  advance.  He  went  on  to  him  and  found 
L ;m  seated  writing  a dispatch ; he  reported  to  him,  and  informed  him  that 
he  had  ordered  his  men  to  advance,  and  asked  if  he  had  any  objection, 
to  which  the  reply  was,  “No,  it  is  just  what  I desire  ; advance  and  en- 
gage the  enemy,  l will  support  you,  and  we  will  drive  them  into  the  fire.” 
He  took  command  of  his  company,  extended  his  flanks,  and  advanced. 

The  whole  force  then  moved  on  rapidly  in  and  through  the  burning 
woods  and  town  to  the  bank  of  the  river.  The  firing  had  ceased  from 
the  boats,  and  the  last  one  was  in  sight  passing  the  bend  gf  the  river 
going  rapidly  off.  At  the  suggestion  of  Captain  Mickler  he  was  fur- 
nished with  a party  of  sharpshooters,  and  he  proceeded  rapidly  to  get 
below  the  bend  to  fire  on  the  boats  as  they  passed,  but  they  were  too 
late.  The  whole  command  then  returned,  and  as  far  as  they  were  able 
put  a stop  to  the  fire  then  raging,  but  the  work  of  desolation  was  then 
nearly  completed. 

The  enemy,  it  appears,  came  up  with  five  wooden  steamers,  landed  a 
force  at  Hunting  Island,  and  then  came  up  and  took  position  with  three 
of  them  at  Bluffton  and  two  at  Baynard’s,  nearly  opposite.  The  sole 
object  of  the  raid  seems  to  have  been  a willful  and  wanton  destruction 
of  private  property.  The  village  of  Bluffton  had  long  been  deserted 
and  uninhabited,  and  no  negro  property  was  within  its  limits  or  adja- 
cent. NTo  negroes  were  seen  by  any  one  with  the  forces  of  the  enemy ; 
indeed  the  few  men  encountered  at  the  mill  in  the  early  beginning  seem 
to  have  been  the  only  troops  seen  by  our  men.  The  enemy  were  not 
enterprising  or  daring,  and  yet  accomplished  their  wicked  work  but  too 
well. 

The  ashes  of  Bluffton,  with  its  withered  and  scorched  remains  of 
noble  trees  and  beautiful  shrubbery,  present  a sad  scene  of  desolation 
and  fiendish  vandalism  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  civilized  nations. 

There  are  points  of  criticism  upon  the  conduct  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Johnson  and  Lieutenant  Smith  obvious  even  to  the  casual  reader  of 
this  fair  statement  of  facts,  as  gathered  from  the  most  reliable  sources 
of  information.  The  loss  of  time  at  the  critical  moment  by  the  move- 
ment of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  to  the  rear  to  form  and  dismount 
his  command,  instead  of  dismounting  on  the  spot  and  sending  his  horses 
to  the  rear,  is  much  to  be  regretted.  The  falling  back  of  Lieutenant 
Smith  with  his  command  at  the  same  time  that  the  enemy  was  doing 
the  same  thing  is  equally  so,  whatever  the  motive  from  which  it  pro- 
ceeded. These  officers  have  asked  for  a court  of  inquiry. 

I respectfully  suggest  that  a full  investigation  will  be  for  the  benefit 
of  the  service,  and  recommend  that  it  be  granted  them,  or  such  other 
course  of  investigation  as  from  an  examination  of  the  facts  may  seem 
in  the  judgment  of  the  commanding  general  more  expedient  to  be  taken. 

The  conduct  of  the  picket  from  Hunting  Island  sent  to  report  to  the 
commander  of  outposts  in  Bluffton  appears  to  have  been  deserving  of 
censure.  I directed  his  arrest  and  that  charges  be  preferred  against 
him. 

Kespectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  F.  LAY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Inspector  of  Cavalry . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff \ c %c.. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  AFFAIR  NEAR  BRUNSWICK,  GA.  315 

JUNE  8,  1863. — Affair  near  Brunswick,  Ga. 

Report  of  Capt.  W.  M.  Hazzard , Fourth  Georgia  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Military  District  of  Georgia, 

Savannah , July  2,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  forward,  for  the  information  of  the 
commanding-  general,  a copy  of  a report  received  from  Captain  Hazzard, 
of  the  Fourth  Georgia  Cavalry. 

I desire  particularly  to  direct  the  attention  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral to  the  good  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Grant  and  detachment. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  MERCER, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  Charleston , S.  C. 

[In  closure.] 

Camp  Walker,  June  29,  1863. 

Colonel  : Yours  of  this  day’s  date,  notifying  me  that  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Mercer  desired  a report  of  the  affair  at  Brunswick  on  8th  of  June 
has  been  received.  9 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th  couriers  reached  camp  about  10  o’clock 
with  information  that  two  gunboats  and  one  transport  towing  two  large 
boats  loaded  with  troops  had  started  from  Saint  Simon’s  Island  in  the 
direction  of  Brunswick.  Previous  information  justified  the  belief  that 
a temporary  landing  in  Brunswick  would  be  attempted.  I therefore 
hastened  to  that  point  with  the  remainder  of  my  command  and  reached 
there  about  10.30. 

Soon  after  leaving  camp  the  heavy  boom  of  cannon  gave  assurance 
that  Sergts.  J.  W.  Taylor  and  Alexander  Burney,  with  the  Brunswick 
pickets,  had  disputed  a landing.  The  firing  was  incessant  for  about 
three-quarters  of  an  hour,  when  the  boats  withdrew. 

Upon  their  approach  these  two  gallant  young  officers  assembled  their 
pickets  upon  the  edge  of  the  bluff  near  the  old  wharf,  and  in  a lying 
position  gave  them  many  well-directed  rounds  at  a distance  of  about 
150  yards.  This  picket  was  aided  by  men  from  two  other  posts.  Corpl 
A.  E.  Foreman,  Corporal  Lamb,  and  Corpl.  T.  E.  Hazzard,  when  they 
saw  the  boats  leave  Saint  Simon’s  Island,  hastened  with  all  the  men 
they  could  spare  to  their  assistance.  Soon  after  arriving  in  Bruns- 
wick with  the  remainder  of  my  command  the  boats  ascended  the  river 
Fearing  for  the  safety  of  the  salt-works,  some  7 miles  up  the  river 
mid  thinking  it  might  only  be  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  us  from 
Brunswick,  I ordered  Lieutenant  Grant  with  the  detachments  of  Ser- 
geants Taylor  and  Burney  and  such  other  men  as  I could  spare,  num- 
bering in  all  some  30,  to  select  a good  position  and  disput'e  every  at- 
tempt at  landing  and  not  to  fire  until  a good  chance  presented  itself 
while  I hastened  with  the  remainder  of  the  command  to  the  salt-works. 
Upon  reaching  the  works  1 found  one  boat  lying  at  the  mouth  of  the 
creek  leading  to  them,  while  the  other  was  returning  to  Brunswick,  and 
as  soon  as  the  return  boat  reached  Brunswick  they  opened  a rapid  fire. 
After  firing  some  fifty  shots  the  one  threatening  the  salt  works  returned 
and  joined  the  other  at  Brunswick.  The  firing  became  heavy.  I has- 
tened back,  but  the  jaded  condition  of  my  horses  did  not  allow  me  to 


316 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


reach  them  before  both  boats  had  well-nigh  exhausted  their  efforts  at 
driving  Lieutenant  Grant  from  his  position. 

I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  the  gallant  conduct  of  the  men 
subjected  to  this  heavy  cannonade,  frequently  at  not  more  than  150 
yards;  their  conduct  is  particularly  commendable  owing  to  the  fact 
that  their  fire  was  reserved.  I also  take  pleasure  in  calling  attention  to 
the  forethought  and  gallantry  displayed  b\  Lieutenant  Grant,  Sergeants 
Taylor  and  Burney,  and  Corporals  Foreman,  Lamb,  and  Hazzard.  Their 
promptness  in  assisting  the  Brunswick  picket  added  much  in  deceiving 
the  enemy  in  regard  to  our  strength.  After  this  effort  the  largest  boat, 
which  was  recognized  as  the  blockader,  returned  to  the  sound,  whilst 
the  others  again  ascended  the  river. 

Thinking  the  salt-works  and  the  railroad  bridge  the  points  of  attack, 
I withdrew  Lieutenant  Grant’s  detachment  and  hastened  them  to  the 
salt-works,  while  a squad,  under  the  guidance  of  Mr.  Julian  Burnett, 
who  had  that  day  shouldered  his  gun  and  volunteered  his  services, 
hastened  to  the  bridge.  Upon  nearing  the  bridge,  which  was  out  of 
rifle-range,  Mr.  Burnett  perceived  the  vandals  had  fired  it,  and  no 
sooner  were  our  men  discovered  than  they  commenced  a rapid  retreat 
to  their  gunboat  in  a barge.  To  get  a shot  at  them  Mr.  Burnett  con- 
ducted the  squad  to  a point  which  the  barge  was  forced  to  pass  at  a 
distance  of  about  100  yards,  but  which  brought  them  within  about  200 
yards  of  the  gunboat  and  transport,  which  by  this  time  had  taken  posi- 
tion in  rear  of  the  gunboat.  As  the  barge  passed  the  squad  poured  a 
well-directed  volley  into  it;  2 officers  fell  and  3 oarsmen  appeared 
wounded.  A second  round  made  the  remainder  of  the  crew  cease  row- 
ing until  the  boat  had  drifted  out  of  range.  The  gunboat  then  opened 
fire,  also  their  sooty  allies  on  the  transport. 

After  many  harmless  rounds  the  boats  returned  to  the  salt-works  at 
about  sunset  and  came  to.  Supposing  their  object  was  to  make  a night 
attack,  I divided  my  command,  placing  detachments  respectively  under 
command  of  Lieutenants  Scarlett,  B.  S.  Pyles,  and  H.  F.  Grant,  who 
carefully  watched  their  movements  until  morning.  No  further  efforts 
were  made  at  a raid,  and  both  boats  returned  to  the  sound. 

We  lost  one  horse  during  the  day  from  a grape-shot,  but  were  blessed 
in  losing  no  one;  not  even  a wound  was  inflicted.  A few  days  after, 
from  the  accidental  bursting  of  a shell,  we  lost  the  heroic  Sergeant 
Burney. 

Information,  apparently  reliable,  states  the  enemy  lost  3 killed,  1 offi- 
cer severely  wounded,  and  others  slightly. 

Very  respectfullv, 

W.  M.  HAZZAED, 

Captain  Company  <r,  Fourth  Georgia  Cavalry. 

Col.  D.  L.  Clinch, 

Commanding  Fourth  Georgia  Cavalry , Waynesville. 

[Indorsement.] 

July  6, 1863. 

Mention  in  orders  the  activity  and  foresight  of  Captain  Hazzard  and 
gallantry  of  Lieutenant  Grant  and  command. 

G.  T.  B. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


ATTACK  OK  DARIEN,  GA. 

JUNE  11,  1863. — -Attack  on  Darien,  Ga. 


317 


REPOETS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Military  District  of 
Georgia. 

No.  2. — Capt.  William  A.  Lane,  Twentieth  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry. 

No.  3. — Capt.  W.  G.  Thomson,  Twentieth  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer , C . S.  Army , commanding  Military 

District  of  Georgia. 

Headquarters  Military  District  of  Georgia, 

Savannah , June  27,  1863. 

General:  Captain  Thomson,  commanding  at  the  time  Twentieth 
Georgia  Battalion  Cavalry,  made  a report  concerning  the  burning  of 
Darien,  a copy  of  which  was  forwarded  to  you.  Wishing  a more  detailed 
account,  I called  upon’ the  officer  in  command  of  the  pickets,  through 
Major  Millen,  for  a report,  and  forward  you  herewith  copies  of  letters 
from  Captain  Lane,  commanding  Company  D,  and  Major  Millen,  com- 
manding battalion.* 

It  appears  to  have  been  impossible  to  concentrate  a force  sufficient  to 
oppose  a landing,  and  Captain  Lane  seems  to  have  been  misled  by  the 
size  of  the  force  to  believe  more  extended  operations  intended,  and  to 
have  acted  with  a view  to  protect  the  large  number  of  families  and  val- 
uable property  at  the  ridge  until  re-enforcements  could  arrive. 

I regret  exceedingly  the  impunity  with  which  the  enemy  escaped. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

H.  W.  MERCED, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff . 

P.  S. — Two  troops  are  stationed  there  now. 


[Inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  Twentieth  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry, 

Camp  Jackson,  June  19,  1863. 

Capt.  William  A.  Lane, 

Commanding  Company  D : 

Captain:  I am  directed  by  the  major  commanding  to  call  on  you  for 
a written  statement  of  the  landing  at  and  burning  of  Darien  by  the 
enemy  on  the  11th  instant. 

You  will  particularly  state  the  number  of  the  enemy  and  the  means 
used  by  yourself  in  defeating  their  purpose  of  landing  and  burning  the 

town. 

Respectfully,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  E.  WILLIAMS, 
Adjutant  Twentieth  Battalion . 


Major  Milieu’s  not  found. 


318 


COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVX 
No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  A.  Lane , Twentieth  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry . 

Camp  Jackson,  June  19, 1863. 

Major  : In  compliance  with  your  order  I proceed  to  give  a statement 
of  the  affair  at  Darien  : 

About  noon  on  the  11th  instant  two  steamers  and  two  gunboats  made 
their  appearance  in  Doboy  Sound,  and  without  halting  proceeded  with 
great  rapidity  southward  along  the  channel  known  as  the  inland  pass 
from  Savannah  to  Brunswick.  Mr.  Pease  (a  large  owner  of  real  estate 
in  Darien  and  familiar  with  all  the  navigable  streams  thereabout)  was 
with  me,  and  expressed  the  opinion  that  they  were  going  southward 
and  not  to  Darien.  When  they  reached  the  Altamaha,  however,  instead 
of  proceeding  southward  they  turned  in  the  direction  of  Darien,  and 
in  a few  minutes  were  vigorously  shelling  our  pickets  just  east  of  the 
town,  and  in  thirty  minutes  from  the  commencement  of  the  shelling  the 
town  of  Darien  was  being  burned.  The  position  of  said  picket  being 
open  and  exposed,  they  retired  and  took  position  on  the  Ridge  road  out 
of  sight  of  the  gunboats. 

So  soon  as  I discovered  that  the  fleet  had  turned  in  the  direction  of 
Darien  I dispatched  couriers  to  the  respective  pickets,  ordering  them  to 
rendezvous  at  a point  between  the  ridge  and  Darien,  and  succeeded  in 
getting  15  together.  The  woods  surrounding  Darien  (which  I may  here 
remark  is  an  open  pine  barren  for  several  miles)  were  shelled  during  the 
burning  of  the  town.  I threw  out  pickets  on  all  the  roads  leading  out 
from  Darien,  with  instructions  to  reach  the  town  if  practicable.  When 
near  the  town  on  one  of  the  roads  I was  informed  by  picket  from  one  of 
the  other  roads  that  a party  of  the  enemy,  supposed  to  be  200  strong, 
had  attempted  to  get  in  their  rear  and  that  the  picket  had  fallen  back. 

There  were  no  white  people  living  in  Darien ; all  of  its  former  inhab- 
itants who  remain  in  that  vicinity  are  at  the  ridge.  They  were  in  hourly 
expectation  of  the  enemy  there,  and  they  could  have  reached  there 
easily  without  the  knowledge  of  the  picket  unless  all  the  roads  were 
picketed.  By  so  doing  the  picket  could  speedily  be  drawn  to  any  road 
by  which  they  might  advance  to  retard  their  movements. 

From  the  best  information  I have  I suppose  that  300  or  400  landed. 
They  remained  until  the  town  was  consumed,  when  they  (the  vessels) 
went  out  into  the  sound. 

Respectfully,  major,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  A.  LANE, 
Captain  Company  D. 

Maj.  John  M.  Millen, 

Commanding  Battalion. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  W.  G.  Thomson , Twentieth  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Twentieth  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry, 

Camp  Jackson , June  13,  1863. 

General  : I have  to  report  that  the  enemy  have  burnt  Darien  to  the 
ground ; there  is  only  one  church  and  two  or  three  small  buildings 


CiTAr.  XXVI.]  LITTLE  FOLLY  ISLAND,  S.  C.  319 

standing.  This  was  done  on  the  11th  instant.  They  came  up  the  river 
in  three  gunboats,  shelling  as  they  came  along. 

The  officer  in  command  of  the  picket  states  that  between  150  to  200 
negroes,  under  white  officers,  landed  and  burnt  the  town.  They  cap- 
tured a pilot  boat,  with  about  60  bales  of  cotton  on  board.  The  men 
aboard  of  the  pilot-boat  state  that  they  did  not  have  time  to  burn  her ; 
that  they  hardly  escaped  themselves.  They  carried  off:  some  few  ne- 
groes— most  of  them  were  free — the  number  not  known.  They  also 
captured  2 white  women,  but  afterward  released  them,  telling  them 
that  they  intended  to  come  back  and  burn  the  whole  of  the  houses  on 
the  ridge  and  along  the  coast.  They  then  returned  down  the  river  and 
now  lie  outside  of  Doboy  Island. 

Respectfully,  general,  vour  obedient  servant, 

W,  G.  THOMSON, 
Captain , Commanding  Battalion. 

Brigadier- General  Mercer. 


JUNE  11-13,  1863. — Operations  on  Little  Folly  Island,  S.  C. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  R.  8.  Ripley , C.  8.  Army , commanding  First  Mili- 
tary District. 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , 8.  C .,  June  12,  1863. 

General  : The  enemy  having  advanced  light  guns  to  Little  Folly 
Island  yesterday  to  shell  the  wreck  of  the  steamer  Ruby,  now  ashore 
at  Light-House  Inlet,  in  accordance  with  directions  Captain  Mitchel, 
commanding  the  batteries  on  the  south  of  Morris  Island,  opened  lire, 
silencing  them  at  the  second  shot. 

This  morning  I gave  directions  for  him  to  open  fire  in  case  he  observed 
any  indications  for  work  on  Little  Folly  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  and 
this  afternoon  about  5 o’clock,  seeing  parties  apparently  at  work,  he 
commenced  shelling.  About  50  men  left  Little  Folly  for  the  main  island. 
The  enemy  replied  from  his  batteries  on  Big  Folly  and  his  light  guns, 
while  his  gunboats  came  up  the  creek  northwest  of  the  island  and  shelled 
the  pickets  at  Oyster  Point. 

No  damage  has  been  done  to  our  troops  or  batteries.  Another  mor- 
tar will  be  in  position  to-night,  and  Captain  Mitchel  has  directions  to 
prevent  any  nearer  approach  of  the  enemy,  if  necessary  with  all  his 

guns. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier - General. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla, 

Charleston , 8.  (7.,  June  14,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday  afternoon,  the 
enemy  having  appeared  to  be  at  work  on  Little  Folly  Island,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Yates  opened  fire  upon  them,  shelling  them  for  about 
three-quarters  of  an  hour,  putting  a stop  to  their  operations,  which 


320  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  £A.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XxVt. 

appeared  to  be  erecting  a shelter  or  batteries  near  the  inlet.  A close 
watch  has  been  directed  to  be  kept  up  and  their  work  to  be  stopped 
whenever  attempted. 

It  is  intended  to  throw  an  epaulement  across  the  island  to  cover  the 
camps  and  depots  from  such  attempts  as  the  enemy  can  make. 

The  main  magazine  for  the  detached  batteries  is  completed,  and  the 
artillery  principally  supplied  with  ammunition. 

It  may  be  necessary  to  change  the  position  of  one  of  the  guns  now  in 
battery,  as  from  the  points  at  which  the  enemy  appeared  to  be  working 
two  or  three  of  our  batteries  can  be  enfiladed.  I have  directed  Lieu- 
tenant Colonel  Yates  to  make  the  necessary  arrangements. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J E.  S.  EIPLEY, 

• . Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff . 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ORDERS,  AND  RETURNS  RELATING 
SPECIALLY  TO  THE  OPERATIONS  ON  THE  COASTS  OF 
SOUTH  CAROLINA,  GEORGIA,  AND  MIDDLE  AND  EAST 
FLORIDA  FROM  APRIL  12,  1862,  TO  JUNE  11,  1863. 

TJIN’IOIN'  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 

*Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces  before  Fort  Pulaski, 

Tyhee  Island , Ga .,  March  30,  1862. 

General  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  Engineer,  TJ.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

Dear  Sir:  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  14th  instant,  asking  for 
“some  particulars  of  the  operations  by  which  guus  and  supplies 
were  transported  and  batteries  established  at  Venus  Point  and  on 
the  island  opposite,  whereby  the  navigation  of  Savannah  River  is 
controlled,”  1 have  the  pleasure  to  submit  the  following,  viz: 

It  was  known  by  our  commanding  general  before  the  middle  of 
January  that  our  gunboats  could  enter  the  Savannah  River  above  Fort 
Pulaski,  on  the  south  side  through  Wassaw  Sound,  Wilmington  Nar- 
rows (or  Freeborn’s  Cut),  and  Saiut  Augustine  Creek,  and  on  the  north 
side  through  New  River,  Wall’s  Cut,  and  Wright  River.  Wall’s  Cut 
is  an  artificial  channel  connecting  New  and  Wright  Rivers,  which  the 
enemy  had  obstructed  by  an  old  hulk  and  numerous  heavy  piles.  These 
obstructions  had  all  been  removed  before  January  12  by  a detachment 
of  our  troops  (infantry  and  engineers)  under  Major  Beard,  Forty-eighth 
New  York,  and  their  removal  reported  to  Commodore  DuPont  by  the 
middle  of  January,  in  order  that  gunboats  could  enter  the  Savannah 
through  Wall’s  Cut  and  cover  us  in  the  erection  of  batteries.  Mud 
River  is  also  navigable  at  high  tide  for  vessels  of  not  over  8J  feet 
draught.  A joint  expedition  of  land  and  naval  forces  was  organized  by 
General  Sherman  and  Commodore  DuPont  to  blockade  the  Savannah 
River  above  the  fort.  It  consisted  of  one  regiment  of  infantry  (the 
Forty-eighth  New  York),  two  companies  of  New  York  Volunteer  Engi- 
neers, and  two  companies  of  the  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  with  twenty 
guns  of  all  calibers,  viz:  Two  8-inch  siege  howitzers,  four  30-pounder 

* Found  too  late  for  publication  in  Series  I,  Vol.  VI. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


321 


Parrotts,  three  20-pounder  Parrotts,  three  12-pounder  James,  and  eight 
24-pounder  field  howitzers,  accompanied  by  three  gunboats.  The  troops 
were  to  rendezvous  at  Daufuskie  Island,  where  we  already  had  three 
companies  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut,  under  Major  Gardiner,  guarding 
Walks  Cut.  They  were  posted  there  on  January  13.  The  land  force 
was  in  readiness  at  Hilton  Head  soon  after  the  middle  of  January. 
Yarious  causes  delayed  the  expected  naval  co-operation,  so  that  no 
gunboats  passed  Walks  Cut  until  the  28th  of  January. 

Another  mixed  force  presented  itself  on  the  south  of  the  Savannah 
River  in  Wilmington  Yarrows  (a  Freeborn  cut),  about  the  same  time, 
the  land  forces  being  commanded  by  General  H.  G.  Wright  and  the 
gunboats  by  Fleet-Captain  Davis. 

I accompanied  the  expedition  on  the  north  side  as  General  Sherman’s 
chief  engineer,  receiving  my  orders  directly  from  and  making  my  re- 
ports directly  to  him.  General  Yiele  commanded  the  land  forces  and 
Commander  John  Rodgers  the  gunboats.  From  Commander  Rodgers’ 
flag-ship,  the  Unadilla  (in  Wright  River),  I witnessed  the  cannonading 
between  our  gunboats  in  Wright  River  and  Wilmington  Narrows  and 
Tatnall’s  fleet  in  the  Savannah  on  the  28th  of  January.  The  distances 
were  about  equal  (2^  miles);  but  little  effect  was  produced.  On  the 
afternoon  of  the  same  day  I made  a reconnaissance  of  Mud  River  and 
the  Savannah  shore  of  Jones  Island,  selected  Yenus  Point  as  the  posi- 
tion for  one  battery,  and  located  the  line  for  a road  or  causeway  between 
Yenus  Point  and  Mud  River.  Jones  Island  is  nothing  but  a mud  marsh, 
covered  with  reeds  and  tall  grass.  The  general  surface  is  about  at  the 
level  of  ordinary  high  tide.  There  are  a few  spots  of  limited  area, 
Yenus  Point  being  one  of  them,  that  are  submerged  only  by  spring 
tides  or  by  ordinary  tides  favored  by  the  wind,  but  the  character  of  the 
soil  is  the  same  over  the  whole  island.  It  is  a soft,  unctious  mud,  free 
of  grit  or  sand,  and  incapable  of  supporting  a heavy  weight.  In  the 
most  elevated  places  the  dry  crust  is  but  3 or  4 inches  in  depth,  the 
substratum  being  a semi-fluid  mud,  which  is  agitated  like  jelly  by  the 
falling  of  even  small  bodies  upon  it,  like  the  jumping  of  men  or  the 
rammiu  g of  earth.  Men  walking  over  it  are  partially  sustained  by  the 
roots  of  the  reeds  and  grass  and  sink  in  only  4 or  5 inches.  When  this 
top  support  gives  way  or  is  broken  through  they  go  down  2 to  2J  feet  and 
in  some  places  much  farther.  A road  or  causeway  of  some  kind  across 
the  island  from  Mud  River  to  Yenus  Point  I thought  necessary,  and  rec- 
ommended it  at  the  outset  (even  if  the  guns  should  not  have  to  be  carried 
over  it)  as  the  means  of  getting  speedy  succor  to  the  Yenus  Point  bat- 
tery in  case  of  attack.  Daufuskie  Island,  4 miles  distant,  beiug  the 
nearest  point  where  troops  could  be  kept  for  that  purpose,  General 
Sherman  was  kind  enough  to  leave  all  matters  having  a bearing  upon 
the  location  and  plan  of  the  battery,  the  devising  of  ways  and  means 
for  heavy  transportation,  &c.,  to  me.  My  orders  were  to  consult  freely 
with  General  Yiele  and  the  chief  of  artillery  in  everything  necessary 
to  be  done  not  strictly  within  the  range  of  my  duties  as  an  engineer 
officer. 

On  the  29th  January  I dispatched  Lieutenant  O’Rorke,  of  the  Engi- 
neers, in  a small  boat,  to  examine  Long  and  Elba  Islands,  in  the  Sa- 
vannah. Major  Beard,  Forty-eighth  New  York,  accompanied  him.  They 
entered  the  Savannah  via  Cunningham  Point,  pulled  up  the  Savan- 
nah, stopping  several  times  on  Long  and  Elba  Islands;  went  around 
the  west  end  of  the  latter  to  within  about  2 miles  of  Fort  Jackson. 

21  r r — VOL  XIV 


322  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  LOhap.  XXVt 

Lieutenant  O’Rorke  reported  the  upper  end  of  Long  Island  favorable 
for  batteries,  the  surface  being  fully  as  high  as  that  at  Venus  Point. 

The  following  extracts  from  my  journal  form  a part  of  the  history  of 
the  operations  on  Jones  Island  and  the  Savannah  River,  and  may 
properly  be  introduced  into  this  report : 

[Extracts  from  journal  of  the  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps.] 

February  1-4,  1862. — The  two  engineer  companies  on  Danfuskie  Island,  commanded 
by  Captain  Sears,  were  employed  in  cutting  polesfor  causeway  on  Jones  Island  from 
Mud  River  to  Venus  Point  and  for  the  engineer  wharf  on  Daufuskie  Island,  New 
River.  On  the  4th  the  wharf,  with  8 feet  water  at  low  tide,  was  completed  ; 10,000 
poles,  5 to  6 inches  in  diameter  and  9 feet  long,  had  been  cut  and  1,900  deposited  at 
the  wharf.  The  men  of  Forty -eighth  New  York  and  Seventh  Connecticut  transported 
the  poles  on  their  shoulders,  the  average  distance  carried  being  1 mile.  I had  a swath 
cut  and  cleared  of  reeds  and  grass  across  the  upper  end  of  Jones  Island  to  prevent  the 
enemy  burning  the  island  over.  Navy  officers  engaged  in  sounding  Mud  and  Wright 
Rivers.  No  certainty  as  yet  that  the  gunboats  will  enter  the  Savannah.  Mud  River 
has  but  about  2 feet  water  in  it  at  low  tide,  with  a very  soft,  almost  semi-fluid,  bottom. 
Soundings  in  Wright  River  not  completed  yet. 

February  5-6.— Nothing  specially  new.  Engineer  force  engaged  in  cutting  poles, 
filling  sand  bags  on  Daufuskie  Island,  building  a temporary  wharf  of  poles  and  sand 
bags  on  Mud  River,  and  constructing  a wheelbarrow  track  of  planks  laid  end  to  end 
from  Mud  River  to  Venus  Point.  The  Forty-eighth  New  York  and  Seventh  Con- 
necticut and  a.  portion  of  the  engineer  force  engaged  in  transporting  poles,  plank, 
filled  sand  bags  from  Daufuskie  Island  to  Jones  Island  (a  distance  of  very  nearly  4 
miles)  in  row-boats. 

February  7-8.— Finished  temporary  wharf  in  Mud  River ; carried  several  hun- 
dred sand  bags  (filled)  across  to  Venus  Point ; also  a quantity  of  plank  and  other  bat- 
tery materials.  Had  the  balance  of  the  materials  required  for  the  Venus  Point  bat- 
tery put  into  lighters,  so  as  to  be  ready  whenever  the  gunboats  should  be  ready  to 
move.  No  immediate  prospect  of  their  moving  yet. 

February  9.— I visited  Commodore  Rodgers  to  consult  in  regard  to  his  moving  into 
the  Savannah.  Said  he  iutended  to  attempt  the  Mud  River  passage  that  night  on  the 
high  tide.  The  signal  of  his  starting  was  to  be  one  note  from  his  steam-whistle. 
Returned  to  Daufuskie  and  consulted  with  General  Viele  and  CaptaiB  Hamilton,  the 
chief  of  artillery.  It  was  arranged  that  the  flats,  with  the  guns  and  ammunition  in 
them,  should  be  towed  by  steamer  Mayflower  through  Walls  Cut  and  up  Mud  River 
just  behind  the  gunboats.  They  were  accordingly  taken  in  tow  in  the  evening  after 
dark  from  the  engineer  wharf.  The  night  was  windy,  rainy,  and  very  dark.  The  May- 
flower, after  several  attempts,  failed  to  reach  Wall’s  Cut,  and  cast  anchor  near  the 
spot  she  started  from.  Gunboats  did  not  move.  I think  they  were  justified  in  not 
doing  so  on  account  of  the  weather.  I visited  Captain  Rodgers  about  midnight.  At 
that  time  he  had  not  fully  decided  to  make  the  attempt. 

February  10.— Captain  Hamilton  quite  ill  from  last  night’s  exposure  in  the  May- 
flower. I consulted  with  General  Viele,  and  it  was  determined  to  establish  the  Venus 
Point  battery  at  once  and  wait  no  longer  for  the  gunboats;  also  to  do  this  by  land- 
ing the  guns  in  Mud  River  and  carrying  them  over  the  marsh.  Major  Beard,  Forty- 
eighth  New  York,  and  Lieut.  J.  H.  Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers,  volunteered  to 
assist  Lieut.  Horace  Porter,  the  ordnance  officer,  in  getting  the  flats  into  Mud  River 
and  the  guns  on  shore  and  into  position.  Accordingly  the  flats  with  the  guns  were 
towed  by  row-boats  up  Mud  River  against  the  tide  and  lauded  without  accident.  Two 
of  them  were  taken  about  200  yards  into  the  marsh  by  Lieutenant  Wilson.  The  Forty- 
eighth  New  York  furnished  the  fatigue  party,  which  had  already  been  twenty-four 
hours  at  work  on  Jones  Island,  and  were  very  much  exhausted.  Deeming  it  impos- 
sible to  get  the  guns  over  that  night  I directed  them  to  be  covered  with  reeds  and 
grass  and  left  for  the  following  night. 

During  the  night  of  the  10th  Lieutenant  (YRorke,  of  the  Engineers,  with  a party 
of  volunteer  engineers,  commenced  the  magazine  and  platforms  at  Venus  Point.  The 
party  concealed  their  work  at  daybreak  (11th)  and  withdrew.  The  platforms  were 
made  by  raising  the  surface  5 or  6 inches  with  sand  carried  over  in  bags.  On  this 
sand  foundation  thick  planks  parallel  with  the  direction  of  fire  were  laid  nearly,  but 
not  quite,  in  contact  with  each  other.  At  right  angles  to  these  the  deck  planks  were 
laid,  giving  a platform  9 feet  by  17  feet.  The  floor  of  the  magazine  was  18  inches 
above  the  natural  surface,  resting  on  sand  bags. 

February  11.— Continued  getting  battery  and  road  materials  to  Jones  Island 
during  the  day.  Early  in  the  evening  1 went  to  Jones  Island  with  fresh  men  to  get 
the  guns  forward.  Major  Beard,  Lieutenant  Wilson,  and  Lieutenant  Porter  took 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


323 


charge  of  the  fatigue  parties  as  before.  The  work  is  done  in  the  following  manner, 

The  pieces  mounted  on  their  carriages  and  limbered  up  are  moved  forward  on  run- 
ways of  planks  (about  15  feet  long,  1 foot  wide,  and  2*  inches  thick),  laid  end  to  end. 
Lieutenant  Wilson,  with  a party  of  35  men,  took  charge  of  the  two  pieces  in  advance 
(an  8-inch  siege  howitzer  and  a 30-pounder  Parrott),  and  Major  Beard  and  Lieutenant 
Porter,  with  a somewhat  larger  force,  of  the  four  pieces  in  rear  (two  20  and  two  30 
pounder  Parrotts).  Each  party  has  one  pair  of  planks  in  excess  of  the  number  re- 
quired  for  the  guns  and  limbers  to  rest  upon  when  close  together.  This  extra  pair 
of  planks  is  planed  in  front  m prolongation  of  those  already  under  the  carriages,  and 
the  pieces  are  then  drawn  forward  with  drag-ropes,  one  after  the  other,  the  length  of 
a plank,  thus  freeing  the  pair  ot  planks  in  rear,  which  in  their  turn  are  carried  to  the 
front.  This  labor  is  of  the  most  fatiguing  kind.  In  most  places  the  men  sink  nearlv 
to  their  knees  m mud,  m some  much  deeper.  This  mud  being  of  the  most  slipperv 
kmd,  singularly  insoluble  m water  and  free  of  grit  or  sand,  the  planks  become  im- 
mediately smeared  over  with  it.  Many  delays  and  much  exhausting  labor  were  occa- 
sioned by  the  carnages  slipping  off.  When  this  occurred  the  wheels  would  suddenlv 
smk  in  to  the  hubs,  and  powerful  levers  had  to  be  devised  to  raise  them  up  a^ain.  “I 
authorized  the  men  to  encase  their  feet  in  sand  bags  to  keep  the  mud  out  of  their 
shoes.  Many  did  so,  tying  the  string  just  below  the  knee.” 

p A*  1 (morning  of  the  12th)  I pulled  back  to  the  schooner  Keating,  in  New 

River,  and  brought  a scow  filled  with  ammunition  into  Mud  River.  It  wSs  carried 
across  to  Venus  Point.  The  magazine  and  platforms  were  ready  for  service  by  dav 
break.  Lieutenant  Wilson  got  his  two  pieces  into  position  at  2.30  a.  in.,  and  Major 
Beard  and  Lieutenant  Porter  their  four  pieces  at  8.30  a.  m.  On  the  12th  Lieutenant 
Wilson  went  back  to  General  Viele  on  Daufuskie  to  report  the  success. 

February  12.— After  giving  directions  for  the  fresh*  relief  to  be  put  to  work  in 
throwing  up  a dike  around  the  battery  to  keep  out  the  spring  tides,  which  were  be- 

niohes  o/the  surfaoe?tUrDe<^  ‘°  DaUftlSkie-  The  hiSh  tide  “> W came  to  withiuS 
Sent  the  following  dispatch  to  General  Sherman  : 

“ Daufuskie  Island,  Ga.,  February  12,  1862. 

‘ General:  Venus  Point  and  the  Savannah  passage  is  held  by  a six-gun  batterv 
US  ast  n‘sht,' . If  everything  goes  on  well  Long  Island  will  be  similarly 
occupied  to-morrow  night.  I will  write  to-morrow  more  in  detail  y 

“Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

un  - n i tt  i “Q-  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier- General  Volunteers  and  Chief  Engineer,  Engineer  Corps. 
“General  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

“ Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C” 

February  \ 3-15.  Various  causes,  particularly  the  weather,  delayed  the  Long  Island 
battery.  On  the  morning  of  13th  rebel  steamer  Ida  passed  down  by  Venus  Point 
under  lull  steam.  Niue  shots  fired  at  her,  striking  astern  all  but  one.  Elevation 
?A°°d’ kut  not  enough  allowance  made  for  speed  of  vessel.  I was  not  in  tbe  bat- 
tery at  the  time.  All  the  pieces  except  one  30-pounder  recoiled  off  the  platforms 
These  were  at  once  enlarged  to  18  feet  by  17*  feet.  On  afternoon  of  14th  thn  e rebei 

aW  °Wa  takr?£'  a dl8tIan(le  a*?out  1 mile  from  the  battery.  Battery  fired 

about  30  shots.  One  of  the  vessels  struck  and  all  withdrew. 

PiSwrr#'  16‘7~nh&  !Ida  ?ortA  Pulaski  and  returned  to  Savannah  via  Lazaretto 
Creek,  Turner’s  Creek,  and  Saint  Augustine  Creek 

Lif^eS  n^ttUrne,dv  fr  mitT T7Head>  as  Per  General  Sherman’s  order,  leaving 
* ORor^e  with  General  Viele,  with  written  instructions  concerning  the 
engineering  operations  to  be  carried  on.  & 


The  foregoing  extracts  from  my  journal  are  all  that  bear  directly 
upon  the  operations  on  the  Savannah  above  Fort  Pulaski.  I did  not 
return  there  on  duty.  I have  received  official  information,  however, 
that  a second  battery,  consisting  of  one  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  one  30- 
pounder  Parrott,  one  20-pounder  Parrott,  and  three  12-pounder  James 
has  been  established  on  Bird  Island,  just  above  Long  Island  This 
was  done  on  the  night  of  February  20,  the  flats,  with  the  guns,  ammuni- 
tion, &c.,  in  them  being  towed  up  Mud  Bive»and  across  the  Savannah 
by  row-boats.  Lieutenant  O’Rorke,  of  the  Engineers,  was  present  as 
the  engineer  officer.  I have  received  no  report  from  him. 

On  the  19th  of  February  I was  ordered  here  to  place  Tybee  Island  in 


324 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

a thorough  state  of  defense  against  approaches  from  Wilmington  Nar- 
rows and  Lazaretto  Greek,  to  prevent  all  approach  by  water  and  blockade 
the  channel,  and  also  to  commence  operations  for  the  bombardment  of 
Fort  Pulaski. 

On  the  27th  of  February  General  Sherman  issued  an  order  assigning 
me  to  the  command  of  the  troops  on  Tybee  Island,  Ga.,  to  enable  me 
to  control  all  the  personnel  available  for  these  objects. 

The  foregoing  extracts  are  from  official  orders.  The  absolute  block- 
ade of  Pulaski  dates  from  the  22d  of  February,  at  which  time  two  com- 
panies with  a battery  were  sent  to  Decent  Island,  on  Lazaretto  Creek. 

To  illustrate  this  report  I transmit  an  outline  tracing  of  a portion  of 
Savannah  Eiver  and  the  adjacent  country.*  I also  send  a package  con- 
taining some  of  the  correspondence  between  GLeneral  Sherman  and 
myself  during  the  progress  of  the  operations  referred  to. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMOEE, 

Actg.  Brig.  Gen.  Vols .,  Chief  Engr.  Expeditionary  Corps. 

[Inclosur©  No.  1.] 

TJ.  S.  Steamer  Flag, 
Wassaw  Sound,  January  8,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Comdg.  Expeditionary  Corps , Hilton  Head , S.  C. : 

The  undersigned,  in  accordance  with  verbal  instructions  from  their 
respective  chiefs,  have  made  a joint  examination  of  Little  Tybee  Eiver, 
or  Freeborn’s  Cut,  from  its  mouth,  upon  Wassaw  Sound,  to  within  half 
a mile  of  Mrs.  Barnard’s  house,  situated  upon  the  first  fast  land  on 
Wilmington  Island.  Above  this  the  passage  is  also  known  as  Wil- 
mington Narrows,  until  it  reaches  Saint  Augustine  Creek.  They  have 
information,  which  they  deem  reliable,  that  a regiment  of  Savannah 
light  infantry  without  cannon  is  stationed  on  Wilmington  Island 
near  Dr.  Screven’s  house,  a mile  beyond  Mrs.  Barnard’s.  They  also 
learned  that  the  channel  passes  near  both  these  houses,  within  50 
yards  of  Dr.  Screven’s.  They  agreed  that  it  was  very  improbable 
that  the  boats  could  pass  so  near  the  enemy  without  being  seen 
by  his  pickets,  and  thus  disclosing  their  examination.  Discovery  by 
warning  tbe  enemy  to  close  this  passage  would  have  militated  more 
against  the  interests  of  the  public  service  than  a successful  examiua-j 
tion  would  have  promoted  it.  Here,  therefore,  their  reconnaissance 
ended.  The  distance  from  the  ship  to  which  their  examination  reached 
was  about  9 miles,  extending  up  Tybee  Eiver  about  7 miles.  The  depth 
of  water  at  half  tide  varied  from  3 to  7 fathoms.  They  found  that 
Isaac  Tatnall,  the  colored  pilot,  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the 
channel.  The  accuracy  of  his  knowledge  of  the  part  under  examina- 
tion gives  assurance  that  he  may  be  perfectly  relied  upon  as  pilot  for 
the  rest  of  the  passage.  The  channel  as  far  as  seen  was  wide,  deep, 
and  practicable  j beyond  they  learn  that  it  is  narrow,  but  still  deep, 
and  it  is  believed  practicable  for  vessels  160  or  170  feet  long.  The  in- 
formation in  regard  to  the  unseen  part  has  been  derived  from  carefully 
collating  the  declarations  of  Isaac  with  those  of  other  negroes  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  this  passage.  The  undersigned  have  therefore, 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  gunboats  may  pass  into  Savannah  Eiver 
through  Freeborn’s  Cut  without  meeting  any  artificial  obstructions  or 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


325 


any  serious  natural  impediment.  Should,  however,  any  unknown  obsta- 
cle be  encountered  the  return  will  be  easy  and  nothing  will  have  been 
sacrificed.  The  undersigned  would  recommend  that  after  entering  Sa- 
vannah River  a rapid  advance  should  be  made  on  the  city,  fighting  the 
vessels  past  Fort  Jackson,  and  reducing  it  from  above  in  order  to  allow 
the  unarmed  transports  free  ingress.  Upon  the  successful  accomplish- 
ment of  this  purpose  the  batteries  on  Skiddaway  Island  and  at  Thun- 
derbolt will  probably  be  abandoned  5 their  positions,  no  longer  valuable, 
would  scarcely  be  tenable.  Fort  Pulaski  will  be  completely  blockaded 
by  the  same  movement,  its  supplies  cut  off,  its  usefulness  destroyed, 
and  its  troops  demoralized.  It  is  found  from  the  Coast  Survey  chart 
and  from  testimony  that  Fort  Jackson  stands  upon  a peninsula  less 
than  2 miles  wide,  and  covered  with  rice  fields.  Vessels  stationed  in 
Saint  Augustine  Creek  and  Savannah  River  can  cross  their  fires  over 
it,  rendering  troops  holding  it  secure  against  successful  attack  by  land 
forces.  This  position,  with  a wharf,  a fort  capable  of  resisting  a coup- 
de-main , with  an  open  line  of  water  communication  with  Tybee  and 
Port  Royal,  with  probably  another  shorter  inland  passage  through 
Wall’s  Cut,  seems  to  be  a good  point  Wappui  for  a base  of  military  op- 
erations in  this  vicinity.  Herewith  inclosed  is  a sketch  showing  route 
proposed.* 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHN  RODGERS, 

Commander. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Captain  and  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Memorandum  of  construction  of  battery  at  Venus  Point , Savannah  River . 

Rear  the  middle  of  January,  1862,  it  was  known  that  the  Savannah 
River  could  be  entered  by  gunboats  above  Fort  Pulaski,  from  the  south 
by  Wassaw  Sound,  &c.,  and  from  the  north  by  New  River,  &c. 

The  obstruction  in  these  passages  had  been  removed  before  the  12th 
January  by  detachments  of  infantry  and  engineers,  Major  Beard,  Forty- 
eighth  New  York,  commanding. 

Joint  naval  and  land  forces  were  organized  for  each  approach,  north 
and  south.  The  naval  co-operation  was  delayed  till  the  latter  part  of 
the  month.  Captain  Gillmore  accompanied  the  north-side  expedition 
as  General  Sherman’s  chief  engineer.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  28th 
January  he  made  a reconnaissance  of  Mud  River  and  the  Savannah 
shore  of  Jones  Island,  and  selected  Venus  Point,  on  Jones  Island,  gs 
the  position  for  one  battery,  and  located  the  road  line  between  Venus 
Point  and  Mud  River  over  the  marsh.  Lieutenant  O’Rorke,  engineer, 
under  Captain  Gillmore’s  orders,  examined,  on  the  29th  January,  Long 
and  Elba  Islands,  in  the  Savannah  River.  Major  Beard  accompanied 
him. 

February  — to  7.— Engineer  troops  cutting  and  transporting  poles  for 
causeways  and  wharf  at  Mud  River ; building  wharf  and  forming  road ; 
filling  and  transporting  sand  bags,  plank,  poles,  and  other  materials 
4 miles,  in  row-boats,  &c.,  to  Jones  Island. 

February  10. — A fatigue  party  of  Forty-eighth  New  York,  after  twenty- 
four  hours’  previous  work,  towed  the  guns  on  flats  to  the  wharf  and 


Not  found. 


326  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

landed  them.  Night  of  10th  Lieutenant  O’Rorke  with  party  com- 
menced magazines  and  platforms  at  Venus  Point. 

February  11. — Continued  getting  battery  and  road  materials  to  Jones 
Island.  In  the  evening  Captain  Gillmore  went  to  Jones  Island  with 
fresh  men  to  get  the  guns  forward.  Major  Beard,  Lieutenant  Wilson, 
Topographical  Engineers,  and  Lieut.  H.  Porter,  ordnance,  in  charge  of 
fatigue  parties  as  before.  Six  guns,  viz,  one  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  three 
30  and  two  20  pounder  Parrott  guns,  being  limbered  up,  they  were 
placed  on  plank  runs  on  the  roadway  of  poles  across  the  march.  Lieu- 
tenant Wilson  and  35  men  had  the  howitzer  and  one  30-pounder  in  ad- 
vance ; Major  Beard  and  Lieutenant  Porter,  with  a rather  larger  force, 
the  other  four  pieces  in  rear.  Each  party  had  two  spare  jdanks  with 
which  the  runway  was  prolonged  to  the  front.  When  the  guns  were 
drawn  forward  with  drag-ropes  the  rear  planks  were  taken  up  and  car- 
ried to  the  front.  The  men  sink  to  the  knees  or  deeper  in  the  mud. 
The  planks  get  smeared  and  the  guns  run  off,  the  wheels  sinking  to  the 
hubs.  The  men  encased  their  feet  and  legs  in  sand  bags.  Captain 
Gillmore  returned  at  1 a.  m.  to  New  River  and  brought  a scow  load  of 
ammunition  over.  The  platforms  and  magazines  at  Venus  Point  were 
ready  for  service  by  daybreak.  Lieutenant  Wilson’s  two  pieces  were 
in  position  at  2.30  a.  in. ; Alajor  Beard  and  Lieutenant  Porter’s  four 
pieces  at  8.30  a.  m.  (12th).  Captain  Gillmore  was  able  to  report  (same 
day)  to  General  Sherman  that  Venus  Point  and  the  Savannah  passage 
were  held  by  a six-gun  battery  erected  u last  night.” 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Dunn’s  Place,  Daufuskie  Island, 

January  28,  1862 — 10  p.  m. 

General  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps , Hilton  Head , 8.  C. : 

General  : I returned  to  this  place  from  an  examination  of  J ones 
Island  about  an  hour  since  and  have  received  your  two  communica- 
tions. I landed  on  Jones  Island  from  Mud  River  about  half  a mile  from 
the  upper  point  of  island,  and  there  struck  a course  due  south,  through 
the  marsh,  to  the  Savannah  River,  and  thence  down  the  river  to  within 
about  150  yards  of  the  Coast  Survey  tower  on  Venus  Point,  where  farther 
progress  was  arrested  by  a deep  creek.  Below  this  creek  and  between 
it  and  Venus  Point  the  land  is  evidently  not  so  good  for  batteries  as  it 
is  just  above  the  creek.  Here  batteries  can  be  erected.  The  surface 
has  not  been  submerged  by  any  recent  tides.  It  is  at  least  18  inches 
above  ordinary  high  water.  I shall  propose  to  General  Viele  and  Cap- 
tain Hamilton  to  take  sand  enough  in  bags  from  Daufuskie  Island  to 
raise  the  platforms  8 or  10  inches  above  the  natural  surface.  Sand  bags 
to  cover  the  magazine  can  also  be  filled  at  Daufuskie.  The  embrasures 
(if  any  are  made)  and  the  interior  slope  of  the  parapet  need  not  be 
revetted  with  bags,  as  the  soil  is  mostly  used  and  will  stand  very  well. 
Under  the  protection  of  gunboats  all  the  guns  in  the  lighters  can  be 
placed  on  shore  and  in  battery  in  one  night.  It  will  not  be  necessary 
to  crowd  the  guns  very  near  each  other,  and  I would  prefer  to  have  them 
some  distance  apart  and  to  cover  them  as  soon  as  possible  with  splinter- 
proofs.  The  men  to  erect  and  man  the  battery  can  be  made  comfortable 
by  raising  the  ground  on  which  they  pitch  their  tents  (to  keep  them 
above  the  water)  and  by  using  in  the  tents  plenty  of  swamp  grass  as  a 
substitute  for  straw.  It  will  answer  the  purpose  very  well.  I have  not 
been  able  to  communicate  with  General  Viele  or  Captain  Hamilton  since 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


327 


my  return,  but  will  do  so  the  first  thing  in  the  morning.  If  the  gun- 
boats go  through  to-morrow  the  battery  ought  to  be  erected  to-morrow 
night.  My  impression  is  that  they  will  not  go  through  until  advices  are 
received  from  the  commodore.  With  our  present  knowledge  of  the  river 
above  Jones  Island  and  the  unknown  difficulties  connected  with  a lodg- 
ment on  Elba  Island  I think  the  position  proposed  the  best  one  known 
for  closing  Savannah  River.  If  no  move  is  made  by  the  gunboats  to- 
morrow I shall  try  to  examine  Elba  to-morrow  night.  The  Pembina  had 
not  passed  the  Out  %t  7 o’clock  this  evening.  Our  gunboats  in  Wilming- 
ton Harrows  range  from  the  Tybee,  Martello  Tower,  just  to  the  right  of 
Fort  Pulaski.  I ascertained  this  from  Colonel  Rosa  last  evening.  I 
took  their  bearing  from  the  Unadilla  to-day.  By  plotting  these  two 
bearings  on  the  Coast  Survey  chart  I find  their  distance  from  the  center 
to  channel  opposite  Yenus  Point  to  be  2-|  miles.  They  cannot  do  much 
at  this  distance. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

w . Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corpt. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.J 

Steamer  McClellan, 

Port  Royal , S.  C .,  January  29,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Gillmore, 

Commanding  Engineers , Daufuslcie  Island  : 

General:  Your  communication  of  last  night  is  received.  Before 
deciding  upon  a site  for  battery  you  will  of  course  make  further  exam- 
ination. Examine  northern  end  of  Long  Island;  Elba  Island  if  you 
can.  After  all  it  is  quite  probable  that  it  will  be  decided  that  Yenus 
Point  or  vicinity  is  the  place.  Your  suggestion  of  having  this  battery 
put  up  in  one  night  meets  my  views  exactly.  General  Yiele  has  force 
enough  there  to  render  any  amount  of  assistance.  The  commodore  will 
send  another  gunboat  to  Captain  Rodgers  to-day,  and  I hope  two  of 
them.  You  say  nothing  further  of  putting  up  a battery  at  the  cut.  It 
is  hoped  it  will  be  found  unnecessary.  But  you  are  the  engineer  of  the 
expedition,  and  this  is  an  affair  of  engineers,  and  that  much  will  depend 
on  what  you  deem  best  on  the  spot.  Communicate  with  me  rapidly 
when  necessary,  and  confer  with  Brigadier- General  Viele  and  chief  of 
artillery  in  everything  you  undertake.  I write  General  Yiele  so  as  to 
insure  a frank  co-operation  between  you.  I am  anxious  that  the  chan- 
nel should  be  stopped  as  soon  as  practicable,  but  of  course  you  are 
somewhat  dependent  on  the  movements  of  the  Navy. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
[Brigadier-  General.] 

[Inclosur©  No.  5.] 

Daufuskie  Island, 
Wednesday  Evening , January  29,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps , Hilton  Head , S.  C. : 

General  : I have  your  letter  from  on  board  the  McClellan  at  Port 
Royal.  I am  sorry  to  say  that  the  Navy  appear  discouraged  at  the 
prospect  of  going  round  Cunningham  Point.  I have  not  seen  Captain 
•Rodgers  to-day,  hut  have  just  returned  from  the  Pembiua.  Captain 


328  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiai>.  XX-VI. 

Bankhead  reports  4 feet  water  at  low  tide  around  Cunningham  Point. 
A shot  from  Fort  Pulaski  fell  within  30  yards  of  his  launch  while  sound- 
ing. Captain  Bankhead  also  informed  me  that  he  saw  very  plainly  this 
morning  at  11  o’clock  two  steamers  towing  a.  large  wreck  into  Saint 
Augustine  Creek.  This,  with  the  piles  reported  to  have  been  encount- 
ered by  Captain  Davis  (as  Bankhead  informs  me),  looks  like  a very 
serious  obstacle  in  Saint  Augustine  Creek.  I learn  that  our  gunboats 
have  all  left  there.  No  boats  have  passed  to  or  from  Pulaski  to-day. 
One  went  down  and  back  last  night.  No  guns^liave  yet  been  put  in 
battery  at  the  Cut.  Captain  Hamilton  thinks  that  two  30-pounder 
Parrotts  can  bestowed  down  early  to-morrow  morning.  If  deemed 
necessary  they  will  be  put  in  position.  I look  anxiously  for  additional  - 
light-draught  gunboats,  something  that  can  get  through  on  9 feet  water. 

If  the  Wright  River  route  turns  out  to  be  impracticable  (or  decided 
to  be  so)  I believe  our  lightest-draught  gunboats  can  go  down  Mud 
River  on  a high  tide,  and  (without  going  into  the  Savannah)  can  cover 
our  erection  of  batteries  on  Jones  Island.  I also  think,  from  what  the 
contrabands  say,  that  a side-wheel  steamer  running  up  and  down  Mud 
River,  will  deepen  the  channel  very  much.  The  bottom  is  very  soft ; a 
10-pound  lead  sinks  1J  feet  into  the  mud.  Suppose  we  try  this  plan : 
Failing  in  all  these  plans  I propose  to  build  a dike  causeway  across  the 
lower  or  the  upper  end  of  Jones  Island  (from  Wright  or  Mud  River) 
and  carry  our  guns  across  to  Yen  us  Point.  This  is  of  course  a dernier 
ressort.  The  alternative  may  be  to  take  our  flats  into  Savappah  River 
without  protection.  Lieutenant  O’Rorke  and  Major  Beard  are  now  out, 
with  instructions  to  examine  the  upper  end  of  Long  Island  and  the 
lower  end  of  Elba.  To-morrow  morning  I shall  go  down  Wright  River 
to  examine  Jones  Island  at  the  lower  end  up  to  the  beacon.  I could  i 
not  approach  it  from  the  upper  end  on  account  of  a creek,  as  I stated  i 
last  eve. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Captain  and  Chief  Engineer. 

P.  S. — My  command  is  now  engaged  in  making  fascines  and  gabions.' 

[Indosure  No.  6.] 

Daufuskie  Island,  S.  0.,  Jan.  30,  1862—7.30  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps , Hilton  Head , 8.  C.  : 

Sir:  I have  to  report  the  safe  return  of  Lieutenant  O’Rorke  (accom- 
panied by  Major  Beard)  from  an  examination  of  Long  Island  and  Elba 
Island.  I inclose  a memorandum  furnished  by  Lieutenant  O’Rorke  in 
advance  of  his  report.  The  position  near  the  upper  end  of  Long  Island 
is  favorable  for  the  erection  of  a battery  should  one  there  be  deemed  j 
necessary  or  advisable. 

In  my  report  of  last  evening  I suggested  the  expediency  of  building 
a causeway  to  Yenus  Point  (if  a battery  be  put  there),  connecting  with 
Mud  or  Wright  River.  I have  caused  the  line  running  from  Yenus 
Point  due  north  to  Mud  River  to  be  examined  to-day.  A causeway  can 
be  easily  constructed  over  that  line.  The  line  to  Wright  River  will  be 
examined  to-morrow  morning.  Even  if  the  Navy  cover  our  erection  of 
batteries  on  Yenus  Point,  we  want  a line  of  communication  with  the 
rear  other  than  by  water  through  Mud  or  Wright  Rivers,  inasmuch  as 
we  might  lose  the  control  of  the  mouths  of  these  streams  in  the  absence 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


329 


of  a naval  force.  This  would  certainly  be  easily  taken  from  us  as  re- 
gards Mud  River,  as  the  enemy’s  gunboats  could  sweep  it  without  coming 
within  range  of  Venus  Point  battery.  Moreover,  if  any  advance  move- 
ment should  meet  with  disaster,  and  we  should  be  under  the  necessity 
of  falling  back  with  the  Venus  Point  guns,  it  would  be  next  to  impos- 
sible to  take  them  off  via  Mud  or  Wright  Rivers  through  their  mouths. 
The  causeway  can  be  constructed  9 feet  wide  in  one  week  by  hurrying 
the  work. 

I am  still  of  the  opinion  that  Mud  River  can  be  deepened  very  much 
by  running  a side-wheel  steamer  up  and  down  the  stream.  The  bottom 
is  very  soft  and  the  tide  very  strong.  The  guns  have  not  been  put  in 
position  at  Wall’s  Cut. 

Captain  Hamilton  writes  on  this  matter: 

The  Unadilla  and  Pembina  are  both  within  the  Cut,  that  is,  this  side  of  it,  the  for- 
mer having  left  her  advanced  position. 

Captain  Hamilton’s  suggestion  to  tow  the  Keating  down  to  the  posi- 
tion occupied  by  Captain  Rodgers,  and  put  three  or  perhaps  four  guns 
in  working  order  on  her  deck,  I cordially  indorse,  provided  Captain 
Rodgers  will  take  charge  of  her  in  the  absence  of  any  towing  facilities 
of  our  own. 

I shall  return  to  Hilton  Head  to  morrow  morning  in  the  Mayflower. 
She  will  discharge  here  early  in  the  morning,  having  just  arrived  from 
the  Winfield  Scott.  I shall  set  my  force  at  work  cutting  stuff  for  the 
causeway  to-morrow  morning  in  anticipation  of  your  approval  of  this 
project. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier • General  and  Chief  Engineer . 

[Inclosure  No.  7.] 

Memorandum  by  Lieutenant  O’Rorlce. 

Left  Daufuskie  Island  at  4.30  p.  m.  on  29th  ; left  Unadilla  5.30  p.  m 
After  passing  south  end  Jones  Island  steered  due  west  and  landed 
about  100  yards  north  of  the  beacon  on  Long  Island  ; beacon  is  about 
one-half  way  from  one  end  to  the  other.  Found  a soil  of  dry  brown 
clay,  with  a substratum  of  black  mold ; surface  of  ground  about  2J  feet 
above  high  water.  Best  ground  and  best  position,  as  far  as  could  be 
determined  in  the  dark,  about  100  yards  south  of  the  north  point  of 
island.  Next  rowed  carefully  up  the  river  to  Elba  Island ; had  some 
difficulty  in  finding  it  in  consequence  of  inaccuracy  of  map.  Finally 
rowed  up  to  north  end  of  it,  landing  about  six  times  and  examining 
shore  and  adjacent  ground.  Found  shore  impracticable  for  landing 
without  causewaying  out;  ground  above  the  upper  half  of  island  all  a 
soft  marsh,  not  practicable  for  batteries.  Returned  to  a point  just 
south  of  mouth  of  Mud  River,  arriving  just  before  daylight.  Hauled 
the  boat  ashore  and  crossed  the  island  to  the  Georgia  side ; traveled 
about  1 mile  north  of  the  point  at  which  we  lauded.  Ground  on  Georgia 
side  overflowed  at  high  water  for  quite  a distance.  Tower  at  mouth  of 
Saint  Augustine  Creek  probably  shot  tower.  Let  the  men  sleep  an 
hour;  recrossed  the  Savannah,  and  arrived  at  1 p.  m.  of  30th. 

flnclosuro  No.  8.] 

Hdqrs.  Expeditionary  Corps,  Feb.  4, 1862. 
General  Gillmore,  Chief  Engineer,  Commanding : 

General  : Yours  is  received.  I am  just  from  the  Wabash.  Cap- 


330 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


tain  Rodgers  lias  received  orders  to  enter  at  once  and  cover  the  con- 
struction of  the  battery.  Expedition  No.  2 will  not  get  off  before  Thurs- 
day, Friday,  or  Saturday.  I’ll  let  you  know  in  due  time.  In  the  mean 
time  I shall  be  anxious  to  hear  of  the  success  in  putting  up  the  battery 
in  one  night.  It  will  do  you  eternal  honor.  If  Captain  Rodgers  retains 
all  his  gunboats  that  he  covers  you  with  I shall  probably  not  join  you; 
but  I shall  see.  Report  promptly,  what  use  can  be  made  of  Long  Island 
to  best  advantage.  We  shall  get  some  hulks  down  there  as  soon  as 
possible,  but  probably  not  till  after  Expedition  No.  2.  In  the  mean 
•while  suggest  to  Rodgers  and  Yiele  to  get  the  brig  from  the  Cut  down 
there  in  the  channel  between  Long  Island  and  Georgia  shore. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

If  you  have  any  time  before  Rodgers  gets  ready  (and  it  is  hoped  not) 
you  had  better  commence  causeway,  if  the  enemy  won’t  discover  you  too 
much. 

T.  W.  S. 


[Inclosure  No.  9.] 

Hdqrs.  Chief  Engineer’s  Office,  S.  C.; 

DaufusMe  Island , February  4,  1862 — £.30  a.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps , Hilton  Head , S.  C.  : 

General  : I have  to  report  my  arrival  here  last  night  at  10  o’clock 
in  a row-boat.  The  Mayflower  was  coaling  at  Seabrook  and  nearly 
through.  We  are  looking  for  her  here  now.  The  examination  of  Jones 
Island  from  Yenus  Point  to  Wright  River  (in  the  shortest  line)  develops 
the  fact  that  the  portion  of  Joues  Island  next  Wright  River,  extending 
about  one-quarter  of  a mile  from  the  stream,  is  very  low,  soft,  badly  cut 
up  with  creeks  and  marshy  spots,  and  is  unsuitable  for  a causeway.  No 
good  landing  place  cau  be  found  on  Wright  River  without  giving  an 
undue  length  to  the  causeway.  I therefore  have  made  up  my  mind  that 
if  a road  is  to  be  constructed  it  must  be  directed  upon  Mud  River.  We 
are  now  ready  to  commence  the  work  on  the  island.  Ten  thousand  poles 
of  5 to  6 inches  in  diameter  have  been  cut,  of  which  1,900  have  been 
transported  to  the  new  dock  or  wharf,  ready  to  go  on  board  of  lighters 
or  to  be  made  into  rafts,  as  circumstances  may  require.  About  1,800 
of  the  cut  poles  can  be  carried  to  the  shore  daily,  the  men  to  do  this 
themselves,  as  there  are  no  other  means  of  land  transportion  here  at 
present  that  can  be  put  upon  such  work.  The  average  distance  to  be 
carried  is  about  1 mile.  I await  orders  from  you  to  go  on  with  the 
causeway.  The  wharf  here  will  be  finished  to-day.  It  has  8 feet  water 
at  low  tide  at  the  head  of  it,  and  is  strong  enough  to  land  everything 
on  except  heavy  guns. 

The  gunboats  have  not  returned  from  New  River  yet.  I expect  to 
pull  up  in  that  direction  to-day.  Captain  Sears  takes  a party  to  Jones 
Island  to-day  to  cut  a wide  zigzag  swath  through  the  reeds  in  a line 
running  from  Mud  River  across  the  narrow  part  of  the  island  to  the 
Savannah,  in  order  that  a fire  communicated  to  the  reeds  at  the  upper 
end  of  the  island  shall  not  spread  over  the  portion  where  the  causeway 
is  to  be  run.  The  enemy  has  seen  us  in  Mud  River,  as  reported  by  con- 
trabands captured  yesterday,  and  may  watch  our  operations  closely. 
The  temptation  to  fire  the  long  grass  could  be  easily  gratified  at  any 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


331 


time,  but  would  probably  be  carried  into  effect  near  the  mouth  of  Mud 
River.  Lieutenant  O’Rorke  will  probably  come  to  Hilton  Head  to-day 
for  a few  hours  on  some  private  business,  and  will  report  himself  to  you. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier -General,  Chief  Engineer,  Engineer  Corps. 


[Inclosxxre  No.  10.] 

Daufuskie  Island,  S.  C.,  February  6,  1862. 
'Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Engineer  Corps , Hilton  Head , 8.  C. : 

General  : There  is  very  little  news  here  to  report.  The  gunboats 
have  made  no  move  forward,  not  having  yet  received  orders  to  do  so. 
Yesterday  I went  up  to  Eed  Bank  in  the  Hale  to  examine  the  works 
there.  They  possess  no  special  interest,  and  the  sketch  taken  by  Major 
Beard  will  perhaps  furnish  you  with  all  necessary  information.  The 
work  in  the  rear  was  intended  for  one  columbiad,  but  it  had  not  been 
put  in  position.  The  two  guns  in  the  other  work  had  been  removed. 
My  orderly  followed  me  up  New  Eiver  in  a row-boat.  As  he  approached 
Box’s  house  a squad  of  70  to  75  cavalry  appeared  on  the  beach  and 
opened  fire  on  the  boat.  They  were  all  mounted  and  equipped.  They 
remained  about  Box’s  place  until  the  gunboat  approached  on  her  return 
from  Eed  Bank.  They  then  left. 

The  day  before  yesterday,  as  my  men  were  cutting  a swath  across 
Jones  Island  to  prevent  the  spread  of  fire  3 men  were  observed  on  the 
upper  end  of  the  island,  one  of  them  being  up  a tree  looking  around. 
They  certainly  mistrust  something  in  that  direction.  The  transporta- 
tion of  the  poles  for  causeway  still  goes  on,  but  as  nearly  all  the  fatigue 
force  of  the  command  is  on  this  work  nothing  has  yet  been  done  on 
Jones  Island  in  the  way  of  laying  them.  I have,  however,  constructed 
a plank  walk  across  to  Venus  Point,  over  which  I can  transport,  by  hand 
or  in  barrows,  sand  bags  and  plank  for  the  platforms.  We  want  more 
force  here  if  a battery  is  to  be  erected  on  Long  Island  during  the  con- 
struction* of  the  one  on  Jones  Island.  The  laying  of  the  causeway  will 
be  commenced  to-day.  Would  it  not  be  proper  to  make  the  exchange 
of  Captain  Sears’  and  Captain  Place’s  companies  while  the  latter  is  in 
waiting  at  Seabrook?  I am  retaining  Captain  Sears  here  until  I hear 
from  you. 

Captain  Hamilton  and  myself  have  concluded  that  an  equal  division 
of  the  armament  brought  along  should  be  made  between  Venus  Point 
and  Long  Island,  leaving  out  the  brass  24-pounder  howitzer  altogether. 
General  Viele  approves  this. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMOEE, 

Brigadier -General  and  Chief  Engineer,  Engineer  Corps. 


[Inclosure  No.  11.] 

Daufuskie  Island,  S.  C., 

February  6,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

.Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps,  Hilton  Head,  8.  C. : 

General:  I have  nothing  new  to  report  this  p.  m.  It  is  so  rough 
and  windy  that  no  great  progress  will  be  made  to-day  in  transporting 


332 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

road  and  battery  materials  to  Yenus  Point.  An  examination  of  the 
upper  end  of  Bird  Island  will  be  made  to-night.  It  is  directly  opposite 
Venus  Point,  while  the  upper  end  of  Long  Island  is  somewhat  below. 

I do  not  object  to  Long  Island  for  a battery  simply  because  it  is  lower 
down  the  river  than  Venus  Point,  but  am  inclined  to  favor  it  on  that 
account,  as  we  can  keep  boats  attempting  to  pass  through  the  river 
longer  under  fire  than  if  the  batteries  were  directly  opposite  each  other. 
I have  just  returned  from  Venus  Point.  I propose  to  put  the  guns  there 
about  40  feet  apart,  with  traverses  between  them.  A longer  develop- 
ment would  unduly  increase  the  labor  of  constructing  the  levee  around 
the  battery  to  keep  out  the  water.  The  fatigue  parties  here  will  be  mostly 
engaged  in  carrying  over  to  Venus  Point  such  portions  of  the  battery 
material  as  will  forward  the  construction  of  the  work  while  the  Navy 
are  awaiting  their  orders.  I prefer  to  apply  the  force  in  this  way  than 
to  work  exclusively  on  the  causeway,  as  it  is  not  expected  that  the 
guns  will  be  carried  across  Jones  Island.  I propose  to  place  each  gun 
on  a grillage  of  poles  20  feet  square.  The  weight  per  square  foot  will 
be  less  thaii  15  pounds.  It  will  be  advisable  to  inclose  the  battery,  so 
that  it  can  resist  an  assault,  and  after  we  get  time  each  gun  can  be 
covered  over  to  secure  the  men  against  the  fragments  of  shells  explod- 
ing over  the  battery.  It  will  be  necessary  to  inclose  the  battery  with  a 
parapet,  at  any  rate,  in  order  to  keep  out  high  tides,  and  it  will  be  easy 
to  convert  this  parapet  'into  an  obstacle  that  will  require  some  time  to 

surmount.  _ , , , 

A rebel  boat  passed  down  Saint  Augustine  Creek  and  back  to-day. 
The  two  towers  near  the  mouth  of  Saint  Augustine  Creek  are  for  the 
telegraph  wires  to  pass  over  on,  as  I am  informed  by  contrabands  who 
worked  upon  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J 1 ’ Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier -General  Volunteers  and  Chief  Engineer. 

p.  S.— If  the  two  engineer  companies  for  Wassaw  are  to  be  retained 
long  on  the  Star  of  the  South  had  they  not  better  be  sent  up  here  (or 
at  least  one  of  them)  to  help  in  the  work  temporarily? 


[Inclosure  No.  12.] 

Chief  Engineer’s  Office  Expeditionary  Corps, 
BaufusHe  Island , 8.  0.,  February  9,  18G2. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Comdg.  U.  S.  Forces , Hilton  Head , S.  C. : 

General:  I have  to  report  no  important  change  in  the  position  of 
affairs  here,  so  far  as  tliev  relate  to  my  department,  since  my  communi- 
cation of  dav  before  yesterday.  We  are  still  in  condition— as  we  have 
been  for  the  last  thirteen  days— to  erect  and  put  in  serviceable  and  effi- 
cient readiness  for  action  batteries  on  Jones  and  Long  Islands  that 
will  thoroughly  blockade  the  Savannah  Biver  within  twenty-four  hours 
after  the  gunboats  enter  that  stream.  My  efforts  for  the  last  three  days 
have  been  directed  to  preparations  for  attaining  this  object  without  the 
assistance  of  the  Navy,  in  case  circumstances  should  arise  to  deprive  u s 
of  their  co-operation,  but  our  limited  means  of  transportation  on  this 
island  have  so  far  absorbed  the  available  strength  ot  the  fatigue  force 
in  carrying  poles  for  the  Jones  Island  causeway  that  the  actual  laying 
of  the  road  has  not  yet  been  commenced.  I have  a very  good  wheel- 
barrow track  across  the  island  to  Venus  Point,  I have  taken  as  much 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  333 

battery  material  there  as  I care  to  trust  in  so  exposed  a position  until 
the  road  on  which  to  transport  the  guns  is  completed  or  the  gunboats 
in  Savannah  River.  I have  also  a very  considerable  quantity  of  ma- 
terials ashore  at  the  landing  at  Mud  River.  The  balance  of  what  will 
be  required  for  the  Yenus  Point  battery  is  in  boats  within  half  an  hour’s 
row  of  the  Mud  River  landing,  so  that  I am  prepared  to  complete  the 
platforms  and  magazines  of  that  battery  within  six  hours  after  the  gun- 
boats enter  the  Savannah.  As  this  movement  is  certainly  expected  to 
take  place  very  soon,  perhaps  within  the  next  twenty-four  hours,  it  is 
not  presumed  that  the  guns  will  be  carried  over  the  causeway.  I am 
not  therefore  pushing  it  with  that  end  in  view,  but  shall  carry  it  for- 
ward with  as  little  delay  as  possible.  What  I expect  to  gain  by  land- 
ing battery  materials  on  Jones  Island  now  is  time,  for  as  soon  as  the 
lighters  are  left  at  Yenus  Point  with  the  guns  for  that  battery  the 
Mayflower  can  proceed  directly  to  Long  Island  with  the  materials  re- 
quired for  the  work  there.  I think  our  row-boats  on  Mud  River  have 
been  seen.  Our  gunboats  (except  one,  I believe)  passed  the  Cut  yester- 
day. I am  told  that  they  intend  to  try  the  Mud  River  passage  into  the 
Savannah.  The  Mayflower  hove  in  sight  last  evening,  but  still  remains 
near  the  Winfield  Scott. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brig.  Gen.  Vols .,  Chief  Engineer  Expeditionary  Corps. 


[Inclosure  No.  13.] 

Daufuskie  Island,  S.  C.,  Feb.  12, 1862. 

General  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Comdg.  Expeditionary  Corps , Hilton  Head , 8.  C. : 

General:  Yenus  Point  and  the  Savannah  passage  is  held  by  a six- 
gun  battery  erected  by  us  last  night.  If  everything  goes  on  well  Long 
Island  will  be  similarly  occupied  to-morrow  night.  I will  write  to- 
morrow more  in  detail. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier- General  and  Chief  Engineer. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  7.  1 Fort  Pulaski , Cockspur  Island , April  13,  1862. 

All  persons  of  color  lately  held  to  involuntary  service  by  enemies  of 
the  United  States  in  Fort  Pulaski  and  on  Cockspur  Island,  Georgia, 
are  hereby  confiscated  and  declared  free,  in  conformity  with  law,  and 
shall  hereafter  receive  the  fruits  of  their  own  labor.  Such  of  said  per- 
sons of  color  as  are  able-bodied  and  may  be  required  shall  be  employed 
in  the  quartermaster’s  department  at  the  rates  heretofore  established 
by  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  April  15, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham, 

Comdg.  Northern  District , Department  of  the  South  : 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  (finding  a constant  communication 


334 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


was  kept  up  between  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  and  the  enemy  and 
that  the  members  of  the  city  government  would  not  assist  me  in  pre- 
venting it)  I placed  the  city  under  martial  law  on  the  12th  instant. 
The  day  after  a re-enforcement  of  four  companies  of  my  regiment  ar-  1 
rived.  I should  have  replaced  the  city  officials  in  power  had  not  the 
feeling  among  the  citizens  been  that  they  desired  martial  law  to  still 
remain.  I am  pleased  to  be  able  to  report  that  no  ill-feeling  or  difficulty 
has  arisen  between  the  citizens  and  the  men  of  my  command,  and  that 
not  an  instance  of  any  insult  or  unpleasant  fee-ling  has  taken  place.  I 
have  prohibited  any  person  passing  the  line  of  my  command  with- 
out taking  the  oath  of  allegiance.  Fort  Marion  has  now  mounted  two 
8-inch  sea-coast  howitzers,  one  32-pounder  gun,  four  iron  6-pounder  guns, 
one  brass  6-pounder  gun,  one  21-pounder  siege  howitzer,  and  a Wiard 
rifled  gun.  Lieutenant  Tardy,  U.  S.  Corps  Engineers,  has  arrived  at 
this  post  and  taken  charge  of  putting  the  fort  in  a state  of  defense. 
Lieutenant  Tardy  intends  to  mount  two  8-inch  columbiads  on  the  fort. 
With  the  ordnance  stores  I have  drawn  a requisition  for  I can  defend 
the  post  against  all  the  enemy  nowT  in  arms  in  Florida.  I have  the 
honor  to  request  instructions  as  to  slaves  belonging  to  disloyal  men.  T 
have  retained  such  slaves,  furnishing  them  with  food  and  compelling 
them  to  wTork,  and  simply  excluding  other  slaves  from  the  fort.  This 
city  is  in  a most  lamentable  condition  with  respect  to  food.  I have  been 
compelled  to  issue  Government  provisions  to  families  to  prevent  them 
from  perishing  from  hunger.  I have  the  honor  to  request  instructions 
as  to  whether  such  issues  will  be  permitted.  Five  deserters  from  the 
enemy  have  come  in ; no  information  of  any  importance  has  been  got 
from  them,  except  that  one  of  the  Saint  Augustine  companies  wished  to 
lay  down  their  arms  and  surrender.  I have  used  every  effort  to  inform 
them  that  they  might  return  here  and  remain  unmolested. 

I take  the  liberty  of  suggesting  again  that  the  ordnance  stores  I have 
drawn  a requisition  for  are  very  necessary  for  the  defense  of  my  post. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

LOUIS  BELL, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  Fourth  Few  Hampshire  Volunteers , 

Commanding  Post  of  Saint  Augustine. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 
Hilton  Head , 8.  C .,  April  17,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  S.  F.  DuPont, 

TJ.  8.  Navy,  U.  8.  S.  Wabash,  Port  Royal  Harbor  : 

Sir  : I have  the  pleasure  of  saying  in  reply  to  your  letter  of  this  date 
that  there  will  be  no  objection  to  withdrawing  the  one  gunboat  as  you 
propose  from  Wassaw.  But  as  General  Hunter  and  myself  feel  that  it 
may  be  important  to  keep  the  enemy  on  the  alert  at  Savannah,  we  would 
be  glad  if  you  would  spare  as  manty  as  you  can  conveniently  of  those 
least  valuable  for  your  other  purposes,  which  boats  might,  without  ex- 
posure to  themselves,  by  constant  movements,  as  if  of  reconnaissance, 
if  so  directed  by  yourself,  keep  the  enemy  either  from  any  approaches 
toward  us  here  or  from  diverting  his  troops  to  Charleston. 

The  reconnaissance  or  the  affair  you  heard  of  it  seems  was  made  by 
the  order  of  Brigadier-General  Gillmore  to  Wilmington  Island  by  Lieu- 
tenant Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers,  escorted  by  400  men  of  Colonel 
Fenton’s  Eighth  Michigan.  They  lost  10  or  12  killed  and  35  wounded, 


Chap.  XXVl.} 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


335 


as  reported  to  me,  and  our  men  claim  to  have  driven  a regiment  of  800 
men  to  the  extreme  point  of  the  island,  holding  the  battle  ground  for 
three  hours  and  returning  unmolested.  I am  not  satisfied  yet  to  ex- 
press an  opinion  on  the  matter. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  C.,  April  18,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Commanding  Tybee  and  Fort  Pulaski , Ga.  : 

General  : The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  acknowledge  your 
report*  inclosing  the  details  of  the  reconnaissance  made  by  Lieutenant 
Wilson,  Topographical  Engineers,  under  your  orders  on  the  [16th  in- 
stant]. 

Although  presuming  you  had  reasons  for  ordering  that  reconnaissance 
which  are  not  stated  in  your  report  or  otherwise  known  to  him,  he  feels 
it  due  to  himself  to  say  that,  notwithstanding  he  had  received  informa- 
tion that  the  enemy  were  in  force  to  the  amount  of  at  least  two  regi- 
ments on  that  island,  he  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  attack  them  then 
beyond  our  marshes  and  next  their  main  land.  He  had  therefore,  as 
you  recollect,  on  the  day  after  the  surrender  of  Fort  Pulaski,  directed 
you  yourself  to  send  the  Eighth  Michigan  Begiment  to  Fort  Pulaski 
to  assist,  with  a company  each  of  engineers  and  artillery,  in  putting 
that  work  in  a state  of  defense  as  early  as  possible  and  to  dismantle 
and  destroy  all  the  batteries  on  Tybee  Island,  and  to  forward  all  the 
ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  to.  this  post  that  you  did  not  deem  it  nec- 
essary to  retain  at  Fort  Pulaski  for  its  complete  armament.  He  also 
directed  that  the  Forty-sixth  New  York  Begiment  alone  should  be  left 
to  garrison  Tybee  Island,  and  that  the  other  troops  should  be  sent  to 
Daufuskie  to  report  to  General  Yiele,  and  the  balance  of  the  forces 
then  ordered  to  this  post  to  report  to  Col.  Bobert  Williams. 

In  conclusion,  the  general  desirps  to  say  that  while  not  doubting  that 
this  reconnaissance  has  been  ordered  from  your  best  motives  and  judg- 
ment, and  that  he  is  not  disposed  to  do  otherwise  than  praise  it,  he  still 
is  compelled  to  feel  that,  as  far  as  at  present  informed,  the  results  that 
appear  to  have  been  anticipated  or  actually  gathered  from  it,  either  from 
information  gained  or  the  known  injury  to  the  enemy,  are  not  a com- 
pensation for  the  great  loss  to  ourselves  which  has  been  suffered  in  this 
affair.  It  is  trusted,  however,  that  your  detailed  report  will  enable  the 
matter  to  be  better  und^jstood. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  ELY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  April  21,  1862. 

Capt.  A.  B.  Ely, 

A,  A.  A.  G .,  Hdqrs.  Northern  Hist.,  Hilton  Head , S.  C.: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  after  a tedious  and  pro- 
tracted passage  I reached  this  place  to-day  and  have  assumed  the  com- 

* See  report  of  General  Gillmore  of  skirmish  at  Whitemarsh  Island,  G^.,  p.  5. 


336  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

rnand.  Soon  after  my  arrival,  and  after  conferring  with  Colonel  Fel- 
lows, to  whom  1 am  indebted  for  much  valuable  information  concerning 
this  command,  I visited  the  principal  stations  of  the  advanced  troops, 
and  examined,  so  far  as  time  permitted,  the  portion  of  the  island  lying 
nearest  to  Little  Edisto,  and  also  that  island,  as  well  as  a small  island 
still  beyond,  called  Whooping  Island,  over  which  the  road  passes  lead- 
ing to  Dawho  Ferry.  The  troops  of  the  command  I find  to  be  dis- 
tributed as  follows : 

Third  New  Hampshire  Eegiment  at  Mitchell’s  plantation,  marked  A 
on  the  sketch  herewith,*  which  furnishes  pickets  of  one  company  at  &, 
one  company  at  c,  two  companies  at  d. 

Forty-seventh  New  York  Eegiment  on  Little  Edisto  Island,  which  it 
pickets,  besides  supplying  a guard  of  100  men  at  the  lower  landing, 
marked  e. 

Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  Eegiment  near  lower  landing. 

Fifty- fifth  Pennsylvania  Eegiment  near  lower  landing,  except  two 
companies,  which  are  serving  with  the  Third  New  Hampshire. 

One  company  of  Massachusetts  cavalry  is  posted  not  far  from  the  two 
regiments  last  named,  but  I have  not  yet  visited  its  camp.  The  bat- 
tery of  the  Ehode  Island  regiment  is  divided,  and  is  serving  with  the 
Third  New  Hampshire  and  Forty-seventh  New  York  Eegiments. 

At  Otter  Island,  which  I visited  on  my  way  here,  are  two  companies 
of  the  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Eegiment ; two  other  companies  are  on 
Fenwick’s  Island  and  one  on  Eaccoon  Island. 

The  headquarters  of  the  command  are  at  Seabrook’s  house,  marked /. 

From  the  foregoing  it  will  be  perceived  that  the  command  is  much 
scattered,  covering  much  more  ground  and  being  much  more  distant 
from  mutual  support  than  could  be  desired.  My  first  impulse  was  to 
concentrate  it  so  that  the  whole  could  act  together  in  the  event  of 
attack  ; but  the  reasons  assigned  for  the  present  distribution,  referring 
mainly  to  the  topographical  features  of  the  position,  have  determined 
me  to  await  further  examination  before  making  a change. 

The  information  regarding  the  position  and  strength  of  the  enemy’s 
forces  is  very  indefinite.  In  general  terms,  however,  he  is  in  possession 
of  the  territory  on  the  right,  ascending  the  North  Edisto  River  to  the 
Dawho  and  up  the  Dawho  to  the  South  Edisto,  his  scouts  or  pickets 
showing  themselves  occasionally  on  Jeliossee  Island. 

Pickets  are  maintained  by  the  rebels  on  Seabrook  Island,  at  Eock- 
ville,  at  the  mouth  of  Seadenwak  Creek,  at  Bear’s  Bluff,  and  at  White 
Point  opposite,  at  Dawho  Ferry,  and  at  the  junction  of  the  Dawho  and 
South  Edisto  Eivers,  his  main  positions  being  at  Willstown,  Adams 
Bun,  Church  Flats,  and  Legareville. 

Colonel  Fellows  reports  that  he  has  not  been  able  to  obtain  any  infor- 
mation of  importance  in  relatioh  to  the  country,  the  routes  and  the 
positions,  and  strength  of  the  enemy  between  this  point  and  Charleston. 
As  he  goes  to  Hilton  Head  he  will  be  able  to  explain  personally  in  ref- 
erence to  this  and  other  matters.  Only  one  contraband  has  come  in 
since  he  assumed  the  command. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding.  | 

P.  S. — Colonel  Fellows  will  explain  the  reason  for  keeping  the  de-j 
tachment  of  100  men  of  the  Forty-seventh  New  York  at  the  lowei 
landing. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


337 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , April  22,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  1 have  the  honor  to  inclose  you  an  editorial  from  the  Savannah 
Eepublican  of  yesterday.  From -this  you  will  see  that  they  are  fully 
aware  of  our  situation.  From  the  best  information  I can  obtain  the 
enemy  have  30,000  at  Savannah,  25,000  at  Charleston,  and  10,000  at  Au- 
gusta— 65,000 — which  they  can  concentrate  at  any  one  point  in  twenty- 
four  hours.  Why  they  do  not  attack  us,  knowing  as  they  do  our  situa- 
tion, is  a mystery  to  me.  We  have  less  than  16,000  men  now  ready  for 
the  field  scattered  along  the  coast  for  200  miles.  Hoping  daily  for  re- 
enforcements, and  hoping  the  enemy  might  be  ignorant  of  our  situation^ 
I have  been  reluctant  to  disturb  the  present  disposition  of  the  troops, 
knowing  the  bad  effect  of  abandoning  places  once  occupied.  I know 
you  are  anxious  to  send  me  re-enforcements  as  soon  as  it  is  in  your 
power,  but  if  you  are  unable  to  do  so  I shall  deem  it  my  imperative 
duty  to  somewhat  concentrate  my  command,  holding  only  on  this  coast 
Saint  Augustine,  Fernandina,  Pulaski,  and  Hilton  Head.  With  proper 
re-enforcements  1 confidently  hope  to  report  to  you  in  a few  weeks  the 
fall  of  Sumter,  Charleston,  and  Savannah. 

I inclose  a note  this  moment  received  from  Beaufort.  The  enemy  have 
also  appeared  in  force  on  Pinckney  Island. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  HTJNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 

[Inclosures.] 

All  Quiet. — We  received  not  a word  of  news  yesterday  by  tele- 
graph from  any  quarter  up  to  dark.  A profound  quiet  seems  to  have 
rested  over  our  armies  at  all  points  for  the  last  few  days.  It  may  be 
and  probably  is  the  awful  stillness  that  precedes  the  storm.  The  rela- 
tive positions  of  the  two  combatants,  both  in  the  West  and  East,  are  such 
that  a collision  is  obliged  to  result  in  the  course  of  a very  few  days. 
Both  parties,  too,  are  ready  for  a grand  strife  that  is  to  determine  the 
fate  of  the  great  American  revolution.  Mighty  consequences  hang  upon 
the  movements  in  the  Peninsula  and  in  West  Tennessee,  and  we  hope 
the  Southern  troops  are  fully  alive  to  the  responsibility  resting  upon 
them. 

On  the  banks  of  the  Savannah  all  seems  quiet  too.  The  enemy,  few 
in  numbers,  are  still  lying  in  our  lower  river,  and  so  far  as  seen  no  re- 
enforcements have  reached  them.  They  have  not  a force  equal  to  an 
attack  on  the  city,  and  its  augmentation  would  seem  inconsistent  with 
the  pressing  demands  from  other  points  at  the  present  time.  McClellan 
will  need  every  man  he  can  draw  into  the  field  for  his  operations  in  the 
Peninsula,  and  the  Federal  exigencies  out  West  are  equally  pressing 
for  all  the  troops  at  their  command.  Meanwhile  we  are  not  idle.  The 
military  authorities  here  are  using  all  means  in  their  power  to  strengthen 
our  defenses  and  make  them  impregnable.  Come  in  what  numbers  he 
may,  the  enemy  will  have  his  hands  full  in  his  march  upon  Savannah. 

A gunboat  came  up  Freeborn’s  Cut  yesterday  forenoon  to  within 
about  2 miles  of  our  battery  at  Carston’s  Bluff,  but  no  gun  was  fired  on 
either  side.  A Federal  propeller  also  came  up  the  river  yesterday  and 
fired  a shot  in  the  direction  of  Mackay’s  Point,  but  it  fell  far  short  of 
the  mark. 

22  r r — yol  xiy 


338  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XXVL 

Beaufort,  April  22, 1862. 

Lieutenant  Keenan: 

The  rebels  have  been  shelling  our  troops  at  the  ferry  since  5 o’clock 
a.  m.  Our  battery  has  just  gone  out. 

HOWARD, 

Lieutenant. 


The  ferry  referred  to  in  the  above  note  is  Port  Royal  Ferry,  at  the 


north  end  of  Port  Royal  Island. 


D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General.  Commanding. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter  commanding,  , 
for  April  30,  1862;  headquarters  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


Command. 


Department,  staff --  - - - - W-'I' ' V 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham  commanding  Northern  District: 

Daufnskie',  Jones, "and  Bird  Inlands,  Brig.  Gen.  E.  L.  Vieie  commanding: 

Staff 

Command 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  1. 1.  Stevens: 

Staff 

Command  . - 

Fort  Edisto  and  Otter  Islands,  Brig.  Gen.  H.  G.  Wright: 

Staff 

Command .----- ----- 

Tybeo  and  Cockspur  Islands, „Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore: 

Staff 

Command 

Hilton  Head  and  Fort  Welles,  Col.  Robert  Williams 

Fornandina,  Fla.,  Col.  It.  Rich 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  Lieut.  Col.  Louis  Bell 

Fort  Seward,  S.  C.,  Lieut.  Col.  S.  R.  Bucklin 


Total. 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

1 

Officers. 

Men. 

12 

12 

4 

4 

7 

7 

113 

2, 662 

3,  070 

7 

7 

127 

3, 1.44 

3,  874 

7 

7 

135 

3,265 

3,  616 

6 

6 

85 

1,  832 

2,133 

102 

2,  331 

2,  967 

37 

979 

1,123 

2 

64 

71 

6 

73 

92 

650 

14,  350 

16,  989 

This  report  embraces  only  the  troops  in  the  Northern  District  of  the  department.  No  return  has  aa 
yet  been  received  from  Tortugas,  Key  West,  or  Fort  Pickens. 


Hdqrs.  Western  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  May  1,  1862. 

Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  U.  S.  Vols.,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  South: 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  inclosed  copies  of 
reports  that  I have  made  to  the  Headquarters  of  the  Army,  Washing-  j 
ton,  and  correspondence  between  flag-officers  Farragut  and  McKean, 
Generals  Butler  and  Brannan,  and  myself  relative  to  military  affairs  i 
in  the  Department  of  Florida.*  As  the  best  mode  of  correctly  informing  I 
Major-General  Hunter,  commanding  Department  of  the  South,  of  the  - 
situation  of  my  command  at  this  time  and  the  relations  existing  be- 
tween it  and  the  rebels  on  the  opposite  side,  as  an  apparent  change  has 
taken  place  since  my  report  to  the  War  Department  dated  Headquar- 
ters Department  of  Florida,  April  24,  1862,  I will  add  that  I was  in- 

* Reference  is  probably  to  correspondence  printed  in  Series  I,  Vol,  VI. 


Chai*.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


339 


formed  some  time  since  and  again  very  recently,  by  a refugee  who 
escaped  three  days  ago  from  the  rebel  side,  that  the  Governor  of  Ala- 
bama keeps  a reserve  of  about  6,000  men  at  Pollard  (where  there  is  an 
arsenal  or  depot  for  powder  and  munitions  of  war),  about  35  miles  by 
rail  from  Pensacola,  these  troops,  &c.,  to  be  sent  to  Mobile  or  Pensacola 
when  either  place  is  attacked.  The  report  that  the  rebels  opposite  had 
abandoned  their  line  of  defense,  forts,  batteries,  navy-yard,  and  Pen- 
sacola, is  unfounded.  Prom  my  own  observation  and  the  best  informa- 
tion I have  been  able  to  obtain  they  have  never  abandoned  their  forts, 
batteries,  &c.,  opposite,  but  have  always  kept  there  one  regiment  of 
old  troops — a Mississippi  regiment,  about  800  or  1,000  strong,  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Jones,  a graduate  of  West  Point,  which  was  soon 
re-enforced  by  2,000  or  3,000  new  levies,  armed  with  rides  and  shot- 
guns. The  strength  of  the  enemy,  however,  does  not  consist  in  numbers, 
but  in  his  position,  forts,  &c.,  and  having  but  a small  force  against  him, 
occupying  a defensive  position  on  an  island  separated  by  a broad  sheet 
of  water,  with  no  suitable  transportation  nor  naval  co-operation.  The 
Navy  has  not  had  for  the  past  two  months  any  vessel  of  war  off  this 
harbor  that  could  assist  me  in  any  offensive  movement,  and  none  what- 
ever except  the  sloop  of  war  Yincennes,  and  she  but  a small  portion  of 
the  time. 

I will  act  on  the  offensive  as  soon  as  I have  the  means  of  doing  so; 
till  then  it  would  be  folly  to  attempt  it,  if  not  impossible  to  do  so.  I 
desire  to  call  the  attention  of  General  Hunter  to  the  great  necessity  of 
furnishing  my  chief  quartermaster  with  a steamboat  of  200  or  300  tons, 
drawing  not  over  10  feet  of  water,  for  a dispatch  boat,  to  tow  dats  with 
troops  on  board,  &c.,  and  some  additional  surf-boats  and  oars. 

I have  under  my  command  about  2,000  men,  on  an  island,  and  not  a 
steamboat  or  sail  vessel  of  any  kind,  and  not  surf-boats  enough  to  land 
stores  for  the  command.  I directed  my  chief  quartermaster  to  require 
of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  a steamboat  from  200  to  300  tons 
burden  for  a dispatch  boat,  and  twelve  surf-boats  30  feet  long,  and  one 
hundred  oars  15  feet  long,  in  February  last,  but  have  received  no  re- 
sponse. 

When  Flag-officer  Farragut  has  taken  New  Orleans  his  squadron  will 
be  available  to  co-operate  with  the  Army  against  Mobile  and  Pensacola; 
both  places  should  be  attacked,  or  one  threatened  and  the  other  at- 
tacked, at  the  same  time,  on  account  of  the  easy  communication  between 

them. 

I inclose  a letter*  of  mine  to  Brigadier-General  Brannan  relative  to 
his  sending  one  or  two  regiments  to  me  from  Key  West.  I shall  want 
more  troops  if  I take  the  offensive. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  ABNOLD, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  8.  Volunteers , Commanding . 


Headquarters, 

JEdisto  Island , 8.  (7.,  May  3,  1862. 

Capt.  A.  B.  Ely, 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  Hdqrs.  Northern  Dist .,  Hilton  Head , 8.  C. : 
Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  nothing  of  interest  has 
occurred  within  the  limit  of  my  command  since  the  date  of  my  last 
communication. 


Not  found. 


34.0  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

Intelligence  received  through  contrabands  indicates  that  the  enemy 
has  no  force  of  any  importance  at  Willstown  or  in  the  region  to  the 
westward  of  that  place  and  below  the  railroad,  as  they  agree  that 
the  troops  were  sent  off  by  railroad  soon  after  the  fall  of  Pulaski. 
The  enemy  still  keeps  up  his  force  at  Adams  Run,  but  his  strength 
I cannot  ascertain.  It  probably  does  not  exceed  two  regiments, 
however. 

On  the  29th  instant  Captain  Rhind,  senior  naval  officer  on  this  sta- 
tion, made  a very  dashing  and  successful  reconnaissance  of  the  Dawho 
River  in  the  gunboat  Hale,  Captain  Gillis,  attacking  and  capturing  a 
battery  of  the  enemy  mounting  two  24-pounder  guns  without  the  loss 
of  a man.  This  battery,  situated  on  Griinball’s  estate,  on  the  north  side 
of  the  Dawho  River,  and  about  2 miles  below  its  junction  with  the 
South  Edisto,  is  represented  by  Captain  Rhind  to  have  been  well  built 
and  susceptible  of  a much  stronger  defense  than  was  made  by  the  en- 
emy. As  it  stood  some  300  yards  from  the  bank  of  the  river,  with  soft 
marsh  intervening,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  bring  off  the  guns,  and 
he  therefore  burned  the  carriages  and  platform,  after  disabling  one  of 
the  guns  by  firing  the  other  against  it  and  spiking  both  with  files.  The 
powder  he  brought  away.  As  the  existence  and  position  of  this  bat- 
tery was  known  I was  desirous  of  aiding,  by  a land  force,  in  its  cap- 
ture; but  as  Captain  Rhind  had  as  strong  a force  of  his  own  as  could 
be  used  to  advantage  no  troops  were  sent.  On  his  return  he  was  at- 
tacked by  the  infantry  and  field  artillery  of  the  enemy  at  a point  below 
the  site  of  the  battery  where  the  fast  land,  covered  with  woods,  ap- 
proaches close  to  the  bank.  The  position  seemed  to  have  been  well 
chosen,  and  it  is  almost  a miracle  that  no  one  on  board  was  hit.  One  of 
his  guns  was  partially  disabled  by  a shot  from  the  enemy’s  artillery  and 
another  shot  passed  through  the  smoke-stack  of  the  steamer.  The  es- 
cape from  all  casualties  seems  to  have  been  due  to  tbe  prudent  forecast 
of  Captain  Rhind  in  covering  his  men,  he  having  suspected  that  an 
attack  might  be  made  on  him  at  that  very  point.  The  darkness  likewise 
favored  him.  As  he  returned  the  fire  from  his  broadside  guns,  loaded 
with  canister,  shrapnel,  and  shell,  it  is  probable  that  the  enemy  suffered 
severely. 

I have  not  been  able  to  obtain  any  late  information  in  regard  to 
the  enemy’s  force  between  this  and  Charleston.  No  contrabands 
have  come  in  from  that  quarter  since  I arrived  here,  and  it  is  next  to 
impossible  to  get  intelligence  through  scouts  sent  out,  as  the  enemy 
occupies  all  the  landing  places  with  pickets.  No  reconnaissance  in 
force  has  been  attempted  for  fear  of  exciting  the  suspicion  of  the  ene- 
my in  regard  to  our  designs,  and  I shall  not  attempt  to  gain  informa- 
tion in  that  way  without  the  sanction  of  General  Benham.  This  I 
conceive  to  be  in  accordance  with  his  wishes,  as  expressed  to  me  in 
conversation. 

Some  indications  of  malarious  diseases  seem  to  have  presented  them- 
selves amongst  the  troops  on  the  upper  end  of  the  island  and  at  Little 
Edisto,  and  it  may  become  necessary  to  withdraw  the  force  to  the  lower 
part  of  the  island  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  sea.  Nothing  will  be 
done  in  this  matter,  however,  until  more  certain  indications  of  uuhealthi- 
ness  manifest  themselves. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- Genera  ?,  Com manding. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  3 J 1 

Washington,  May  6, 1862. 

John  Tucker,  Esq.,  Fort  Monroe: 

Please  detain  until  further  orders  all  the  transportation  that  may  be 
at  Fort  Monroe,  Shipping  Point,  or  elsewhere  in  that  vicinity,  and  re- 
port how  much  transportation  there  is  fit  for  a movement  upon  Charles- 
ton, S.  C.,  and  how  much  there  is  fit  for  any  other  purpose.  Give  this 
immediate  attention. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON. 


General  Orders,  i Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Souih, 

No.  11.  f Hilton  Head , Fort  Royal , S.  C.,  May  9,  1862. 
The  three  States  of  Georgia,  Florida,  and  South  Carolina,  comprising 
the  Military  Department  of  the  South,  having  deliberately  declared 
themselves  no  longer  under  the  protection  of  the  United  States  of 
America,  and  having  taken  up  arms  against  said  United  States,  it  be- 
came a military  necessity  to  declare  martial  law.  This  was  accordingly 
done  on  the  25th  day  of  April,  1862.  Slavery  and  martial  law  in  a free 
country  are  altogether  incompatible ; the  persons  in  these  three  States, 
Georgia,  Florida,  and  South  Carolina,  heretofore  held  as  slaves,  are 
therefore  declared  forever  free.* 

By  command  of  Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

[ED.  W.  SMITH,] 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Dept.,  Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington , D . C.,  May  10,  1862. 

Capt.  C.  E.  Fuller, 

Assistant  Quartermaster  Volunteers , Port  Royal , 8.  C. : 

Captain  : A copy  of  your  letter  of  the  3d  instant  to  Colonel  Tomp- 
kins, assistant  quartermaster-general,  New  York,  has  been  forwarded 
to  this  office,  in  which  you  state,  “ It  is  proposed  to  have  the  steamers 
Ben  De  Ford,  McClellan,  and  Atlantic  run  a weekly  line  between  Port 
Royal  and  New  York,”  &c.,  and  that  by  direction'  of  General  Benham, 
commanding,  you  sent  the  Ben  De  Ford  to  New  York  on  the  3d  instant, 
ordering  her  to  leave  that  port  on  Wednesday,  May  14,  unless  some 
great  emergency  or  unavoidable  accident  occurs. 

The  authority  of  the  military  commander  at  Port  Royal  does  not 
extend  to  steamers  in  New  York  Harbor. 

You  should  discharge  the  loads  of  the  expensive  steamers  at  Port 
Royal  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  hasten  them  back  to  New  York,  where 
they  will  be  subject  to  the  order  of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department,  to 
return  to  Port  Royal  or  not,  as  the  general  public  service  may  require. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster- General. 


Headquarters, 

Edisto  Island , South  Carolina , May  15,  1862. 

Col.  J.  H.  Jackson, 

Comdg.  Third  Regiment  New  Hampshire  Infantry  (. MitchelVs ) : 
Corporal  Wertz,  u the  old  scout,”  has  just  come  in  with  a report  that 
* The  correspondence  resulting  from  this  order  will  he  printed  in  Series  III,  Yol.  II. 


342  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI.  i 

tlie  rebels  landed  to-day  on  Bonyhall  Island,  near  Simmons’  place,  with 
a force  that  he  estimates  at  500  infantry  and  100  cavalry,  and  came  | 
near  capturing  him  at  Colonel  Morris’  place,  where  he  then  was.  He 
also  tells  me  that  he  has  made  the  same  report  to  you  and  to  Major 
Bedel,  so  that  you  will  both  be  on  the  lookout  for  any  further  move- 
ments of  the  enemy. 

Assuming  the  general  truth  of  the  report,  I must  confess  that  the 
story  of  the  100  cavalry  taken  across  the  South  Edisto  (or  Pon  Pon) 
Biver  seems  to  me  doubtful,  for  I cannot  conceive  any  reason  the  enemy  j 
can  have  for  such  a force  on  that  island.  Yet  the  report  should  not  be  i 
disregarded,  and  should  prompt  us  to  increased  watchfulness. 

If  there  be  any  truth  in  the  statement,  which  I can  hardly  doubt,  it  i 
shows  the  enemy  to  be  active.  Let  me  know  by  a mounted  messenger  j 
if  any  further  demonstration  is  made  by  the  enemy. 

Your  report  of  this  morning,  inclosing  one  from  Major  Bedel  to  you, 
has  been  received.  Major  Bedel’s  advance  and  demonstration  upon 
Jehossee  Island  yesterday  was  of  course  without  any  authority  from 
me,  as  any  instructions  of  that  character,  or  indeed  any  other,  would 
have  been  given  through  you.  I assume  that  the  conduct  of  Major 
Bedel  was  prompted  by  the  most  praiseworthy  motives,  but  it  cannot  I 
be  approved,  as  it  was  in  open  disregard  of  the  well-known  military  ; 
principle  that  no  forward  movement  or  demonstration  must  be  made  j 
without  the  sanction  of  the  commander  of  the  forces.  A major-general  , 
commanding  a division  of  our  Army  would  not  make  a movement  upon 
the  enemy  or  send  out  a party  for  a forced  reconnaissance  without  the 
sanction  of  the  general  commanding  all  the  forces,  as  an  act  of  this  : 
kind  might  involve  the  most  serious  consequences,  such  as  bringing  on 
a general  action  when  it  was  not  desired  or  disturb  the  plans  of  a cam-  ; 
paign.  Other  ill  consequences  flowing  from  such  unauthorized  pro- 
ceedings can  be  readily  imagined.  Should  Major  Bedel  think  at  any  ; 
time  any  particular  movement  is  desirable  he  should  present  his  views,  i 
so  that  if  approved  the  movement  may,  if  necessary,  be  supported.  I : 
do  not  mean  to  say  that  an  officer  in  Major  Bedel’s  position  cannot  i 
send  out  reconnoitering  parties  to  ascertain  the  presence  of  an  enemy,  j 
such  a course  being  both  proper  and  necessary  to  his  own  security,  but 
this  is  a very  different  thing  from  moving  with  his  main  force  several 
miles  to  the  front,  as  I understand  to  have  been  done  yesterday. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  C.,  May  10,  1862. 

General  A.  H.  Terry: 

Dear  Sir  : In  consequence  of  the  violation  of  the  flag  of  truce  on 
the  14th  instant  by  the  seizure  of  our  boat’s  crew  while  on  an  errand 
of  mercy  to  the  rebels,  and  properly  under  such  a flag  of  truce,  you  are 
hereby  directed  to  seize  and  hold  all  of  their  parties  coming  to  or  near 
our  lines  on  any  pretense  whatsoever  until  said  boat  and  boat’s  crew 
shall  have  been  returned.  If  these  men  are  not  returned  by  the  17th,  if 
you  can  get  up  an  expedition  in  safety  and  secrecy  to  capture  the  picket 
of  the  rebels  upon  Saint  Augustine  Creek  at  its  mouth  you  are  hereby 
authorized  to  do  so,  and  a written  notice  may  be  left  to  the  command- 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


343 


OitAP.  XXVI.] 

i.. o-  officer  of  the  rebels  stating  that  these  prisoners,  sueli  as  you  may 
capture  will  be  held  responsible  for  the  safe  return  of  our  men,  and 
that  until  their  return  no  flags  of  truce  or  other  communication  can  be 
permitted  with  men  who  have  so  grossly  violated  the  laws  ot  war. 

The  pretense  of  the  absence  of  a commissioned  officer  or  ot  the  national 
flag,  while  a white  flag  was  flying,  being  considered  mere  subtertuges 
to  cover  their  base  intention  and  conduct. 

Bv  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham  : ri 

A..  D.  JtljJJ  JL 

Aide-de-Camp  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

COCKSPUR,  DAUFUSKIE,  AND  TYBEE  ISLANDS, 

Fort  Pulaski , May  20,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham,  7 „ 

Comdg.  Northern  District,  Department  of  the  bouth  : 

General:  The  dismantling  of  the  Jones  Island  battery  was  com- 
pleted last  night.  Four  of  the  guns  are  now  here.  The  scow  m which 
the  other  two  are  is  aground  at  the  head  of  Cockspur  Island,  but  will 
be  got  down  at  high  tide.  The  Mayflower  is  now  towing  down  the 
hulk  When  she  has  brought  it  to  the  dock  1 shall  send  her  to  Dau- 
fuskie  for  the  schooner  there  to  take  the  guns.  I have  given  directions 
to  have  the  engineer  tools  collected  at  Tybee  and  placed  on  board  the 
Ellen  In  accordance  with  your  instructions  of  the  17th  instant  the 
balloon  was  inflated  day  before  yesterday  with  the  intention  of  send- 
ing it  up  yesterday.  The  Mayflower  being  otherwise  occupied,  1 did 

not  send  it  up.  „ _ , , ,T  i 

Having  received  your  letter  of  yesterday,  I sent  word  to  Mr.  Stark- 
weather that  the  balloon  would  not  be  sent  up  to-day.  He,  however, 
misunderstanding  mv  message,  and  thinking  that  I meant  to  say  only 
that  the  steamer  would  not  take  it  up  the  river  or  creek,  made  an  as- 
cension from  here.  This  ascension  has  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  two 
new  rebel  camps,  one  on  each  side  of  the  river,  within  supporting  dis- 
tance of  the  pickets.  Mr.  O’Rorke  has  been  up,  and  thinks  that  the 
one  on  the  south  bank  of  the  river  is  at  or  this  side  of  Four  Mile  I oint, 
and  is  large  enough  to  contain  four  or  five  companies.  The  other  is 
opposite  to  it  or  a little  higher  up,  and  possibly  is  on  one  of  the  islands. 

I think  it  probable  that  the  pickets  themselves  as  well  as  their  sup- 
ports have  been  strengthened.  It  would  not  have  been  possible  for 
me  to  organize  a boat  expedition  for  to-night  on  anything  like  the  scale 
which  you  mentioned.  I could  not  collect  and  prepare  the  boats  m time. 
Were  this  otherwise,  I should  not  fee}  at  liberty  to  proceed  after  the 
discovery  of  this  morning  until  I hud  reported  it  to  you  and  received 
further  instructions,  for  the  difficulty  of  the  undertaking  appears  to  me 
to  be  very  much  increased  by  the  additional  force  which  has  been  placed 
there.  I shall  proceed  to  get  the  boats  ready  in  case  you  shall  think  it 
best  to  go  on.  I might  make  a suggestion  ; it  would  be  that  if  a few 
gunboats  could  be  spared  temporarily,  either  from  Wassaw  Sound  or 
Port  Royal,  to  go  up  the  river  with  the  Mayflower  and  the  balloon,  keep- 
ing just  out  of  the  range  of  the  batteries,  and  if  at  the  last  moment,  be- 
fore our  operations  at  the  northward  commence,  all  the  small  steamers 
which  could  be  spared  were  to  go  up  with  empty  schooners  m tow  of 
these  latter,  having  enough  men  on  board  of  them  to  give  them  the 
appearance  of  large  transports  with  troops,  sufficient  alarm  could  be 


344 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


created  to  check  for  the  time  any  rc  enforcement  of  Charleston  from 
Savannah,  and  a strong  impression  would  be  created  that  Savannah  is 
the  point  of  contemplated  attack.  Additional  means  of  creating  alarm 
would  be  to  arrange  the  hulk  of  one  of  our  very  large  lighters  (some  70 
feet  in  length)  with  a pent  roof  of  boards,  blacken  it  with  coal  tar,  make 
port-holes,  and  put  in  u Quaker”  guns — in  short  make  a sham  iron  float- 
ing battery,  and  send  it  up  with  the  steamer  and  gunboats.  We  can 
easily  construct  such  a sham  battery  in  two  days  should  such  a plan 
meet  with  your  approbation. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  H.  TERRY, 

Brigadier- General. 


Hdqrs.  Southern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Key  West , Fla.,  May  22,  1862. 

Lieut.  E.  W.  Smith, 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  Department  of  the  South , Port  Royal , S.  G.: 

Sir:  On  yesterday  the  transport  steamer  Mississippi  arrived  here 
from  New  Orleans  with  dispatches  from  Maj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler,  com- 
manding Department  of  the  Gulf,  requesting  me  to  send  him  two  regi- 
ments from  my  command  for  operations  there;  also  that  I might  furnish 

500.000  rations.  As  the  Department  of  the  South  has  been  created 
since  the  instructions  of  the  general-in-chief,  in  February  last,  I of 
course  informed  General  Butler  that  the  regiments  could  not  be  sent  to 
him  without  the  consent  of  Major-General  Hunter.  I have  ordered 

200.000  rations  to  be  shipped,  as  I can  spare  them,  and  General  Butler 
fears  he  may  run  short  before  supplies  can  be  sent  him  from  the  North. 

The  organization  of  the  Department  of  Key  West  was,  as  the  gen- 
eral commanding  must  be  aware,  for  a specific  purpose,  against  an  un- 
expected attack  from  a great  naval  power;  and!  know  the  Government 
did  not  expect  either  Key  West  or  Fort  Jefferson  to  be  weakened  by  the 
removal  permanently  of  any  large  number  of  troops.  Supplies  for  4,000 
men  for  two  years  were  ordered  to  both  points  before  I was  assigned  to 
the  command,  and  I was  instructed  to  keep  at  least  one  and  a half  years’ 
rations  always  on  hand. 

I will  casually  observe  that  in  the  applications  of  both  Generals  But- 
ler and  Arnold  (each  for  two  regiments)  they  do  not  invite  me  to  accom- 
pany the  troops. 

The  mutineers  belonging  to  the  New  York  Volunteer  Engineer  Regi- 
ment arrived  yesterday.  I have  placed  them  in  Fort  Taylor,  and  shall 
put  them  to  work,  or  undergo  such  punishment  as  they  may  deserve 
provided  they  refuse. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  BRANNAK, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  May  23,  1862. 

General  M.  O.  Meigs, 

Quartermaster- General  U.  S.  Army  : 

Sir  : A letter  from  yourself*  has  been  shown  me  by  my  chief  quarter- 


Of  May  10,  to  Captain  Fuller,  p.  341. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


345 


master  giving  tbe  views  of  your  department  as  to  the  disposition  to  be 
made  of  the  steamers  that  may  have  been  employed  m this  district  and 
returned  to  New  York,  and  in  relation  to  these  views  I have  certain 
statements  to  make  to  you  which  may  lead  you  to  form  an  OP1™11 
whether  they  are  just  or  most  expedient  for  the  public  service.  The 
troops  of  this  district,  some  twenty-two  regiments,  are,  as  you  of  course 
know,  situated  upon  islands  entirely  (except  some  600  men  at  the  iso- 
lated outpost  of  Saint  Augustine),  and  they  are  distributed  along  a line 
of  these  Lands  nearly  200  miles  in  length.  Land  transportation,  as 
horses,  mules,  and  wagons,  your  department  has  not  furnished  us,  and 
they  could  have  been  but  of  limited  use  if  you  had.  Our  only  means 
of  movement  therefore  for  attack  or  defense  is  by  vessels,  and  they  must 
be  steamers:  and  with,  as  has  been  fully  believed,  some  60,000  men  in 
front  of  us,  between  Savannah  and  Charleston,  that  can  be  concen- 
trated  by  railway  in  five  or  six  hours  at  any  point  m front  of  our  13,000 
effective  men  here,  this  would  seem  to  make  it  necessary  that  we  have 
transportation  always  for  one-half  of  that  force  at  least. 

Now,  I might  even  pass  over  whatever  claims  the  nearly  25,000  men 
of  the  Army  and  Navy  here  may  have  to  some  provision  lor  the  send- 
ing of  their  mails  to  them,  and  the  importance  that  Government  orders 
should  duly  reach  them,  and  for  which  I find  that  one  steamer  only 
besides  the"  Atlantic  could  furnish  us  with  weekly  line  (the  yessels  be- 
ing otherwise  loaded  with  supplies  that  will  be  constantly  needed). 
These  Government  dispatches,  it  should  be  observed,  are  at  times  ot  the 
utmost  importance,  when  our  enemy  in  front  have  telegraphic  com- 
munication to  all  their  main  armies,  learning  their  victories  or  defeats 
days  and  even  weeks  before  we  do,  by  which  the  reasons  for  early 
opportune  movements  are  entirely  with  them.  Yet  even  this  small 
boon  of  this  weekly  mail  has  been  denied  this  department,  mails  haviug 
at  several  different  times  reached  here  only  at  intervals  ot  three  to  lour 
weeks,  in  one  case  having  accumulated  to  the  number,  as  the  postinaster 
states,  of  over  83,000  letters,  and  since  my  arrival  to  between  60,000  to 
70,000  at  once,  the  steamer  Atlantic  appearing  to  be  allowed  to  run 
here  only  because  it  is  the  only  port  she  can  enter  (except  to  Fort  Mon- 
roe] on  this  whole  coast. 

I might  pass  over  all  this,  but  when  the  safety  of  the  army  is  com- 
promised and  its  efficiency  destroyed  by  such  decisions  as  are  in  your 
letter,  as  I doubt  not  by  your  not  understanding  fully  the  case,  it  be- 
comes my  duty  to  inform  you  of  the  facts,  and  to  remonstrate  against 
such  action.  About  the  first  of  this  month  I submitted  a plan  ot  an 
attack  upon  Charleston  with  such  troops  as  could  be  spared  from  my 
division  alone  (as  it  appeared  that  we  had  no  hope  of  re-enforcements). 
This  was  to  take  over  one-half  the  disposable  force  to  Edisto,  as  could 
havt$  been  done  in  two  days  with  the  steamers  then  here  or  confidently 
relied  upon  to  come,  and  then  to  start  with  the  balance  all  afloat  at  once, 
and  in  one  day,  with  a bound  as  it  were,  join  the  others  and  spring  upon 
the  island  adjacent  to  and  this  side  of  Charleston  Haxbor.  It  was  per- 
haps the  most  daring  project  for  so  many  troops  that  has  been  proposed 
in  the  war,  and  General  Hunter  could  not  feel  that  we  were  strong 
enough  for  it  to  be  safe  at  that  time.  ...  , T 

Information  since  received  has  convinced  him  of  its  feasibility,  and  I 
have  now  been  endeavoring  to  execute  it  since  the  16tli  instant,  but  am 
almost  powerless  now  to  execute  it  with  the  means  at  hand,  for  the  suc- 
cessive steamers  sent  to  New  York  since  then  are  all  retained  or  do  not 
return.  The  McClellan,  Ben  De  Ford,  Boston,  also  the  Cahawba,  and  at 
times  the  Oriental,  constituting  more  than  two-tliirds  of  our  safe  outside 


34G 


Coasts  of  s.  c.,  GA.,  and  Mid.  and  east  flA.  [chap.  aavi. 


transportation.  And  tlie  first  part  of  my  project,  to  have  been  executed 
in  two  days,  is  not  yet  accomplished  in  six,  and  for  the  latter  I cannot 
now  take  2,000  men  with  our  two  or  three  small  steamers  here,  instead 
of  5,000  or  more,  as  I need  for  safety.  The  consequence  is  that  this 
movement,  which  was  to  have  been  a surprise,  is  undoubtedly  now  known 
by  the  enemy  and  may  be  defeated,  or  can  be  accomplished  only  at  the 
probable  cost  of  a large  sacrifice  of  life,  or  it  must  be  abandoned  and 
Charleston  still  held  by  the  rebels,  and  all  because  our  means  of  move- 
ments are  to  be  decided  upon  and  taken  away  from  us  by  the  quarter- 
master’s department  in  New  Y ork,  where  our  necessities  cannot  be  known. 

To  one  other  point  I would  respectfully  ask  your  attention,  and  that  is 
the  furnishing  of  light  felt  hats  for  the  troops  here.  From  the  first  week 
after  my  arrival  I saw  the  indispensable  necessity  of  this  to  save  our 
men  from  suffering,  and  the  chief  quartermaster  forwarded  a requisition 
for  15,000  of  such  hats,  which  have  again  been  asked  for  without  our 
receiving  them,  though  now  some  six  or  seven  weeks  have  passed,  and 
the  greatest  heats  of  the  Southern  sun  now  are  impending,  and  the  men 
have  no  head  covering  but  those  little  cloth  caps. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  TJ.  S.  Forces, 

Edisto  Island , S.  (7.,  May  24,  1862. 

Col.  T.  Welsh, 

Gomdg.  Forty -fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers : 

I am  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  direct  you  to  detail 
one  company  from  your  command  and  embark  them,  with  two  days’  ra- 
tions and  with  arms,  on  the  steamer  Honduras,  to  morrow  morning,  with 
instructions  to  the  officer  commanding  to  proceed  to  Otter  Island  and 
take  on  board  the  horses,  ammunition,  shot,  shell,  implements,  and  all 
other  property  remaining  there.  The  gun  carriages  must  be  brought 
off,  and  the  guns  also  if  possible.  Should  the  officer  in  charge  find  him- 
self unable  to  put  the  guns  on  the  steamer  he  will  bury  them  in  the 
sand,  first  clearing  all  negroes  from  the  vicinity,  in  order  that  his  oper- 
ations may  not  be  witnessed.  He  will  locate  the  spot  in  which  the  guns, 
may  be  buried  in  such  a manuer  that  they  may  be  readily  found  here- 
after from  his  description  of  the  locality.  The  steamer  will  stop  on  her 
way  to  Otter  Island  at  the  mouth  of  the  Edisto  River  to  take  in  tow- 
certain  scows,  which  will  be  brought  down. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  W.  FOSTER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Brio.,  North.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Fort  Pulaski , May  25,  1862. 

Capt.  II.  F.  Hawkes, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c.: 

I regret  to  report  the  failure  of  an  attempted  attack  upon  the  enemy’s 
pickets  last  night.  All  my  preparations  were  made  yesterday ; boats 
were  prepared  and  the  men  detailed.  From  the  completeness  of  the 
arrangements  I had  every  reason  to  hope  that  a serious  alarm  would 


347 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

be  given.  In  tbe  evening,  however,  the  storm  became  so  severe  that 
I should  have  countermanded  the  expedition  had  it  not  been  that  this 
morning  was  the  last  one  on  which  the  tide  would  serve.  The  party 
started  at  1.30  a.  m.,  but  owing  to  the  darkness  and  the  storm  they 
lost  their  way  and  made  such  slow  progress  that  they  had  proceeded 
no  farther  than  the  Jones  Island  Battery  when  the  morning  broke. 
The  officer  in  charge  of  course  then  abandoned  the  attempt.  In  two 
or  three  days  the  evening  tide  will  serve  and  I shall  renew  the  attempt. 

The  two  gunboats  have  been  together  at  the  Cooper  River,  and  yes- 
terday, as  I learn,  shelled  the  woods  beyond  it,  where  there  was  a large 
fire.  Whether  this  fire  was  of  buildings  or  woods  I have  not  learned. 
It  has  occurred  to  me  that  a good  impression  would  be  made  if  one  of 
the  gunboats  were  to  i>ush  up  the  river  and  commence  openly  sound- 
ing out  the  channel,  placing  conspicuous  buoys  to  indicate  it.  I shall 
endeavor  to  communicate  with  Captain  Law  and  make  the  suggestion 
to  him. 

Seven  companies  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers  have 
arrived  here  to-day.  In  a letter  which  I received  from  you,  dated  the 
23d  instant,  I was  directed  to  order  Colonel  Perry  to  leave  one  company 
of  his  regiment  at  Daufuskie  and  cover  certain  points  named  with 
pickets.  Colonel  Perry  has  received  directly  from  headquarters  orders 
to  leave  three  companies  at  Daufuskie  until  the  stores  are  removed 
and  then  send  them  to  Pulaski.  Am  I to  understand  that  when  the 
stores  are  removed  no  troops  whatever  will  be  left  upon  the  island  1 

In  the  orders  for  moving  the  Seventh  Connecticut  and  Forty-sixth 
New  York  Volunteers  it  is  directed  that  they  shall  leave  their  heavy 
baggage  at  their  present  camps  until  it  can  be  sent  for.  Is  the  term 
heavy  baggage  to  include  tents  ? I suppose  of  course  that  it  is  to 
include  horses,  wagons,  quartermaster’s  stores,  and  all  subsistence,  ex- 
cept, say,  two  days’  cooked  and  three  days’  uncooked  rations. 

I desire  to  calUke  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  the  dis- 
position to  be  made  of  the  sick.  The  Forty-eighth  New  York  have 
a considerable  sick  list  and  but  one  surgeon,  so  that  with  his  own  peo- 
ple and  the  sick  prisoners  on  his  hands  he  would  be  unable  to  give 
any  attention  to  the  sick  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  should  they  be 
left  behind  here.  The  Seventh  has  two  surgeons,  but  as  they  are  to 
go  into  active  service  they  certainly  would  need  both.  The  Forty-sixth 
New  York  will  be  in  the  same  situation  or  worse,  for  there  will  be  no 
surgeons  left  on  Tybee  after  they  leave. 

Should  not  the  seriously  sick  men  of  both  these  regiments  be  sent 
to  the  general  hospital?  There  are  a considerable  number  of  men  who 
are  not  sick  enough  to  send  to  the  hospital,  and  yet  would  be  only  a 
clog  if  their  regiment  take  the  field.  I ask  to  be  directed  in  regard  to 
them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  H.  TERRY, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  0.,  May  31,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : The  Navy  have  entered  Winyaw  Bay  and  have  command  of 
Georgetown.  On  the  Santee,  Great  Pee  Dee,  Waecamaw,  and  Black 


348  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Rivers,  near  Georgetown,  there  is  said  to  be  4,000,000  or  5,000,000 
bushels  of  rice.  It  is  important  that  we  should  have  this  rice,  and  still 
more  important  that  the  enemy  should  be  deprived  of  it. 

The  Navy  have  also  possession  of  Saint  Simon’s  Island,  Ga.,  where 
they  have  a flourishing  negro  colony,  and  Captain  Godon,  of  the  Navy, 
who  has  command  there,  can  at  any  time  occupy  Brunswick. 

I think  it  a great  mistake  to  suppose  that  military  operations  can- 
not be  carried  on  here  in  the  summer.  Occupying  three  islands  along 
the  coast  we  necessarily  move  by  water,  and  our  men  are  all  the  bet- 
ter for  a little  occupation  and  a change  of  scene.  With  the  necessary 
steamers,  now  almost  entirely  taken  from  us,  and  a few  thousand 
additional  troops,  we  could  soon  have  Charleston,  Georgetown,  BulPs 
Bay,  Brunswick,  Savannah,  Saint  Mary’s,  and  Jacksonville.  Occu- 
pying thus  the  whole  coast,  the  slaves  would  flock  into  our  posts, 
and  the  enemy  be  thus  injured  as  much  as  in  any  other  way.  Accord- 
ing to  my  experience  they  would  rather  lose  one  of  their  children  than 
a good  negro. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  IT.  S.  Forces, 
Edisto  Island , 8.  <7.,  June  3,  1862. 


Capt.WV  C.  Bhind, 

U.  8.  8.  Crusader , Senior  Naval  Officer , Edisto  Island,  8.  C.: 


Captain  : After  the  departure  of  the  larger  portion  of  the  troops 
there  will  remain  at  this  place  as  its  garrison  the  Fifty-fifth  Regiment 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  one  squadron  Massachusetts  cavalry,  and 
two  pieces  of  field  artillery,  with  a detachment  of  the  Third  Rhode 
Island  Regiment  to  serve  them. 

I have  advised  Colonel  White,  the  commanding  officer,  not  to  at- 
tempt with  his  force  the  occupation  of  the  whole  island,  but  to  hold 
the  depot  of  supplies  near  the  wharf  only.  This  he  can  do  easily,  with 
the  efficient  aid  you  will  afford  him  with  your  vessels  against  any  force 
likely  to  be  brought  against  him. 

In  this  connection  I beg  leave  to  express  the  obligations  the  Army 
force  is  under  for  the  valuable  assistance  received  from  you  and  the 
vessels  under  your  command  in  crossing  the  troops  and  making  the 
preparations  for  landing. 

Captain  Gillis,  of  the  Hale  gunboat,  rendered  most  valuable  assist- 
ance in  the  construction  of  the  landing  on  Seabrook  Island ; indeed 
without  his  aid  it  would  have  been  impracticable  to  have  built  it  with 
the  limited  means  at  my  command. 

Since  the  crossing  commenced,  The  Planter,  attached  to  your  com- 
mand, has  done  a large  part  of  the  work  of  carrying  over  the  troops. 
Acting  Master  McDougal,  in  command  of  her  until  about  noon  to-day, 
has  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  iu  forwarding  the  transfer  of  the 
force  to  the  other  bank  of  the  Edisto. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


349 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Legareville , 8.  (7.,  June  7,  1862. 

Lieutenant  SeALY, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Edqrs .,  &e.,  steamer  Delaware : 

Sir:  The  acting  brigade  commissary  of  my  staff  has  been  engaged 
during  the  entire  day  in  getting  subsistence  on  shore,  and  reports  to 
me  that  after  working  until  after  dark  he  has  found  it  impossible  to 
land  sufficient  to  provision  the  command.  He  says  he  has  had  all  the 
assistance  needed  in  the  way  of  a working  force,  and  he  has  had,  further, 
the  authoritv  to  take  and  use  any  or  all  the  public  boats  this  side  of  the 
Stono  River,"  so  that  neither  the  want  of  boats  nor  men  has  retarded  his 

operations.  _ , , , . ......  ^ 

The  trouble  he  reports  to  be  the  difficulty  and  almost  impossibility  ot 
getting  the  boats  on  shore  on  account  of  the  strong  current  in  the  Stono 
River,  the  bad  character  of  the  landing  on  the  river,  and  the  long  time 
needed  for  getting  to  the  wharf  in  the  Aberpoolie. 

All  this,  he  suggests,  may  be  avoided  by  having  a steamer  to  tow  the 
loaded  barges  from  the  transport  to  the  last- mentioned  landing,  and, 
approving  tbe  suggestion,  I have  the  honor  to  recommend  that  a steamer 
be  designated  for  this  service.  It  ought  not  to  require  to  exceed  half  an 
hour  after  receiving  notice  that  the  lighters  are  ready. 

Unless  this  facility  be  afforded  I fear  I shall  find  myself  unable  to 
execute  the  generaPs  order  to  have  two  days’  rations  always  on  hand. 

At  the  last  report  one  lighter  was  stuck  in  the  mud  near  the  lauding, 
which  will  be  unloaded  and  ready  to  return  to  the  transport  by  day- 
light. Orders  have  also  been  given  to  have  both  the  large  lighters 
loaded  up  as  soon  as  possible  to-morrow  and  to  wait  alongside  the  trans- 
port for  a tow. 

Please  submit  this  at  once  to  General  Benham  for  his  action. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J H.  G.  WRIGHT, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

On  board  U . 8.  transport  Delaware , 
Stono  River , 8.  (7.,  June  8,  1862. 

Capt.  Percival  Drayton, 

U.  S.  Navy , Senior  Naval  Officer : 

Captain  : I have  the  pleasure  of  inclosing  you  an  extract  of  the  orders 
I have  issued  for  the  arrangement  of  our  forces  here  for  the  movement 
which  I expect  to  take  place  either  to-night  or  to-morrow,  Monday  night, 
by  which  you  will  see  what  we  are  to  attempt. 

' It  is  the  wish  of  General  Hunter,  as  you  were  kind  enough  to  offer 
your  assistance,  that  you  would  have  one  or  two  small  gunboats  on  our 
right  that  may  bear  upon  or  toward  Secession ville,  and  one  small  boat 
up  the  Aberpoolie  Creek,  just  opposite  the  upper  part  of  Legareville,  to 
protect  that  place  from  destruction,  as  we  have  been  obliged  to  reduce 
our  force  to  the  minimum  there,  and  that  the  remainder  of  your  vessels, 
as  many  as  you  should  see  fit  to  spare  for  the  purpose,  should  be  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  reach  above  Grim  ball’s  or  rather  above  Newton’s  Cut, 
to  make  as  much  of  a demonstration  or  an  appearance  of  an  attack  against 
Fort  Pemberton  as  possible,  while  they  may  also  be  able  by  their  fire  to 
prevent  our  left  flank  or  rear  from  being  attacked  Ivy  the  bridge  ovey 
Newton’s  Cut, 


350 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


A final  letter  will  be  sent  you  as  to  the  actual  hour  of  the  advance 
movement,  whether  to-night  or  to-morrow  night,  and  we  would  hope 
to  have  your  vessels  in  position  as  early  as  possible  by  the  following 
morning. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Washington,  June  9, 1862. 

Major-General  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South , 

(Care  of  Assistant  Secretary  of  War  John  Tucker,  Fort  Monroe) : 
Your  dispatch  of  31st  May  is  received.  You  are  authorized,  at  your 
discretion,  to  operate  with  the  Navy  in  the  operations  against  Charles- 
ton, so  far  as  the  forces  now  under  your  command  will  permit.  The 
Department  lias  no  troops  which  can  be  sent  South  before  the  reduction 
of  Richmond.  The  steamer  Vanderbilt,  now  in  the  Chesapeake,  is  under 
orders  to  tow  a fleet  of  sailing  transports  to  Hilton  Head  and  to  report 
to  you  for  orders. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Northern  Dist.,  Dupt.  of  the  South, 

On  hoard  U.  S.  transport  Delaware , 
Stono  River , S.  C.,June  10,  1862. 

Capt.  Percival  Drayton, 

U.  S.  Navy , Senior  Naval  Officer : 

Captain  : I have  the  pleasure  of  forwarding  to  you  a copy  of  the 
orders  I have  issued  for  the  operations  of  our  troops  to-morrow  morning 
intended  to  break  up  the  batteries  that  have  been  shelling  your  boats 
and  General  Wright’s  camp  to-day. 

I would  respectfully  suggest  that  for  the  aid  you  so  kindly  offered 
from  your  gunboats  that,  say,  two  should  aid  General  Stevens  on  our 
right  and  be  in  communication  with  him,  and  that  two  others  should  be, 
say,  where  the  Huron  was  to-day,  just  above  his  camp,  to  cross-fire  in  his 
front  and  to  shell  the  woods  beyond,  where  they  feel  assured  that  they 
know  where  our  forces  are.  Another  boat  could  be  well  occupied  in 
commanding  the  road  just  this  side  of  Newton’s  Cut,  to  prevent  or  an- 
noy re-enforcements  of  the  enemy. 

This  road  I learn  can  be  covered  in  part  from  your  gunboats. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Northern  District, 

On  hoard  XJ.  S.  transport  Delaware , 

Stono  River,  S.  C.,  June  10,  1862. 

General  Wright: 

General  : It  being  important  that  the  batteries  of  the  enemy  which 
have  borne  upon  our  camps  at  Thomas  Grimball’s  to-day  should  be 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


351 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

closely  reconnoitered  or  broken  up  if  possible  at  the  earliest  moment, 
for  this  purpose  a column  will  be  sent  out  from  General  Stevens’  com- 
mand, to  consist  of  two  good  regiments,  supported  by  two  pieces  of 
artillery,  which  are  before  daylight  to-morrow  morning  to  take  post  as 
near  as  possible  without  alarming  the  pickets  of  the  enemy  toward  or 
at  the  angle  of  the  causeway  running  northeast  and  the  wall  running 
north  at  the  house  of  S.  Regard,  north  of  the  marsh,  about  one-half  mile 
north  of  General  Stevens’  advanced  camps.  It  is  believed  this  battery 
is  from  one-fourth  to  one-tliird  mile  north  on  this  angle,  and  a rush  will 
be  made  upon  and  toward  it  (the  men  avoiding  the  actual  line  of  the  road 
whenever  practicable)  at  between  3 o’clock  and  the  earliest  daylight. 

A selected  regiment  of  General  Wright’s  command  will  be  stationed 
at  the  same  hour  as  quietly  as  possible  in  the  thin  woods  about  1 mile 
a little  north  of  east  of  Thomas  Grimball’s  to  support  this  movement 
and  to  distract  the  attention  of  the  enemy. 

It  will  be  important  that  the  regiment  from  General  Wrights  com- 
mand shall  not  move  until  the  firing  shall  have  become  well  sustained 
between  General  Stevens’  column  and  the  enemy,  or  until  they  shall 
have  been  signaled,  as  is  suggested,  by  rockets ; for  the  last  column,  if  in 
the  dark,  it  is  suggested  that  rockets  of  one  color,  say  red,  should  be 
with  General  Stevens’  to  burn,  and  another,  say  blue,  with  General 
Wright’s  regiment,  and  whenever  a doubt  arises  as  to  position  a rocket 
should  be  sent  up  by  the  party  iu  doubt,  to  be  answered  by  the  other; 
a selected  non-commissioned  officer  to  be  near  the  commanding  officer  ot 
each  detachment  for  this  purpose.  „ 

The  main  command,  or  both  united  if  necessary,  will  go  forward  well 
uii  on  the  road  from  S.  Legare’s,  say  for  1 or  2 miles,  to  examine  that 
road  and  the  woods  and  fields  on  this  side  of  it  if  possible  up  to  the 
woods  around  the  church,  returning  as  soon  as  this  duty  shall  have 
been  accomplished,  unless  indeed  they  shall  hear  firing  in  advance  and 
to  their  left,  when  the  commanding  officer  may  in  his  discretion,  it  he 
can  do  so  with  effect,  advance  toward  the  woods  in  which  the  church  is 
situated,  to  cut  off  any  parties  that  may  be  driven  out  of  these  woods 
by  a force  under  Colonel  Williams,  which  is  expected  to  be  there  at 
about  the  same  time.  This  latter  force  will  be  organized  by  General 
Wright  under  Colonel  Williams,  to  consist  of  two  good  regiments  and 
two  pieces  of  artillery,  and  to  start  soon  after  3 o’clock  p.  m. ; and  the 
object  of  this  is  to  reconnoiter  to  the  left  and  front  of  General  Wright’s 
camp  and  toward  the  church,  the  object  being  to  scour  the  passages 
through  or  around  these  woods  to  the  rear  of  the  church  if  it  can  be 
done  without  too  great  exposure  or  loss  to  our  force — and  it  is  left  to 
the  discretion  of  Colonel  Williams  to  leave  these  woods  if  he  can  pass 
on  his  right  or  left  or  go  through  them,  and  if  successful  in  getting  to 
the  rear  he  may  perhaps  unite  with  and,  if  he  does,  will  take  command 
of  the  other  detachments,  and  make  a further  reconnaissance  and  de- 
traction of  the  works  of  the  enemy  to  the  front  or  to  bring  them  off 

onfp]  y 

Colonel  Williams  should  be  provided  with  rockets  of  a color  similar 
to  that  in  General  Stevens’  column  or  preferably  of  a third  color;  these, 
it  is  suggested,  may  be  obtained  from  the  courtesy  of  the  naval  officers 
by  Generals  Wright  and  Stevens  sending  for  them. 

The  ambulances  should  be  taken  with  each  column,  and  the  men 
should  have  full  canteens  and  a full  cooked  ration  each. 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  it  will  be  recollected  by  all  command- 
ing officers,  that  the  best  arrangements  possible  should  be  made  to  pre- 
vent confusion  in  our  different  columns  and  to  secure  them  from  collis- 


352  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap. XX\I. 

ion  with  each  other,  and  to  this  the  greatest  care  and  attention  will  be 
given. 

As  additional  security,  the  colors  will  be  taken  by  each  detachment 
as  further  recognition  by  each  other  and  by  the  Navy,  but  will  be  ex- 
hibited before  the  enemy  as  little  as  possible. 

We  have  ascertained  that  distinctive  colored  rockets  cannot  be  ob- 
tained, and  only  two  rockets  can  be  furnished  each  regiment. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 

(Same  to  General  Stevens,  U.  S.  A.) 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

June  10,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham: 

General  : Your  letter  of  this  date,  directing  a reconnaissance  to-mor- 
row morning  by  forces  from  the  commands  of  General  Stevens  and  my- 
self, has  been  received^  and  in  reply  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  the 
reconnaissance  then  ordered,  so  far  as  this  command  is  concerned,  can 
only  be  carried  out  by  troops  which  are  now  quite  exhausted,  having 
been  actually  engaged  with  the  enemy  or  under  his  tire  for  several  hours 
this  afternoon. 

The  enemy  made  an  attack  upon  our  line  this  afternoon  at  about 
3.30  o’clock  in  considerable  force  at  the  junction  of  the  road  leading 
from  Griraball’s  across  the  island. 

During  the  morning  he  had  shelled  our  position  from  his  batteries  in 
front,  preparatory  to  this  attack.  He  was  easily  repulsed,  but  owing 
to  thick  woods  which  enveloped  our  position  in  front  it  was  difficult  to 
decide  where  the  real  attack  would  be  made,  hence,  in  order  to  guard 
all  points,  it  was  necessary  to  bring  almost  all  the  troops  forward  in  de- 
fense of  the  position.  They  are  consequently  very  much  fatigued  and 
ought  to  have  all  the  rest  they  can  get  while  holding  themselves  in 
readiness  to  resist  any  further  attack  to-night. 

Should  it  be  deemed  necessary  to  make  the  reconnaissance  ordered 
to-morrow  morning  I can  of  course  organize  the  two  forces  required 
from  my  command,  but  with  the  exception  of  one  regiment  and  two  com- 
panies they  cannot  be  fresh  troops. 

I have  not  yet  received  the  report  of  casualties,  but  hope  they  will 
not  exceed  5 killed  and  15  or  20  wounded.  That  of  the  enemy,  though 
not  ascertained,  is  known  to  be  much  greater. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.  G.  Wright : 

C.  W.  FOSTER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 
GrimbalVs  Plantation , June  12,  1862. 

Oapt.  Percival  Drayton, 

U.  S.  8.  Pawnee , Senior  Naval  Officer , Stono  River , 8.  C. : 
Captain:  When  you  stated  yesterday  that  you  had  instructions  from 
the  flag-officer  to  send  two  of  the  gunboats  from  this  station  I requested 
that,  if  any  discretion  was  left  with  you  in  the  matter,  the  whole  naval 


:hai>.  xxvi.  i 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


353 


force  should  be  retained  here  until  our  position  on  this  island  should 
be  more  assured,  and  I now  have  the  honor  to  say  that  I still  think  it 
would  be  unwise  to  diminish  our  present  force,  either  naval  or  military, 
by  a single  man  or  gun,  until  re-enforcements  arrive. 

If,  therefore,  the  discretion  referred  to  above  be  left  with  you,  I would 
ask  that  your  force  be  not  diminished  until  the  flag-officer  can  be  heard 
from  again. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

H.  Gr.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  0.,  June  17,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , i).  C. : 

Sir  : It  is  with  great  regret  that  I find  myself  compelled  to  trouble 
you  with  complaints,  but  my  duty  to  the  brave  men  placed  under  my 
command  compels  me  to  bring  to  your  notice  the  total  neglect  with 
which  we  have  been  treated  by  the  authorities  of  the  Quartermaster’s 
Department,  who  appear  to  have  ignored  us  entirely. 

Not  content  with  taking  away  the  marine  transportation,  so  neces- 
sary here,  situated  as  we  are  on  many  scattered  islands,  thus  almost 
completely  crippling  us,  they  pay  no  attention  to  our  most  pressing 
and  important  requisitions.  More  than  two  months  since  we  made  an 
earnest  application  for  straw  or  light  felt  hats,  convinced  that  we  could 
thus  save  the  lives  of  many  of  our  men,  exposed  as  they  are  to  an  almost 
tropical  sun  ; application  was  also  made  for  tents,  so  indispensable  at 
this  season  of  the  year  to  the  health  and  comfort  of  our  men ; but  both 
these  applications  have  been  entirely  neglected,  and  the  consequence 
is  that  our  hospitals  are  tilling  up  rapidly,  and  we  shall  probably  lose 
double  the  number  of  men  there  was  any  necessity  for  losing.  So  desti- 
tute are  we  of  tents,  and  so  impossible  has  it  proved  to  procure  atten- 
tion from  the  Quartermaster’s  Department,  that  we  have  been  unable 
to  get  tents  for  myself  and  staff. 

Regretting  much  to  find  myself  under  the  necessity  of  making  this 
statement,  I know  that  the  paramount  importance  of  preserving  the 
health  of  my  command  in  this  climate  will  induce  you  to  give  the  requi- 
site orders  to  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  to  have  our  requisitions 
filled  without  delay. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , June  — , 1802. 
(Received  War  Department  June  17,  1862.) 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  2d  day  of  this  month  I 
left  here  for  the  Stono  River  with  an  expedition  against  Charleston,  I 
23  R R — VOL  XIV 


354  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

intimated  to  you  in  a previous  letter  my  fears  that  this  expedition 
would  fail  in  consequence  of  my  being  stripped  of  transportation  by 
the  Quartermaster’s  Department,  and  I have  not  the  least  doubt  if  we 
had  the  steamers  belonging  here  and  those  for  which  I have  applied 
that  we  should  to-day  be  in  possession  of  Charleston.  Without  this 
transportation  our  different  points  are  not  in  supporting  distance  of 
each  other  and  we  are  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy,  being  liable 
any  day  to  be  cut  off  in  detail.  I deem  it  a duty  I owe  to  myself  frankly 
to  state  our  situation,  as  I have  before  frequently  done,  that  reverses 
may  not  be  attributable  to  me.  We  now  hold  the  southwestern  portion 
of  James  Island,  within  5 or  6 miles  of  Charleston,  ready  to  advance 
upon  that  city  as  soon  as  re-enforcements  arrive.  I most  earnestly  beg 
for  re-enforcements,  and  I still  more  earnestly  beg  for  the  transporta- 
tion necessary  to  enable  the  different  parts  of  my  command  to  support 
each  other.  Being  in  small  commands  and  on  islands,  without  this 
transportation  we  are  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 

June  17, 1862. 

Referred  to  the  Quartermaster-General. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

C.  P.  WOLCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  0.,  June  19,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South: 

Sir:  Your  letters  of  31st  May  and  June — have  been  received. 

Your  instructions  at  the  time  of  your  departure  did  not  require  any 
movements  against  Charleston,  but  committed  a large  discretion  to  you, 
to  be  exercised  on  your  own  responsibility. 

Your  letters  of  the  3d  and  22d  of  April  and  14th  of  May  informed  the 
Department  that  you  designed  to  hold  simply  a defensive  position  unless 
re-enforced,  and  for  that  your  force  seemed  to  be  considered  adequate. 
On  the  30th  April  you  were  informed  that  no  re-enforcements  could  be 
sent. 

The  letter  of  the  31st  of  May  was  the  first  intimation  to  the  Depart- 
ment that  you  had  changed  your  plans  and  contemplated  offensive 
operations  against  Charleston  and  Fort  Sumter.  The  reasons  for  this 
change  in  your  plans  and  what  force  you  deemed  requisite  for  success 
not  having  been  communicated,  the  Department  is  unable  to  judge  of 
their  propriety. 

The  letters  of  the  Quartermaster-General  and  Adjutant-General  (of 
which  copies  are  herewith  inclosed)  in  relation  to  the  complaints  against 
them  will,  I hope,  satisfy  you  that  there  has  been  no  disposition  in  any 
branch  of  this  Department  to  withhold  support  and  assistance  from  you. 

Your  letters  afford  no  indications  as  to  the  amount  of  transportation 
you  require,  nor  whether  the  movement  against  Charleston  and  Fort 
Sumter  is  designed  to  be  made  with  a detachment  or  with  your  whole 
force. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


355 


It  could  not  have  been  expected  that  a general  of  your  experience 
would  undertake  at  his  own  discretion,  without  orders  and  without  no- 
tice to  the  Department,  a hazardous  expedition,  with  “fears  of  failure” 
for  want  of  adequate  transportation,  and  it  is  therefore  hoped  that  the 
statement  in  your  letter  in  the  last  respect  may  be  unfounded. 

If,  however,  the  force  of  the  enemy  at  Charleston  be  so  large  as  you 
estimate  your  expedition,  even  if  it  should  fail  as  to  its  main  purpose — 
the  capture  of  Charleston — may  accomplish  an  important  object  by 
occupying  with  a small  force  a much  greater  body  of  the  enemy  that 
but  for  your  operations  would  be  employed  against  us  at  Richmond. 

In  the  absence  of  any  information  from  you  as  to  the  kind  or  amount 
of  transportation  you  require  I directed  all  that  can  be  speedily  pro- 
cured to  be  sent  you,  and  hope  you  will  order  back  what  you  may  not  need. 

General  Saxton  takes  out  this  dispatch  and  you  will  doubtless  be  glad 
to  meet  him. 

Serious  complaints  have  been  made  against  General  Benham  touch- 
ing his  courage  and  good  conduct,  copies  of  which  will  be  immediately 
sent  to  you. 

I shall  be  glad  to  have  frequent  reports  from  you,  and  wishing  every 
success  to  your  command,  I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serant, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  0.,  June  19,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wrioht, 

U.  S.  Army , James  Island , S.  C. : 

Sir:  You  are  assigned  to  the  command  of  all  the  troops  on  James 
Island  and  at  Legareville.  You  will  not  attempt  to  advance  toward 
Charleston  or  Fort  Johnson  till  largely  re-enforced  and  until  you  receive 
express  orders  from  these  headquarters. 

You  will  select  a neck  of  land  a short  distance  in  advance  of  the  old 
battery,  where  you  can  have  a flanking  fire  from  the  gunboats  in  the 
Stono  "and  on  the  creek  and  fortify  it  strongly.  You  will  repair  the 
causeway  to  Cole7s  Island,  and  shelter  your  stores  and  men  as  far  as 
practicable  by  houses  taken  from  any  of  the  plantations  on  the  Stono. 
You  will  make  seasonable  requisitions  on  the  quartermaster,  commis- 
sary, medical  director,  and  ordnance  officer  at  Hilton  Head  for  all  nec- 
essary supplies,  and  report  to  these  headquarters  the  state  of  your  com- 
mand by  every  opportunity. 

Should  you  deem  your  present  position  untenable  you  will  immedi- 
ately make  all  the  necessary  dispositions  for  abandoning  James  Island 
and  John’s  Island,  sending  off  in  the  first  place  all  your  sick  and  all 
your  stores. 

Your  front  being  completely  covered  by  the  gunboats  of  the  Navy, 
you  can  make  the  retrograde  movement,  should  you  deem  it  necessary, 
without  losing  a man  or  a pound  of  supplies.  As  soon  as  the  stores  are 
removed  all  the  troops  not  sailing  in  the  first  detachment  of  transports 
should  be  at  once  removed  to  the  west  bank  of  the  Stono,  at  Legare- 
ville. Should  you  determine  to  abandon  the  Stono  you  will  have  one 
regiment  at  North  Edisto,  and  you  will  immediately  inform  me  of  your 
decision,  that  I may  send  you  all  the  transportation  in  my  power. 
Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

* D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


356 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA,,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 
GrimhalVs  Plantation , S.  0.,  June  19,  1862. 

General  H.  W.  Benham, 

Comdg . Northern  District , Department  of  the  South  : 

General  : In  answer  to  your  letter  of  this  date,  asking  an  outline 
of  my  plan  for  the  defense  of  this  camp,  I have  to  say  that  after  learn- 
ing more  definitely  than  I now  do  the  plans  of  General  Stevens  I should 
be  able  to  devise  mine  more  understandingly,  and  had  proposed  to  visit 
his  camp  and  lines  this  morning  for  the  purpose. 

Assuming,  however,  that  General  Stevens’  batteries  will  be  at  least 
three  in  number — one  situated  on  the  extremity  of  the  tongue  of  land 
farthest  from  his  camp,  the  second  being  the  three-gun  battery  already 
erected,  and  the  third  somewhere  in  the  vicinity  of  the  one  gun  which 
was  opened  upon  the  enemy  during  the  cannonading  of  his  works — I 
should  propose  for  my  own  position  a strong  inclosed  work  - projected 
well  forward  toward  and  to  the  right  of  the  open  pine  woods  in  front 
of  this  camp,  this  work  to  mount  as  many  guns  of  the  heaviest  caliber 
as  can  be  procured.  Such  a work  would  possess  the  following  advan- 
tages : It  would  act  along  General  Stevens’  front,  would  cover  well  our 
line  of  camps  by  a flank  and  reverse  fire  in  case  of  near  attack,  and  iu 
the  event  of  an  attack  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  shell  our  camp  from 
the  battery  near  the  Tower  or  from  others  which  may  be  erected  back 
of  the  woods  to  the  left,  could  reply  effectively  and  draw  the  fire  which 
would  otherwise  be  directed  at  our  camps.  It  also  possesses  another 
and  important  property  which  no  work  nearer  the  camp  can  claim,  that 
of  looking  toward  future  operations  in  the  reduction  of  the  enemy’s 
lines  and  batteries. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , 8.  (7.,  June  20,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  Louis  Bell, 

Commanding  Post , Saint  Augustine , Fla. : 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  letter  dated  June  1,  relative  to  the  case  of 
William  Keyes  and  three  other  men  who  had  taken  the  oath  of  alle- 
giance, and  who  nevertheless  were  guilty  of  harboring  a sergeant  of  the 
Confederate  Army  and  supplying  him  with  information,  I atn  instructed 
by  the  major-general  commanding  to  advise  you  that  the  prisoners  in 
question  are  to  be  heavily  ironed  and  sent  to  these  headquarters,  with 
a statement  in  writing,  and  as  full  as  possible,  of  their  otfense.  Your 
action  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Steubenmeyer,  the  Episcopal  clergyman,  is 
approved. 

In  reference  to  your  letter  dated  May  29,  relative  to  the  hanging  and 
persecution  of  loyal  citizens  by  roving  bands  of  Confederate  guerrillas, 
the  major-general  commanding  desires  that  you  shall  take  the  most 
rigorous  and  prompt  measures  for  the  suppression  of  such  practices. 
All  guerrillas  caught  you  will  iron  heavily  and  send  to  these  headquar- 
ters, with  written  charges  accompanying  them. 

You  will  also  threaten  to  arm,  and  if  necessary  anu^  aUpegrpes  aud 

Indians  wbo  way  bo  trilling  to  enter  the  service, 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


357 


3haf.  XXVI.] 

You  should  also  at  once  drive  out  of  your  lines  all  persons,  without 
reference  to  sex,  who  have  not  taken  and  shall  refuse  to  take  the  oath 

°fTheegffeneral  commanding,  reposing  much  confidence  in  your  judg- 
ment, gives  you  a large  and  liberal  discretion  in  reference  to  all  acts 
that  may  be  "necessary  for  the  vindication  of  the  laws  within  your  dis- 
trict, and  guarantees  you  a frank  support  in  any  acts  within  the  limits 

of  a reasonable  discretion.  . , , . a.  ,A 

It  is  not  his  wish,  however,  that  the  death  penalty  should  be  inflicted 
ou  prisoners  captured  without  express  orders  from  these  headquarters. 
The  better  way  will  be  to  iron  all  malefactors  and  send  them  here  for 

disposition  under  the  necessary  guard.  . , 

You  will  report  frequently  and  fully  all  action  taken  by  you  under 

the  terms  of  these  instructions.  , , . 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 

servant’  CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  it.  S.  Forces,  Department  of  the  South 

James  Island , $.  0.,  June  20,  1862. 

Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter,  _ , _ n 

Gomdg.  Department  of  the  Souths  Hilton  Heaa^  o.  C.. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication of  the  19th  instant,  assigning  me  to  this  command,  directing 
that  no  advance  should  be  made  without  express  order  5 to  select  a neck 
of  land  a short  distance  in  advance  of  the  old  battery,  where  I can 
have  a flanking  fire  from  the  gunboats  on  the  Stono  and  on  the  creek ; 
and  to  fortify  it  strongly ; and  in  case  I deem  the  present  position  un- 
tenable, to  make  all  the  necessary  disposition  for  abandoning  Janies 

and  John’s  Islands.  . T . , ... 

1 have  no  reason  to  think  that  the  occupation  of  James  Island,  with 
our  present  force  even,  is  now  untenable.  Every  indication  is  to  the 
contrary.  We  can  hold  on  for  a long  time,  if  it  be  necessary,  against 
any  force  that  the  enemy  is  believed  to  have  in  our  vicinity,  and  we 
can  only  be  reached  by  batteries  which  the  enemy  must  yet  establish, 
his  present  ones  not  being  within  effective  range.  I am  speaking  now 
of  the  position  occupied  by  the  present  camps  ; but  I inter  from  your 
letter  of  instruction,  though  it  is  not  explicitly  stated,  that  you  desire 
the  camps  at  Grimball’s  to  be  moved  down  toward  the  old  battery  and 
mined  to  those  of  General  Stevens’  division. 

Every  preparation  for  this  removal  will  be  made,  such  as  selecting 
the  new  line  of  defense,  positions  for  camps,  and  removing  the  stores  to 
the  old  battery,  so  that  no  delay  shall  occur  in  the  execution  ot  the 
order,  if  I have  rightly  interpreted  it.  I am  by  no  means  certain  that 
the  transfer  of  this  force  is  either  judicious  at  this  time  or  intended  by 
you,  and  as  I can  send  the  Delaware  to-night  so  as  to  be  back  to-mor- 
row night,  before  any  actual  move  of  the  force  could  be  made,  I have 
decided  to  do  so,  and  ask  your  further  instructions. 

Such  a movement  would,  I have  no  doubt,  be  deemed  by  the  enemy 
an  indication  of  weakness  on  our  part,  which  would  embolden  him  to 
advance,  while  he  will  scarcely  attack  us  in  our  present  positions  lor 
some  time. 


358  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap. XXVI. 

While  I believe  that  we  can  hold  what  we  have  till  re  enforcements 
arrive,  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  unless  strong  re-enforcements 
of  troops,  having  artillery  and  munitions  of  war,  are  expected,  it  be- 
comes a serious  question  for  your  consideration  whether  we  should  at- 
tempt to  hold  our  present  position.  It  is  employing  a large  force  of 
excellent  troops  which  might  be  of  service  elsewhere,  and  is  inducing 
the  enemy  to  strengthen  and  to  add  to  the  already  formidable  defenses 
on  the  line  of  advance  to  Charleston  over  James  Island. 

I would  ask  that  you  come  here  and  look  at  the  condition  of  matters 
yourself.  A few  hours’  time  spent  here  in  a personal  interview  and  in 
an  examination  of  the  position  would  be  of  great  advantage  to  the 
interest  of  the  service. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  IJ.  S.  Forces  North.  Dist.,  Dept.  South, 
James  Island , 8.  C.,  June  20,  1862. 

General  Isaac  I.  Stevens, 

Commanding  Second  Division,  James  Island , 8.  C. : 

General  : I have  received  yours  of  this  date,  stating  that  no  ar- 
rangement has  been  made  with  the  Confederate  officers  regarding  ces- 
sation of  operations  on  account  of  flags  of  truce,  and  that  you  had  sent 
Captain  Lusk  for  instructions  as  to  further  proceedings. 

I have  seen  Captain  Lusk,  and  from  what  I learn  from  him  and  from 
the  letter  of  General  W.  D.  Smith,  which  Captain  Lusk  delivered  to 
me,  I do  not  see  that  any  further  action  is  necessary,  unless  it  may  be 
in  regard  to  exchange  of  prisoners.  I do  not  know  what  instructions 
you  may  have  had  from  General  Benham  on  this  point,  but  you  are  no 
doubt  aware  that  exchanges  are  prohibited  by  War  Department  order 
except  under  instructions  from  the  Secretary  of  War. 

Please  send  me  copies  of  any  instructions  in  this  matter  you  may 
have  received  from  General  Benham,  or  if  they  were  verbal  then  of 
your  letters  on  the  subject. 

I send  you  copy  of  a letter  from  General  Hunter  to  General  Benham, 
directing  the  latter  to  turn  over  the  command  to  me  and  return  to 
Hilton  Head. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WEIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , 8.  C.,  June  21,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces , Stono  River , 8.  C. : 

General  : I have  received  your  letter  of  yesterday.  It  was  not  my 
intention  that  you  should  leave  your  camps  at  Grim  ball’s  unless  you 
should  deem  it  expedient  so  to  do.  I wish  you  to  exercise  your  own 
judgment  in  the  case.  Stay  where  you  are,  or  send  a portion  of  your 
command  at  Grim  ball’s  to  Cole’s  Island  and  the  other  part  to  the  neck 
occupied  by  General  Stevens.  This  last  arrangement  may  have  the 


XXVI.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


359 


advantage  of  having  your  front  more  completely  covered  by  gunboats ; 
mt  it  may  be  attended  with  disadvantage,  which  I do  not  at  present 
ee.  I have  no  doubt  you  will  be  able  to  hold  your  position  whichever 
ine,  in  your  own  good  judgment,  yon  may  determine  on. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 

iervant>  D.  HUNTER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South 
jf0.  is.  ) Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  June  21,  1862. 

I.  So  much  of  General  Orders,  No.  1,  current  series,  from  these  head- 
quarters,  as  relates  to  the  division  ot  the  department  into  districts  is 
lereby  countermanded.  All  returns  will  hereafter  be  made  direct  to 

ffiese  headquarters.  . j . , . , 

II  Mai.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  assistant  adjutant- general,  having  been 
reassigned  to  duty  in  this  department,  is  hereby  announced  as  assistant 
adjutant-general  of  the  department  and  chief  of  staff  to  the  major-gen- 
3ral  commanding.  D jjUNTER, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  IT.  S.  Forces, 

James  Island , S.  (7.,  June  22,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  Hunter,  , „ „ 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  Southy  Hilton  Head , b.  0.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  let- 
ter of  the  21st  instant,  and  in  pursuance  of  the  discretion  which  it 
leaves  with  me  I shall  maintain,  for  the  present  at  least,  the  camp  at 
GrimbalPs.  This  decision,  founded  on  the  information  now  here,  is 

most  expedient.  „ „ ,, 

I shall  go  on  with  the  fortifications  of  both  camps,  or  rather  with  a 
line  covering  both,  which  when  completed  will,  I believe,  render  them 
secure  from  any  attack  the  enemy  is  likely  to  make.  This  line  involves 
but  little  more  labor  than  would  be  required  for  the  single  camp,  while 
the  space  covered  is  largely  increased. 

While  I state  my  confident  belief  that  we  can  maintain  our  position 
on  James  Island  for  a considerable  time— perhaps  an  indefinite  one— 
I am  still  bound  to  say  in  all  frankness  that  I do  not  understand  the 
object  of  the  occupation  at  all,  unless  the  command  be  sufficiently  re- 
enforced to  enable  us  to  prosecute  the  attack  upon  Charleston.  You 
will  remember  that  in  regard  to  the  campaign  I was  never  consulted, 
and  that  I do  not  know  upon  what  assurances  of  additional  troops  the 
plan  was  based.  I am  here  as  the  commander  of  the  forces  now  on  the 
island,  and  in  regard  to  these  I have  full  information.  Beyond  this  my 
knowledge  does  not  go. 

Whether,  then,  it  is  expedient  to  hold  on  to  the  last — to  fight  the 
possession  of  our  present  position  foot  by  foot  in  the  expectation  ot 
adequate  force  for  the  prosecution  of  the  undertaking  and  finally  to 
evacuate  if  forced  to  do  so  by  overwhelming  numbers  or  whether  to 
withdraw  sooner,  and  to  use  the  excellent  troops  we  have  elsewhere 
because  no  reasonable  prospect  of  such  aid  is  to  be  anticipated,  aie 
questions  which  I am  not  in  position  to  decide. 


360  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

I have  all  along  assumed,  and  have  been  led  to  believe,  that  such  re- 
enforcements  have  been  promised  and  were  expected,  and  till  notified 
to  the  contrary  it  will  be  my  duty  to  hold  on  to  the  occupation  of  the 
island.  Such  re-enforcements  should  be  sufficient  to  swell  our  present 
numbers  to  40,000  men,  with  the  proper  complement  of  heavy  and  light 
artillery  and  munition,  in  order  to  make  the  enterprise  sure,  in  view  of 
the  enemy’s  probable  force  and  the  works  of  defense  now  existing  and 
being  daily  added  to  and  strengthened, 

I would  again  respectfully  suggest  that  a visit  from  you  to  this  point 
would  b#  of  the  highest  importance  to  the  interests  of  the  service.  It 
would  go  further  toward  putting  you  in  possession  of  a correct  knowl- 
edge of  the  condition  of  affairs  and  enable  you  to  act  more  understand- 
ing^ than  all  the  letters  that  could  be  written. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

James  Island , 8.  C .,  June  23,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  Hunter: 

General:  A deserter  from  the  Forty-seventh  Georgia  Regiment, 
who  was  brought  in  by  our  pickets  last  night*,  says  there  are  twelve 
regiments  on  the  island,  numbering  some  8,000  men.  He  describes  very 
indefinitely,  however,  a line  of  intrenchments  across  the  island  in  our 
front  extending  north  to  Wappoo  Creek.  This  we  knew  before.  This 
line  he  represents  as  having  at  intervals  batteries  containing  one  heavy 
gun  each,  which  is  confirmed  by  other  statements.  These  heavy  guns 
are  probably  32-pounders.  It  is  clear,  I think,  from  the  information  ob- 
tained from  a variety  of  independent  sources,  that  the  enemy  has  a line 
extending  from  Secessionville  to  Wappoo,  and  perhaps  beyond.  As 
regards  its  strength,  I believe  from  present  information  that  it  should 
be  approached  cautiously  and  pierced  at  one  point,  when  the  rest  could 
be  turned.  At  this  moment  I should  not  hesitate  to  attempt  it  with 
20,000  men  and  a siege  train  of  24-pounders.  What  it  will  be  a week  or  a 
month  hence  I cannot  of  course  say. 

A contraband  who  came  in  this  morning  makes  a statement  which 
confirms  me  in  the  belief  that  the  enemy’s  lines  were  in  the  most  par- 
ticulars prepared  long  before  our  landing,  and  that  what  has  been  done 
since  has  reference  to  particular  points  rather  than  to  the  general  sys- 
tem. If  this  be  so,  it  shows  that  any  dash  upon  Charleston  was  out  of 
the  question  with  our  present  force  of  men  and  means. 

My  greatest  solicitude  is  in  regard  to  the  health  of  the  command.  It 
seems  to  be  a universally  received  opinion  that  white  men  cannot  stay 
upon  these  islands  after  June.  Whether  this  be  true  I of  course  cannot 
say.  So  far  as  I have  remarked  the  health  of  the  command  is  good. 

I don’t  believe  the  enemy  designs  attacking  us  in  our  present  posi- 
tion at  present,  nor  will  they  do  so  till  they  find  out  we  are  not  strong 
enough  to  advance,  possibly  not  then. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


361 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 
James  Island , 8.  C.,  June  29,  1862. 


Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Dept.,  Hilton  Head,  8.  G. : 

Major  . I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  letter  of 
the  major-general  commanding,  dated  the  27th  instant,  instructing  me 
to  abandon  James  Island  with  the  force  under  my  command,  and  in 
obedience  thereto  have  already  sent  oft*  such  of  the  sick  as  could  not 
march  with  their  regiments,  and  have  been  to-day  shipping  stores  and 
the  horses  of  the  cavalry,  which  will  be  the  first  of  the  command  to 
leave.  I hope  to  be  able  to  accomplish  the  whole  movement  success- 
fully, removing  everything  without  loss. 

The  movement  to  Legareville  with  the  balance  of  the  command  left 
after  the  first  detachment  is  sent  away  will  occasion  much  labor,  and  1 
fear  loss  of  time,  as  the  difficulties  of  approach  to  that  place  by  steamer 


are  serious. 

It  might  be  well  to  leave  it  to  my  judgment  whether  to  make  the 
transfer  or  not.  On  this  point  I would  ask  early  instructions. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  C.,  June  30,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Comdg.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron,  Port  Royal  Harbor  : 

Commodore  : Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan  signals  to  me  from  Beaufort 
that  he  has  received  information  from  sources  which  he  regards  as  re- 
liable to  the  effect  that  the  enemy  in  strong  force  are  about  to  make 
an  attack  on  Port  Royal  Island  from  the  direction  of  Grahamville. 
General  Brannan  reports  that  for  the  last  three  nights  boats  have 
approached  our  pickets  at  the  ferry,  and  adds  that  the  enemy  are  said 
to  have  crossed. 

General  Brannan  is  anxious  that  a gunboat  be  sent  up  Broad  River 
and  Whale  Branch  to  operate  around  the  island,  and  in  this  request,  if 
it  be  possible,  I concur. 

General  Brannan  has  a force  of  thirty  companies  on  Port  Royal 
Island,  which,  in  my  judgment,  should  be  ample  for  its  defense. 

With  the  highest  esteem  I have  the  honor  to  be,  commodore,  your 
most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  South, 

No.  19.  ) Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  8.  C.,  June  30, 1862. 

Surg.  Charles  H.  Crane,  U.JS*  Army,  being  the  senior  medical  officer 
of  the  department,  is  hereby  appointed  and  announced  as  medical 
director  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  and  will  report  for  duty  at 
these  headquarters. 

By  command  of  Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter  : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


362 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter  command- 
ing, for  the  month  of  June,  1862;  headquarters  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


Present  for 
duty. 

4^  - 

a 

<s> 

<U 

u 

present 

nt. 

present 

on  last 

am. 

U 

<£> 

o 

50 

O 

Men. 

Pi 

<D 

"ce 

bfi 

<D 

bl) 

bfl 

<1  • 

Aggregate  ] 

and  abse 

Aggregate  ] 

and  absent 

monthly  reti 

Remarks. 

31 

34 

65 

71 

138 

3,  590 

4,182 

4,  564 

3, 454 

239 

6, 172 

7, 436 

9,  537 

9,  823 

Six  field  pieces  artil- 
lery. 

124 

2,  669 

3,  268 

3,  638 

3,  656 

99 

2, 192 

2,  699 

2,  802 

2, 758 

34 

577 

699 

707 

718 

21 

674 

728 

756 

759 

28 

730 

852 

884 

890 

20 

663 

848 

899 

883 

22 

657 

853 

940 

933 

756 

17,  958 

21,  630 

24,  798 

23, 880 

Command. 


Department  staff 

James  Island : 

First  Division,  Brig.  Gen.  H.  G. 
Wright. 

Second  Division,  Brig.  Gen.  I.  I. 
Stevens. 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Bran- 
nan. 

Fort  Pickens  and  Pensacola,  Fla., 
Brig.  Gen.  L.  G.  Arnold. 

Key  West,  Fla  

Fort  Edisto,  S.  C 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga 

Fernandina  and  Fort  Clinch,  Fla 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  South , Maj.  Oen.  David 
Hunter  commanding , June  30,  1862. 


FIRST  DIVISION.  * 

Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  J.  L.  Cpiatfield. 

6th  Connecticut,  Col.  J.  L.  Chatfield. 
47th  New  York,  Maj.  P.  C.  Kane. 

97th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  H.  R.  Guss. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Thomas  Welsh. 

45th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Thomas  Welsh. 
76th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  J.  M.  Power. 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E,  Capt.  John 
Hamilton. 


SECOND  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  William  M.  Fenton. 

7th  Connecticut,  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley. 
28th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  M.  Moore. 
8th  Michigan,  Col.  William  M.  Fentou. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  A.  Farnsworth. 

46th  New  York,  Col.  Rudolph  Rosa. 
79th  New  York,  Col.  A.  Farnsworth. 
100th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  D.  Leasure. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Robert  Williams. 


3d  New  Hampshire,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Jackson. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Col.  E.  W.  Serrell. 

1st  Connecticut  Battery,  Capt.  A.  P.  Rockwell. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  Maj.  E.  Metcalf. 
1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Col.  Robert  Williams. 


James  Island,  S.  C. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

. BE  A UFORT,  S.  C. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan. 


363 


8th  Maine,  Col.  J.  D.  Rust. 

7th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  H.  S.  Putnam. 
47th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  T.  H.  Good. 


50th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  B.  C.  Christ. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  B,  D,  and 
M,  Capt.  L.  L.  Langdon. 


FORT  PICKENS  AND  PENSACOLA,  FLA. 


Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold. 

6th  New  York,  Col.  William  Wilson.  1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  A,  F,  andL. 

75th  New  York,  Col.  J.  A.  Dodge.  2d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  C and  K. 

91st  New  York,  Col.  J.  Van  Zandt. 


MISCELLANEO  US. 


Fernandina  and  Fort  Clinch,  Fla. 

9th  Maine,  Col.  R.  Rich. 

Fort  Edisto,  S.  C. 

55th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  R.  White. 

FORT  PULASKI,  GA. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry. 

48th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  B.  Barton. 


jxvy  rrvxi;  j1  ta. 

90th  New  York,  Col.  J.  S.  Morgan. 
Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

4th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  L.  Bell. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , July  11,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washmgton: 

Sir  : I most  earnestly  beg  that  by  return  of  mail  you  will  give  me  full 
authority  to  muster  into  the  service  of  the  United  States,  as  infantry, 
all  loyal  men  to  be  found  in  my  department,  and  that  I be  authorized  to 
appoint  all  the  officers.  This  has  now  become  a military  necessity  in 
this  department.  I send  by  General  Stevens  to  Fort  Monroe  six  regi- 
ments, and  will  send  four  more  as  soon  as  transportation  arrives.  If 
affairs  in  the  mean  time  should  take  such  a turn  as  to  render  the  sending 
of  these  four  additional  regiments  unnecessary  please  notify  me  at  once. 
Send  sufficient  transportation  if  they  are  needed.  1 have  to  abandon 
Edisto  and  possibly  Beaufort. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  8.  0.,  July  11,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Horatio  G.  Wright, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces  at  North  Edisto , 8.  C. : 

General:  In  consequence  of  heavy  drafts  made  on  this  department 


364  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [qnAr.  XXVI. 

to  furnish  re  enforcements  to  the  army  before  Richmond  it  has  be- 
come necessary  that  North  Edisto  be  abandoned.  You  will  therefore 
make  all  your  arrangements  for  the  removal  of  the  forces  under  your 
command  to  this  point  whenever  transportation  can  be  furnished,  and 
you  will  consult  with  Mr.  De  La  Croix  as  to  the  best  means  of  collect- 
ing all  the  negroes  within  our  lines  and  on  the  adjacent  islands,  and 
forwarding  them  to  these  headquarters. 

As  this  evacuation  will  leave  the  islands  without  protection  until 
such  time  as  our  troops  can  be  returned  to  us  with  re-enforcements, 
you  will  please  notify  all  Government  agents  and  employes  of  every 
kind  to  collect  such  property  as  can  be  moved,  and  have  the  same 
shipped  under  your  directions  to  this  point.  Your  sick  and  the  army 
stores  will  be  moved  first,  and  next  after  these  such  property  as  may 
in  your  judgment  be  worth  removal. 

You  will  also  apportion  sufiicient  transportation  to  the  civil  employes 
of  Government  and  to  any  loyal  persons  within  your  lines. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  (7.,  July  12,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt,  per  transport  pro- 
peller Mississippi,  at  6.80  p.  m.  last  evening,  of  your  telegraphic  dis- 
patch directing  that  all  the  infantry  force  that  can  be  spared  from  this 
department  shall  immediately  be  sent  to  Fortress  Monroe,  and  in  reply 
thereto  have  to  state : 

That  I send  immediately  by  the  transports  Mississippi,  Vanderbilt, 
and  Merrimac  six  regiments  of  infantry,  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen. 
Isaac  I.  Stevens,  consisting  of  the  following  troops: 

Fiftieth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

One  hundredth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Twenty-eighth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Forty-sixth  New  York  Volunteers. 

Seventy-ninth  New  York  (Highlanders). 

Eighth  Michigan  Volunteers. 

As  soon  as  transportation  can  be  furnished  I will  send  four  addi- 
tional regiments  of  infantry,  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.  G.  Wright, 
to  embrace  as  follows : 

Ninety- seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Fifty-fifth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  one  other  regiment  as  yet  un- 
assigned. 

The  troops  thus  sent  and  to  be  sent  are  all  that  can  possibly  be 
spared  in  the  present  weakened  condition  of  this  department  and 
with  an  enemy  flushed  with  his  recent  success  on  James  Island  in  our 
vicinity. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  with  the  highest  esteem,  your  most  obe- 
dient servant, 


D.  HUNTER. 


Chap.  XXVI.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.- 


-IJNION. 


365 


Fort  Monroe,  July  15,  1862 — 10.30  a.  m. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : rni 

General  Hunter’s  force  is  arriving.  Two  regiments  are  here.  There 
will  be  more  here  to-night.  What  is  to  be  done  with  them  t General 
Hunter  requests  me  to  telegraph  to  you  the 

Major-General . 


Adjutant  General’s  Office, 

Washington , July  23,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix, 

TJ.  S.  Volunteers , Fort  Monroe , Va. : 

Retain  the  Arago  twenty -four  hours  if  she  has  not  left,  and  send  the 
following  to  Major-General  Hunter  by  the  first  opportunity  : 

Adjutant-General’s  Office, 

■ Washington,  July  23,  1862. 

Your  orders  only  required  you  to  send  to  Fort  Monroe  such  troops  as  you  could  spare 
without  endraugeringqauy  part  of  your  command.  You  will  retain  such  forces  as  will 
secure  the  safety  of  your  positions. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : ^ THOMAS 

Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  (7.,  July  26,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acquaint  you  that  owing  to  recent  devel- 


opments in  the  Department  -l  ^ - - *- 

my  first  determination  to  send  ten  regiments  of  infantry  to  re  entoice 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Seven  regiments  have  been  already  sent, 
and  no  more  can  be  spared  without  seriously  jeopardizing  the  important 
basis  of  operations  and  depots  of  stores  in  this  department. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General.  Commanding. 


have  been  led  to  regard  as  inexpedient 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  (7.,  July  31,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington , H.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  Flag-Officer  DuPont  has 
i eceived  information  which  he  regards  as  reliable,  and  which  has  e\ery 
appearance  of  being  so,  to  the  effect  that  the  rebels  in  Savannah  have 
prepared  and  completed  a powerful  iron-mailed  ram,  with  which  to 
attack  the  fleet  and  transport  vessels  in  this  harbor  and  attempt  to 
destroy  the  vast  depots  of  quartermaster  and  commissary  stores  on 
Hilton  Head. 


*See  of  July  11,  p,  363, 


3 f'6  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

The  flag-officer  is  making  every  preparation  to  repel  the  expected 
attack,  but  previous  experience  shows  that  gunboats  and  war  vessels 
of  the  ordinary  class  cannot  be  safely  relied  upon  in  cases  of  this  kind. 
1 have  therefore  to  request,  for  the  protection  of  the  military  stores  at 
Hilton  Head  and  Beaufort,  that  arrangements  be  made  with  the  Navy 
Department  for  promptly  sending  to  Port  Royal  Harbor  one  of  the  new 
iron-mailed  floating  batteries  of  the  monitor  class,  or,  in  case  this  should 
be  impossible,  that  the  Yanderbilt  or  some  vessel  of  equal  weight  and 
speed  be  permanently  stationed  here  to  run  down  the  rebel  ram  on  its 
appearance.  . 

The  information  relied  upon  by  the  flag-officer  is  partially  confirmed 
by  our  pickets  in  and  around  Fort  Pulaski,  who  report  renewed  activity 
on  the  upper  part  of  the  Savannah  River,  steamers  coming  down 
within  range  of  the  guns  of  the  fort  for  the  purpose  of  taking  sound- 
ings and  row-boats  being  engaged  in  buoying  out  the  channel. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  with  the  highest  esteem,  your  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major - General , Commanding. 

P.  S. — I have  just  had  an  interview  with  Flag-Officer  DuPont,  who 
considers  it  extremely  important  to  the  safety  of  his  fleet  that  the 
Yanderbilt  should  be  sent  here  immediately. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  (7.,  July  31,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir  : The  recent  call  for  troops  to  re-enforce  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac appeared  so  urgent  that  seven  regiments  of  infantry  were  imme- 
diately dispatched,  under  command  of  Generals  Wright  and  Stevens, 
thereby  making  necessary  the  abandonment  of  our  positions  on  Edisto 
and  Daufuskie  Islands. 

It  is  in  my  judgment  extremely  important  that  both  these  positions 
should  be  reoccupied,  and  also  that  strong  posts  should  be  established 
at  Georgetown,  Brunswick,  and  Saint  Simon’s  Island. 

I have  therefore  to  request  that  re- enforcements  may  be  sent  to  this 
department  as  soon  as  possible,  not  only  with  a view  to  future  opera- 
tions, but  also  for  the  further  security  of  our  present  positions  and 
depots. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Cuai*.  XXYI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  367 


Abstract  f rom  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter , U.  S.  Army, 
commanding,  for  July  31,  1862. 


Present  for 
duty. 

■4-3 

a 

o 

03 

G? 

S 

li 

Command. 

Officers. 

Men. 

ft 

© 

H 

bO 

© 

bJD 

6® 

S'* 

8fg 

© 9 

f_i  cj 

bfl 

bt 

<4 

Remarks. 

Department  staff  

21 

34 

55 

59 

The  following  regiments,  under  command 

Beaufort,  S.  C 

134 

2,  996 

4, 131 

5, 170 

of  Brig.  Gen.  I.  I.  Stevens,  embarked 
from  Hilton  Head,  en  route  to  Fort  Mon- 

Hilton Head,  S.  C 

188 

4,  919 

6, 130 

7,  099 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga 

30 

781 

914 

969 

roe,  July  12,  1862 : 

Fernandina,  Fla 

22 

650 

829 

889 

28th  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Montieth. 

Fort  Clinch,  Fla 

1 

69 

82 

92 

8th  Michigan,  Colonel  Fenton. 

Fort  Old  Town,  Fla. 

1 

64 

71 

85 

46th  New  York,  Colonel  Rosa. 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla 

17 

465 

633 

656 

79th  New  York,  Colonel  Farnsworth. 

Key  West,  Fla 

20 

355 

458 

458 

50th  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  Christ. 

Fort  Jefferson,  Fla 

13 

222 

252 

252 

100th  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  Leasure. 

Pensacola  Harbor,  Fla 

99 

2, 192 

2,  699 

2,  804 

July  18,  the  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania, 
Colonel  Welsh,  embarked  for  Fori 
Monroe. 

July  20,  Fort  Edisto  evacuated  by  the 
forces  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  H. 
G.  Wright. 

July  29,  Brigadier-General  Wright  re- 
lieved from  command  at  Hilton  Head. 

Total 

546 

12,  747 

16,  254 

18,  533 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  South , Maj.  Gen . David 
Hunter , U.  S.  Army , commanding,  July  31,  1862. 

BEAUFORT,  S.  C. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Brannan. 


6th  Connecticut,  Col.  J.  L.  Chatfield. 
8th  Maine  Lieut.  Col.  J.  F.  Twitchell. 
4th  New  Hampshire  (three  companies), 
Maj.  J.  D.  Drew. 

7th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  H.  S.  Putnam. 
47th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  T.  H.  Good. 

55th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  R.  Whith. 


1st  Connecticut  Battery,  Capt.  A.  P. 
Rockwell. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery  (three  batteries),  Capt. 
L.  L.  Langdon. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (three  com- 
panies), Capt.  A.  H.  Stevens,  jr. 

1st  New  York  Engineers  (detachment). 


HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C. 
Col.  Robert  Williams. 


7th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  G.  F.  Gar- 
diner. 

3d  New  Hampshire,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H. 
Jackson. 

47th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  L.  Fraser. 
76th  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  D.  C. 
Strawhridge. 

97th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  H.  R.  Guss. 


1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (nine  com- 
panies), Maj.  G.  S.  Curtis. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Lieut.  Col.  S. 
R.  Bucklin. 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E,  Lieut.  E. 
Gittings. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Lieut.  Col.  J. 
F.  Hall. 


PENSACOLA  HARBOR , FLA. 

Brig.  Gen.  L.  G.  Arnold. 

6th  New  York,  Col.  William  Wilson.  1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  A,  F,  and  L. 

75th  New  York,  Col.  J.  A.  Dodge.  2d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  C and  K. 

91st  New  York',  Col.  J.  Van  Zandt, 


368 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiai*.  XXYL 


MISCELLANEOUS  POSTS. 


Eernandina,  Fla. 

9t.h  Maine,  Col.  R.  Ricli. 

Fort  Clinch , Fla. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  C, 
Capt.  J.  E.  Place. 

Fort  Jefferson,  Fla. 

90th  New  York  (four  companies),  Lieut. 
Col.  L.  W.  Tinelli. 

Fori  Old  Town , Fla. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  E, 
Lieut.  H.  Farrand. 


Fort  Pulaslci,  Ga. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry. 

48th  New  York,  Col.  W.  B.  Barton. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery  (one  com- 
pany), Capt.  J.  H.  Gould. 

U.  S.  Engineers  (detachment). 

Fort  Taylor,  Key  West,  Fla. 

91st  New  York  (two  cos.),  Maj.  C.  G.  Clark 

Key  West  Barracks , Fla. 

90th  New  York  (four  cos.),  Col.  J.  S. 
Morgan. 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

4th  New  Hampshire  (seven  companies), 
Col.  Louis  Bell. 


Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces,  Fort  Pulaski,  Key  West,  &c., 
Saint  Augustine , Fla.,  August  2,  1862. 

Col.  E.  Eich,  Ninth  Maine  Volunteers : 

• * 

The  Eoman  Catholic  hishop  of  Florida  has  complained  to  me  that 
some  time  since  the  Catholic  church  at  Fernandina  was  broken  open 
and  the  vestments  of  the  priest  and  a valuable  chalice  were  stolen. 
Such  an  act  of  sacrilege  must  be  detected  and  punished  if  within  the 
bounds  of  possibility.  I desire  that  you  will  make  the  most  careful  in- 
quiry into  the  aUeged  facts  and  institute  the  strictest  search  for  the 
perpetrators  of  the  crime.  If  necessary* open  every  knapsack  in  your 
command  and  examine  every  house  in  the  city. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

ALFEED  H.  TEEEY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Washington  City,  D.  C.,  August  5,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

Sir:  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  this  date,  calliug  for  certain  informa- 
tion in  regard  to  the  troops  recently  transferred  from  the  Department 
of  the  South  and  those  still  remaining  in  that  department,  I have  the 
honor  to  report : 

1st.  That  the  force  recently  transferred  to  Fortress  Monroe,  under 
orders  from  the  War  Department,  consisted  of  seven  regiments  of  vol- 
unteer infantry,  the  aggregate  strength  of  which  I am  unable  to  state. 
They  are  at  present  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  I.  I.  Stevens. 

2d.  The  military  force  remaining  in  thatdepartmeutcomprises  fourteen 
regiments  of  infantry,  one  regiment  volunteer  engineers,  one  regiment 
cavalry,  three  light  batteries,  and  three  companies  of  regular  artillery, 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  369 

armed  as  infantry.  This  force  was  disposed  as  follows  when  I left  Port 
Royal  on  the  29th  ultimo: 

At  Hilton  Head  and  at  Bay  Point,  on  opposite  side  of  entrance,  six 
regiments  of  infantry,  one  regiment  volunteer  engineers,  one  regiment 
cavalry,  and  two  light  batteries. 

At  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  five  regiments  and  three  companies  of  infantry, 
one  light  battery,  and  three  companies  of  regulars. 

At  Fort  Pulaski,  one  regiment. 

At  Fernandina,  one  regiment. 

At  Saint  Augustine,  seven  companies. 

3d.  The  force  remaining  in  the  Department  of  the  South  is  not  only  am- 
ply sufficient  to  hold  the  posts  now  occupied,  with  the  aid  afforded  by 
the  Navy,  but  may  in  my  judgment  be  still  further  reduced  without  en- 
dangering the  safety  of  any  of  the  positions,  the  extent  of  the  reduction 
depending  upon  the  policy  adopted  of  covering  the  coast  to  a consid- 
erable extent  from  the  incursions  of  the  rebels  or  simply  holding  the 
points  of  actual  military  importance. 

Assuming  that  all  the  positions  now  occupied  are  to  be  maintained, 
it  would  be  entirely  safe,  I think,  to  withdraw  four  more  regiments  of 
infantry,  the  regiment  of  cavalry,  the  whole  or  a part  of  the  volunteer 
engineer  regiments,  and  one  or  two  of  the  light  batteries.  The  remain- 
ing troops,  distributed  as  follows,  would  cover  securely  all  the  positions 
now  occupied. 

At  Beaufort,  four  regiments  infantry,  one  light  battery,  and  three 
companies  of  regulars. 

At  Hilton  Head  and  Bay  Point,  four  regiments  of  infantry  and  any 
part  of  the  engineer  regiment  not  withdrawn. 

At  Fernandina,  one  regiment,  as  at  present. 

At  Fort  Pulaski  and  Saint  Augustine,  one  regiment  of  infantry  dis- 
tributed, six  companies  at  the  former  and  four  companies  at  the  latter 
place. 

The  cavalry  is  of  little  service  in  the  department,  and  should  be 
withdrawn  if  needed  elsewhere.  Should  the  demand  for  troops  be  so 
pressing  as  to  justify  a change  of  policy  in  regard  to  the  occupation 
of  positions  in  the  Department  of  the  South,  a still  further  reduction  of 
force  might  be  made  to  the  extent  of  two  regiments.  This  would  leave 
eight  regiments  of  infantry  and  one  battery  of  artillery  in  the  depart- 
ment, and  would  involve  the  abandonment  of  Beaufort,  and  consequently 
the  withdrawal  of  the  contrabands  from  Port  Royal  and  the  adja- 
cent islands  and  their  establishment  on  Hilton  Head.  This  change  of 
policy  is  of  doubtful  expediency,  and  is  recommended  only  in  case  the 
services  of  the  two  additional  regiments  secured  thereby  are  impera- 
tively required  elsewhere.  The  withdrawal  of  four  more  infantry 
regiments,  the  regimeut  of  cavalry,  the  whole  or  a part  of  the  engineer 
regiment,  and  Hamilton’s  regular  battery  is  however  confidently  recom- 
mended. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G.  WRIGHT, 
Brigadier -General  of  Volunteers . 


General,  Orders,  ) War  Dept.,  Adjt.  General’s  Office, 

No.  98.  ( Washington , August  8,  1862. 

West  Florida  is  detached  from  the  Department  of  the  South  and 
24  r r — VOL  XIV 


370 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVE 

annexed  to  the  Department  of  the  Gulf.  Brig.  Gen.  L.  G.  Arnold  will 
report  to  Major-General  Butler  accordingly. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces  on  the  Savannah  Biver, 

Fort  PulasM , Ga .,  August  11,  1862. 

Capt.  E.  W.  Smith, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  about  7 o’clock  yesterday 
morning  one  of  the  enemy’s  steamers  was  reported  coming  down  the 
Savannah  Biver,  bearing  a flag  of  truce.  I immediately  sent  Lieut.  A. 
W.  Goodell,  adjutant  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  post  adju- 
tant, accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Dandy,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volun- 
teers, to  meet  her,  giving  him  the  following  letter  of  instructions : 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces  on  the  Savannah  River, 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  August  10,  1862. 

To  A.  W.  Goodell, 

Adjutant  Fortg-eiglith  New  York  Volunteers,  Post  Adjutant : 

Adjutant  : You  will  at  once  proceed,  with  the  tug-boat  Thomas  Foulkes,  to  meet  the 
flag  of  truce  now  coming  down  the  Savannah  River,  going  up  the  South  Channel  and 
meeting  her  at  as  great  a distance  from  the  fort  as  is  now  possible.  Ascertain  the 
object  of  her  visit  and  direct  the  boat  to  remain  precisely  at  the  point  of  meeting 
until  you  communicate  with  me.  Should  the  bearer  of  the  flag  desire  a personal 
interview  with  the  commanding  officer  I will  accompany  you  on  your  return,  but  on 
no  account  and  under  no  circumstances  are  you  to  permit  any  person  connected  with 
the  steamer  to  land  with  you  at  either  of  the  wharves  at  this  fort. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  B.  BARTON, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

When  the  steamer  bearing  the  flag  arrived  at  a point  about  3J  miles 
distant  from  the  fort  I directed  a gun  on  the  northwest  angle  to  be  fired 
as  a signal  for  her  to  heave  to,  which  she  at  once  did.  By  the  time  our 
boat  had  reached  her,  however,  she  had  moved  considerably  nearer  the 
fort,  partly  no  doubt  by  the  action  of  the  tide,  and  partly  also  pro- 
pelled by  her  own  wheels,  which  turned  slowly  at  intervals. 

Wljen  Adjutant  Goodell  returned  to  the  wharf  he  informed  me  that  ! 
the  boat  was  the  General  Lee,  with  Captain  Stewart,  of  General  Mer- 
cer’s staff,  on  board,  accompanied  by  three  other  officers,  and  that  the 
object  of  the  visit  was  to  bring  down  a Mrs.  Hanley  and  her  little  son, 
who  desired  to  go  North.  These  persons  he  had  brought  to  the  wharf 
in  the  Foulkes.  As  soon  as  the  lady  and  her  boy  had  landed  I directed 
the  adjutant  to  return  to  the  Lee  and  inform  Captain  Stewart  that  I 
deemed  It  my  duty  to  detain  the  steamer  until  I could  communicate 
with  the  major-general  commanding,  which  I would  do  at  once,  but  that 
she  must  positively  drop  her  anchor  where  she  was  and  remain  there 
until  I gave  her  permission  to  go,  and  that  if  she  attempted  to  leave 
without  this  she  would  receive  the  fire  of  the  fort.  Meanwhile  I for- 
warded, through  Lieutenant  Bushby,  acting  signal  officer,  the  following 
dispatch : 

To  General  Hunter: 

Steamer  with  flag  of  truce  now  here.  Four  officers.  No  pretext  but  to  bring  a lady 
to  New  York.  Send  instructions. 


BARTON. 


hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  371 

I am  informed  by  Adjutant  Goodell  that  he  gave  to  the  officer  in 
harge  of  the  flag  the  above  instructions  in  the  plainest  possible  man- 
er,  telling  him  at  least  four  times  to  come  to  an  anchor,  and  receiving 
iis  assurance  that  he  would  do  so.  This  statement  is  entirely  corrobo- 
ated  by  Lieutenant  Dandy  and  other  persons  then  on  board  the  Foulkes. 
)ur  boat,  however,  had  not  reached  the  wharf  on  her  return  when  the 
rheels  of  the  General  Lee  began  to  revolve,  first  slowly  and  then  rapidly, 
,nd  the  vessel  to  move  up  the  river.  As  this  was  in  direct  violation  of 
ay  instructions  and  of  Captain  Stewart’s  promise  I directed  the  guns 
•n  the  west  face  of  the  fort  to  open  fire  upon  her,  but  so  rapidly  was 
he  moving  that  she  was  almost  immediately  out  of  range.  As  she  con- 
inued  to  increase  her  speed  and  showed  no  disposition  to  stop  I quickly 
>laced  on  board  the  Foulkes  a 6-pounder  and  25  men,  including  a de- 
achment  of  the  Third  Ehode  Island  Artillery,  in  charge  of  Lieutenant 
Handing,  of  that  regiment,  the  whole  in  command  of  Captain  Coan, 
^orty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers.  I directed  him  to  pursue  the  re- 
lating steamer  and  make  every  effort  to  bring  her  back.  He  was 
uccessful  in  this  attempt.  The  full  particulars  in  regard  to  this  will 
>e  found  in  Captain  Coan’6  report,  which  I herewith  inclose.* 

Having  directed  the  Lee  to  be  anchored  near  the  north  wharf,  and 
Laving  forwarded  the  following  dispatch : 

’o  General  Hunter: 

I have  detained  the  steamer  and  am  on  my  way  to  Hilton  Head. 

BARTON. 

I started  for  Hilton  Head,  to  communicate  personally  with  the  major- 
general  commanding.  Soon  after  I had  left  the  wharf  a dispatch  was 
eceived  at  this  post  as  follows: 

?o  Colonel  Barton  : 

Detain  the  rebel  steamer  and  send  the  officers  as  prisoners  to  these  headquarters. 

HUNTER. 

To  which  a reply  was  sent  by  Captain  Elmendorf,  the  senior  officer, 
n my  absence: 

?o  General  Hunter: 

Dispatch  received.  Tug-boat  Relief  aground.  Shall  I send  prisoners  with  rebel 
teamer? 

ELMENDORF. 

Meanwhile  I had  arrived  at  Hilton  Head  and  seen  the  general  com 
nanding,  and  received  verbal  instructions  to  forward  the  Lee,  with  all 
>n  board  as  prisoners,  to  headquarters.  These  instructions  were  after- 
vard  modified  by  the  general,  through  Lieutenant  [A.  M.l  Kinzie,  of 
iis  staff,  by  a direction  to  forward  the  officers  and  crew  oy  our  own 
)oat,  which  was  done  this  morning,  during  my  absence  from  the  fort. 

Captain  Elmendorf,  then  commanding,  received  these  instructions, 
riz: 

To  Captain  Elmendorf: 

Retain  the  prisoners  at  the  fort  until  Colonel  Barton  returns. 

HUNTER. 

To  Captain  Elmendorf  : 

Put  the  officers  and  crew  of  the  rebel  steamer  in  close  confinement  in  the  fort. 

HUNTER. 

* Not  found. 


372  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

On  the  return  of  the  prisoners  to  this  post  this  p.  m.,  in  accordance 
■with  instructions  from  the  major-general  commanding  I permitted  then 
to  leave  with  their  steamer  for  Savannah. 

In  addition  to  Captain  Coan’s  report  I send  herewith  that  of  Adit 
A.  W.  Goodell. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedieni 
servant, 

WM.  B.  BARTON, 

Colonel  Forty -eighth  New  YorTc  Volunteers , Commanding  Post. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces', 
Savannah  River , Fort  Pulaski , Ga .,  August  11,  1862. 
Col.  William  B.  Barton, 

Forty-eighth  New  York  State  Volunteers , Comdg.  Post : 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Sunday  morning,  Au- 
gust 10,  I received  the  following  order  from  you,  namely  : 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Savannah  Biver , Fort  Pulaski,  August  10,  1862. 

A.  W.  Goodell, 

Adjutant  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers : 

Adjutant:  You  will  at  once  proceed  with  the  tug-boat  Thomas  Foulkes  to  meel 
the  flag  of  truce  now  coining  down  the  Savannah  River,  going  up  the  South  Channel) 
and  meeting  her  at  as  great  a distance  from  the  fort  as  is  now  possible.  Ascertain 
the  object  of  her  visit  and  direct  the  boat  to  remain  precisely  at  the  point  of  meeting 
until  you  communicate  with  me.  Should  the  bearer  of  the  flag  desire  a persona] 
interview  with  the  commanding  officer  I will  accompany  you  on  your  return,  but  on 
no  account  and  under  no  circumstances  are  you  to  permit  any  person  connected  with 
the  steamer  to  land  with  you  at  either  of  the  wharfs  of  this  fort. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  B.  BARTON, 
Colonel,  Commanding. 

In  pursuance  of  the  foregoing  order  I immediately  proceeded,  in  com- 
pany with  Lieutenant  Dandy,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers,  whom 
you  ordered  to  join  me  at  the  south  wharf,  and  went  on  board  the  Thomas 
Foulkes,  hoisting  a white  flag  at  the  foremast  and  the  national  flag  at 
the  stern,  and  proceeded  around  the  east  end  of  Cockspur  Island  and 
up  the  Savannah  River.  I met  the  flag  of  truce  at  a point  3 statute 
miles  by  Coast  Survey  from  this  fort.  The  flag  was  borne  on  board  a 
large  high-decked  steamer  named  the  General  Lee.  I at  once  made 
fast  to  the  steamer  and  went  on  board  of  her  and  communicated  with 
the  bearer  of  the  flag,  ordering  him  to  remain  stationary  and  not  to 
approach  with  the  tide  or  by  other  means  nearer  the  fort,  and  to  accom- 
plish which  I requested  him  to  drop  his  anchor.  I found  the  officer 
in  charge  of  the  flag  to  be  Captain  Stewart,  of  General  Mercer’s  staff, 
accompanied  by  Captain  Stiles  and  Lieutenant  Dent,  all  of  the  so-called 
Army  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America.  On  inquiring  of  them  what 
they  desired,  they  replied  they  wished  to  place  in  my  charge  a lady, 
named  Mrs.  Hanley,  and  her  little  son,  residents  of  New  York  City, 
who  wished  to  proceed  North  to  their  home.  I received  the  lady  and 
her  son  with  the  understanding  that  should  you  not  permit  them  to 
land  they  were  to  receive  them  back  on  board  their  steamer  and  re- 
turn at  once  with  them  to  Savannah.  Meantime  they  (the  officers 
with  the  flag  of  truce)  were  to  remain  on  board  the  General  Lee  until 
my  return  to  that  vessel,  and  upon  my  reporting  to  you,  should  you 
comply  with  their  wishes  as  to  receiving  the  lady  and  should  you  deem 


3hap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


373 


further  intercourse  unnecessary,  I was  to  cause  a signal  gun  10  be  fired, 
when  they  were  immediately  to  return  to  Savannah.  I at  once  returned 
to  the  north  wharf,  where  I met  you  and  reported  the  result  of  my  in- 
terview, when  you  took  the  lady  and  son  in  charge  at  the  wharf  and 
directed  me  to  return  to  the  bearer  of  the  flag  of  truce  and  detain  him 
and  the  steamer  until  you  communicated  by  signal  with  General  Hun- 
ter at  Hilton  Head ; you  also  ordered  me  to  signalize  you  by  three  blows 
of  the  whistle  of  the  Thomas  Foulkes  in  case  the  bearer  of  the  flag  at- 
tempted to  leave  the  point  of  meeting  in  violation  of  your  orders.  I im- 
mediately returned  again  to  the  General  Lee  and  executed  your  orders, 
which  they  agreed  to  comply  with.  Upon  reaching  the  steamer  at  this 
time,  however,  I discovered  they  had  not  only  not  anchored,  but  had  drift- 
ed down  the  river  to  a point  just  off  the  lower  end  of  Long  Island,  distant 
li  statute  miles  in  a direct  line  from  this  fort,  and  in  full  view  of  the  fort 
and  its  surroundings.  I at  once  informed  them  that  they  had  approached 
nearer  the  fort,  and  inquired  if  they  had  dropped  their  anchor.  They 
said  no,  for  they  could  keep  her  in  her  position  by  turning  her  wheels. 
On  waiting  a few  minutes  I noticed  she  was  still  drifting  down  nearer 
the  fort.  I then  requested  Captain  Stewart  to  order  the  captain  of  his 
steamer  to  drop  his  anchor  at  once  and  started  forward  with  hiui  to  see 
it  executed.  We  met  the  captain  of  the  steamer  coming  toward  us,  and 
in  answer  to  the  order  to  drop  anchor  he  replied  his  anchor  was  a 
heavy  one  and  would  give  him  some  trouble  to  get  it  up.  I then  said, 
“Gentlemen,  I shall  have  to  leave  you,  but  you  must  remain  where  you 
are  until  I return  with  further  orders  from  my  commanding  officer. ; ” I 
immediately  cast  off,  and  while  doing  so  noticed  they  were  moving  their 
wheels  and  building  their  fires,  when  I hailed  them  (being  then  20  yards 
off)  in  these  words,  “Stop  your  wheels  and  throw  your  anchor  or  I am 
afraid  the  fort  will  fire  into  you  ; ” to  which  I judged  by  their  gesticula- 
tions they  assented.  I proceeded  at  once  on  my  way  to  the  north  wharf, 
and  when  one-half  mile  this  side  the  steamer  the  tort  opened  fire  on  the 
steamer  General  Lee,  the  first  shot  striking  10  yards  from  her  starboard 
side,  the  second  the  same  distance  from  her  port  side,  the  third  over 
and  ahead  of  her,  and  no  shot  struck  her.  Yet  she  put  on  all  speed  ior 
5 miles  up  the  river  until  overhauled  and  fired  into  by  the  steamer  in 
pursuit. 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  above  report,  colonel,  for  your  ap- 
proval. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ’ A.  W.  GOODELL, 

Adjt,  Forty-eighth  N.  Y.  State  Vols .,  Actg.  Post  Adjutant. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Read , Port  Royal , S.  C.,  August  11,  1862. 

Commanding-  Officer  at  Savannah,  Ga.  : 

Sir  : The  flag  of  truce  which  arrived  at  Fort  Pulaski  on  the  10th  in- 
stant was  accompanied  by  three  officers,  a circumstance  which,  taken 
in  connection  with  the  improper  behavior  of  the  officer  commanding  the 
steamer,  seemed  suspicious,  and  induced  me  to  detain  the  party.  A sub- 
sequent investigation  having  resulted  satisfactorily,  I have  the  honor 
to  return  them,  with  the  request  that  in  future  but  one  officer  may  be 
permitted  to  accompany  a flag  of  truce. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


374 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Washington,  D.  C.,  August  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South : # 

General  : The  general-in-chief  directs  me,  in  reply  to  your  commu- 
nication of  the  31st  ultimo,  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  to  in- 
form you  that  no  re-enforcements  can  at  present  be  sent  to  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  South. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  (7.,  August  14,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington , D.  <7. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  received  your  telegram 
ordering  the  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry  to  Fort  Monroe.  This  leaves 
the  Department  of  the  South  without  a mounted  man,  and  compels  the 
abandonment  of  three  of  the  five  sea  islands,  now  under  a fine  state  of 
cultivation,  to  the  enemy.  The  moral  effect  of  thus  abandoning  these 
beautiful  islands,  after  having  occupied  and  cultivated  them,  will,  in  my 
humble  opinion,  be  greatly  more  injurious  to  our  cause  than  any  benefit 
which  can  arise  from  increasing  General  McClellan’s  force  by  the  small 
number  which  can  be  sent  from  this  department. 

We  have  already  abandoned  James  Island,  Edisto  Island,  and  Dau- 
fuskie,  and  we  shall  now  have  to  leave  Saint  Helena,  Ladies,  Port 
Eoyal,  Paris,  and  Spring  Islands,  all  under  a fine  state  of  culture. 
Abandoning  these  fine  islands  to  the  enemy  after  having  them  planted 
and  promising  the  negroes  protection  is  a very  sad  termination  to  our 
exertions  in  this  department.  But  with  the  constant  diminution  of  my 
force  I am  left  no  other  alternative. 

As  we  have  to  guard  the  whole  shore  of  our  islands  vedettes  are  par- 
ticularly wanted.  I have  not  now  a mounted  man  to  send  on  express 
in  the  department. 

The  beautiful  town  of  Beaufort,  so  necessary  to  our  hospital  purposes, 
will  be  a great  loss  to  us. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

August  22, 1862. 

Referred  to  Major-General  Halleck,  general-in-chief. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Beaufort,  S.  C.,  August  16, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Dear  Sir  : I very  respectfully  but  urgently  request  of  you  authority 
to  enroll  as  laborers  in  the  employ  of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department 


Shap.XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


375 


a force  not  exceeding  5,000  able-bodied  men  from  among  the  contra- 
bands in  this  department,  common  laborers  to  be  paid  not  exceeding  $8 
per  month  and  mechanics  not  to  exceed  $10  per  month,  to  be  furnished 
with  soldiers’  rations,  for  each  class.  The  men  to  be  uniformed,  armed, 
and  officered  by  men  detailed  from  the  Army. 

My  reasons  for  asking  this  authority  are  the  following : Along  the 
entire  coast  occupied  by  our  forces,  one  or  two  places  excepted,  the 
people  suffer  greatly  from  fear  of  attack  by  their  rebel  masters,  in  the 
event  of  which  they  expect  no  mercy  at  their  hands.  This  fear  contracts 
more  or  less  their  individual  labors,  as  well  as  paralyzing  their  efforts 
for  social  and  moral  improvement.  The  rebellion  would  be  very  greatly 
weakened  by  the  escape  of  thousands  of  slaves  with  their  families  from 
active  rebel  masters  if  they  had  such  additional  security  against  re- 
capture as  these  men,  judiciously  posted,  would  afford  them.  On  the 
withdrawal  of  our  troops  from  Edisto  it  became  necessary  to  remove 
1,500  people,  and  most  of  them  from  loved  homes  of  many  years,  to 
Saint  Helena  Island,  where  were  neither  proper  accommodations  nor 
adequate  employment  for  them.  Six  hundred  and  ninety-seven  acres 
of  cotton,  835  acres  of  corn,  and  300  acres  potatoes,  the  product  of  months 
of  labor,  were  abandoned,  and  unless  destroyed  or  gathered  by  our  forces 
may  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  rebels. 

With  such  protection  as  the  N avy  will  afford  the  people  could  return  in 
safety,  and  guarded  by  these  men,  as  well  as  assisted  in  the  field  work 
by  them,  the  people  could  secure  all  those  crops,  a good  harvest  of  figs 
and  oranges,  as  well  as  comfortable  homes  for  their  suffering  families. 

Six  hundred  people  from  Georgetown,  above  Charleston,  and  175  from 
Hutchinson’s  Island,  for  lack  of  sufficient  protection,  have  also  been 
transferred  to  this  overpopulated  field,  and  necessarily  embarrassing 
somewhat  our. efforts  to  carry  out  your  wishes  with  regard  to  improving 
their  condition.  On  the  coast  of  Georgia  is  Saint  Simon’s  Island,  a 
beautiful  sea  island,  with  a colony  of  400  very  interesting  refugees,  gath- 
ered and  protected  by  the  Navy  alone,  and  thus  far  sustained  without 
any  expense  to  the  Government.  This  island  has  been  guardedfor  along 
time  by  negro  pickets  ; it  is  an  important  rendezvous,  and  the  Navy  ask 
for  additional  protection.  A few  rebels  have  already  landed,  with  the 
intention,  it  has  been  reliably  ascertained,  of  slaughtering  every  man, 
woman,  and  child  on  the  island.  They  were  vigorously  attacked  by  the 
negro  pickets,  and  during  the  action  which  ensued  2 ot  the  latter  were 
killed  and  1 wounded.  The  rebels  fled,  and  it  is  believed  succeeded  in 
making  their  escape  from  the  island.  What  their  loss  was  is  not  known. 
I think  some  of  them  must  have  been  killed.  So  near  is  this  island  to 
the  main-land  that  two  or  three  rebel  flags  can  be  seen  with  the  naked 
<eye  constantly  floating,  while  the  smoke  ot  their  salt  manufactories  black- 
ens the  sky  day  and  night.  With  a proper  guarantee  against  recapture 
an  immense  number  of  men  now  busily  at  work  in  gathering  in  crops, 
manufacturing  salt,  &c.,  could  be  withdrawn  from  the  enemy,  and  thereby 
very  materially  increase  our  power  over  these  traitors  to  our  country. 
In  two  or  three  places  contrabands  have  been  employed  by  the  Govern- 
ment for  several  months  without  receiving  anything  save  their  rations 
for  it,  no  pay  roll  having  been  kept.  In  other  cases  slaves  reputed  to 
belong  to  rebel  masters  have  been  employed,  and  at  high  rates,  whose 
wages  were  paid  to  agents  ot  these  masters.  (Among  these  cases  are 
the  slaves  of  ex-Senator  Mallory,  of  Florida).  All  these  abuses  would 
be  speedily  corrected  by  the  arrangement  contemplated  in  this  request. 
Thus  organized,  disciplined,  and  constantly  employed,  the  men  would 
^escape  demoralization  among  themselves,  and  working  with  and  for  the 


376 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL. 


soldiers  whenever  their  health  or  efficiency  demanded  it,  a happy  recip- 
rocal influence  upon  the  soldiers  and  these  earnest  and  ready  helpers 
would  almost  necessarily  be  the  result.  In  the  event  of  any  emergency 
calling  for  immediate  aid  from  these  men  they  could  promptly  respond 
to  the  call.  Hoping  by  this  arrangement  to  increase  a little  at  least  the 
efficiency  of  our  noble  Army  in  its  mighty  Struggles  for  the  integrity  of 
our  bleeding  country,  I beg  leave  to  submit  it  for  your  consideration 
and  such  action  as  you  may  deem  proper. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  27.  j Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  (7.,  August  17, 1862. 

I.  The  Seventh  Eegiment  of  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  Colonel  Put- 
nam, will  be  held  in  readiness  to  embark  for  Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  of 
which  place  it  will  hereafter  form  the  garrison.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Sleeper,  of  the  Fourth  Eegiment  of  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  on  being 
relieved  by  Colonel  Putnam,  will  embark  with  the  several  companies 
of  his  regiment  now  at  Saint  Augustine  for  this  place. 

II.  It  is  with  deep  regret  that  the  general  commanding  the  depart- 
ment has  received  several  reports  against  officers  for  returning  fugitive 
slaves  in  direct  violation  of  a law  of  Congress.  It  will  hardly  be  be- 
lieved when  it  is  announced  that  a New  England  colonel  is  to-day,  in 
the  second  year  of  the  rebellion,  in  arrest  for  having  been  engaged  in 
the  manly  task  of  turning  over  a young  woman,  whose  skin  was  almost 
as  white  as  his  own,  to  the  cruel  lash  of  her  rebel  master. 

III.  Numerous  acts  of  pilfering  from  the  negroes  have  taken  place  in 
the  neighborhood  of  Beaufort,  committed  by  men  wearing  the  uniform 
of  the  United  States.  I cannot  and  will  not  call  them  soldiers.  To 
enable  General  Saxton  to  have  these  petty  thieves  arrested  and  sent 
to  this  post  for  punishment  the  three  companies  of  the  Fourth  Eegiment 
of  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  now  at  Beaufort  will  be  placed  exclu- 
sively under  his  command,  for  service  on  the  plantations.  Major  Drew, 
or  the  officer  commanding  these  three  companies,  will  be  directed  by 
General  Brannan  to  report  immediately  to  General  Saxton  for  orders. 

All  the  furniture  left  by  the  rebels  on  the  islands,  including  that 
left  in  the  city  of  Beaufort,  is  hereby  placed  under  the  exclusive  juris- 
diction of  General  Saxton. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

ED.  W.  SMITH, 

First  Lieut.,  Fifteenth  Infantry , Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  202.  ) Washington , August  22,  1862. 

* # * # * # # 

II.  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  has  on  his  own  application 
a leave  of  absence  for  sixty  days.  He  will  turn  over  the  command  oF 
his  department  to  the  officer  next  in  rank. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck: 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


HAP.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


377 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  D.  0.,  August  26,  1862. 


brigadier- General  Saxton  : 

General  : Herewith  you  will  receive  instructions  in  relation  to  your 
iomm unication  dated  the  16th  instant.  . , 

In  addition  to  the  powers  therein  conferred  you  are  authorized  to 
,nlist  into  the  United  Stages  service  for  three  years  or  during  the  war, 
n order  to  fill  up  the  regiments  in  the  Southern  Department,  as  many 
ible-bodied  white  persons  as  may  be  required  for  that  purpose,  ihe 
•ecruits  will  be  allowed  the  advanced  pay  and  bounty  authorized  by 


aw. 

Yours,  truly, 


EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


[Inclosure.] 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  (7.,  August  25, 1862. 

Brigadier-General  Saxton: 

General:  Your  dispatch  of  the  16th  has  this  moment  been  received, 
[t  is  considered  by  the  Department  that  the  instructions  given  at  the 
ime  of  your  appointment  were  sufficient  to  enable  you  to  do  what  you 
lave  now  requested  authority  for  doing.  But  in  order  to  place  youi 
mthority  beyond  all  doubt  you  are  hereby  authorized  and  instructed: 

1st.  To  enroll  and  organize,  in  any  convenient  organization,  by  squads, 
lompanies,  battalions,^  regiments,  and  brigades,  or  otherwise,  colored 
persons  of  African  descent  for  volunteer  laborers  to  a number  not  ex- 
ceeding 5,000,  and  muster  them  into  the  service  of  the  United  States 
or  the  term  of  the  war,  at  a rate  of  compensation  not  exceeding  $5  per 
non th  for  common  laborers  and  $8  per  month  for  mechanical  or  skilled 
aborers,  and  assign  them  to  the  quartermaster’s  department,  to  do  and 
perform  such  laborers’  duty  as  may  be  required  in  the  military  service 
pf  the  United  States,  and  wherever  the  same  may  be  required  during 
the  present  war,  and  to  be  subject  to  the  Buies  and  Articles  of  War. 

2d.  The  laboring  forces  herein  authorized  shall,  under  the  order  of 
the  general -in-chief  or  of  this  Department,  be  detailed  by  the  Quarter- 
master-General for  laboring  service  with  the  armies  of  the  United  States, 
and  they  shall  be  clothed  and  subsisted  after  enrollment  in  the  same 
manner  as  other  persons  in  the  Quartermaster’s  service. 

3d.  In  view  of  the  small  force  under  your  command  and  the  inability 
of  the  Government  at  the  present  time  to  increase  it,  in  order  to  guard 
the  plantations  and  settlements  occupied  by  the  United  States  from 
invasion  and  protect  the  inhabitants  thereof  from  captivity  and  murder 
by  the  enemy,  you  are  also  authorized  to  arm,  uniform,  equip,  and  re- 
ceive into  the  service  of  the  United  States  such  number  of  volunteers 
of  African  descent  as  you  may  deem  expedient,  not  exceeding  5,000,  and 
may  detail  officers  to  instruct  them  in  military  drill,  discipline,  and 
duty,  and  to  command  them.  The  persons  so  received  into  service 
and  their  officers  to  be  entitled  to  and  receive  the  same  pay  and  rations 
as  are  allowed  by  law  to  volunteers  in  the  service. 

4th.  You  will  re-occupy,  if  possible,  all  the  islands  and  plantations 
heretofore  occupied  by  the  Government,  and  secure  and  harvest  the 
crops  and  cultivate  and  improve  the  plantations. 

5th.  The  population  of  African  descent  that  cultivate  the  lands  and 


378 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


perform  the  labor  of  the  rebels  constitute  a large  share  of  their  military 
strength,  and  enable  the  white  masters  to  fill  the  rebel  armies  and  wage 
a cruel  and  murderous  war  against  the  people  of  the  Northern  States. 
By  reducing  the  laboring  strength  of  the  rebels  their  military  power 
will  be  reduced.  You  are  therefore  authorized  by  every  means  in  your 
power  to  withdraw  from  the  enemy  their  laboring  force  and  population, 
and  to  spare  no  effort  consistent  with  civilized  warfare  to  weaken, 
harass,  and  annoy  them,  and  to  establish  the  authority  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  United  States  within  your  department. 

6th.  You  may  turn  over  to  the  Navy  any  number  of  colored  volun- 
teers that  may  be  required  for  the  naval  service. 

7th.  By  recent  act  of  Congress  all  men  and  boys  received  into  the 
service  of  the  United  States  who  may  have  been  the  slaves  of  rebel 
masters  are,  with  their  wives,  mothers  and  children,  declared  to  be 
forever  free.  You  and  all  in  your  command  will  so  treat  and  regard 
them. 

Yours,  truly, 


EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War, 


[Washington,  August  26,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Brannan,  Hilton  Head , S.  C.  : 

General  : I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  instructions  of  the  Secretary 
of  War  to  Brigadier-General  Saxton.*  You  will  give  all  possible  assist- 
ance in  carrying  out  these  instructions.  No  more  of  the  cavalry  regi- 
ment in  your  command  will  be  sent  away  until  further  orders. 

This  is  directed  to  you  on  the  supposition  that  General  Hunter  has 
turned  over  to  you  the  command  of  the  department.  If  not,  it  will  be 
delivered  to  him. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-Chief. 


Washington,  August  28,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Brannan,  Hilton  Head , S.  C.  : 

General  : I wrote  to  you  on  the  26th,  inclosing  certain  regulations 
and  instructions  to  General  Saxton,  and  directing  you  to  give  all  possi- 
ble aid  to  carry  them  into  full  effect.  I also  directed  that  no  more  of 
the  cavalry  regiment  be  sent  north. 

You  will  do  everything  in  your  power  to  hold  the  islands  now  occu- 
pied in  South  Carolina  and  to  defend  the  negroes  who  are  or  may  be 
hereafter  under  our  protection. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces,  Savannah  Kiver, 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  August  31,  1862, 

Lieut.  E.  W.  Smith, 

Actg.  Asst.  A'djt.  Gen.,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. : 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the 


See  Stanton  to  Saxton,  same  date. 


bap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.- — UNION. 


379 


eneral  commanding,  that  at  daylight  this  morning  onr  pickets  on  the 
orthwest  shore  of  Cockspur  Island  discovered  and  reported  to  me  a 
teamer  flying  the  rebel  flag  apparently  aground  off  Cunningham 
>oint,  the  southeastern  extremity  of  Jones.  Island.  The  night  had 
een  very  dark  and  stormy,  with  a thick  fog,  which  accounts  for  her 
aving  escaped  observation  before.  When  the  vessel  was  first  seen 
wo  of  her  boats  filled  with  men  had  left  her  and  were  about  a mile  up 
be  Savannah  Eiver,  on  the  way  to  Savannah,  and  a third  immediately 
illowed.  As  it  was  very  evident  that  the  vessel  herself  was  hard  and 
ast  aground,  her  copper  showing  plainly,  I directed  the  fire  of  the 
art  entirely  at  the  retreating  boats,  but  these  being  at  the  extreme 
ange  of  our  longest  guns,  no  damage  was  done  them.  I had  previously 
ent  orders  to  the  tug  Starlight,  then  at  the  south  dock,  to  come  im- 
aediately  around  to  the  north  wharf,  but  in  so  doing  she  unfortunately 
.lew  out  the  packing  of  her  valves,  so  that  the  engineers  could  remain 
nly  a moment  at  a time  in  the  engine-room  and  her  speed  was  greatly 
essened.  Had  it  not  been  for  this  untoward  accident  doubtless  the 
Thole  party  belonging  to  the  steamer  would  now  be  in  our  hands.  I 
lid  not,  however,  permit  them  to  escape  without  an  effort,  but  pursued 
hem  with  small  boats  as  long  as  there  seemed  to  be  the  least  hope  of 
vertaking  them.  Almost  immediately  after  her  abandonment  by  the 
rew  and  long  before  our  boats  could  reach  her  the  steamer  was  dis- 
overed  to  be  on  fire,  and  was  soon  completely  enveloped  in  flames, 
lot  only  \/as  she  set  on  fire,  but  apparently  every  exertion  was  made 
o blow  up  her  boiler,  the  last  without  success.  I judge  her  to  have 
>een  originally  a river  steamer,  of  about  500  tons  capacity,  but  built 
»ver  to  enable  her  to  go  to  sea.  Sbe  was  a very  handsome  model,  evi- 
Lently  very  fast,  and  from  the  marks  on  her  stem  drew  only  5 or  6 feet 
>f  water.  In  appearance.she  was  somewhat  similar  to  the  Ben  He  Ford, 
die  had  a full  cargo  of  cotton.  Doubtless  as  soon  as  she  grounded 
reparations  were  made  to  burn  her,  for  the  flames  burst  out  from  all 
mints  almost  simultaneously  and  spread  with  inconceivable  rapidity, 
ler  boilers,  machinery,  anchors,  &c.,  can  easily  be  saved,  and  in  my 
udgment  are  of  sufficient  value  to  justify  the  sending  down  of  a suita- 
)le  vessel  and  experienced  persons  to  remove  them.  I have  reason  to 
>elieve  her  to  be  the  Emma,  a steamer  well  known  to  have  run  the 
flockade  several  times  heretofore  to  hTassau.  The  design  of  this  ves- 
;el  doubtless  was  to  get  to  sea  by  the  following  route,  which  I pointed 
>ut  as  practicable  in  my  communication  of  July  29  to  Major  Halpine, 
assistant  adjutant-general,  and  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract: 

In  my  opinion  it  is  by  no  means  impossible  for  a steamer  to  run  the  blockade  by 
dtber  of  the  following  routes  : Running  under  the  fire  of  the  fort  for  a short  distance 
tnd  entering  Wright  River,  at  its  mouth  through  Wall’s  Cut,  Bull  River,  Pull-and- 
>e-damned  Creek,  Cooper  River,  Calibogue  Sound,  and  thus  to  sea,  by  the  channel 
learly  3 miles  distant  from  our  battery  at  the  Martello  Tower,  or  down  Mud  River, 
>ntering  Wright  River,  entirely  out  of  range  of  the  fort,  and  for  the  rest  of  the  dis- 
;ance  by  the  route  named  above  to  sea. 

Had  she  gone  her  length  farther  to  the  right  she  would  have  got 
nto  the  channel  of  Wright  River  and  gone  to  sea,  as  she  would  have 
ipproached  no  nearer  than  5 statute  miles  to  our  battery  at  Martello 
rower,  and  after  getting  into  Wright  River  would  not  only  have  been 
mt  of  range  of  our  guns,  but  actually  out  of  sight  in  the  day-time.  If 
It  was  possible  to  furnish  me  with  another  steamer  I think  I could 
make  the  blockade  entirely  effectual,  at  least  I would  undertake  to  do 
30,  but  as  now  situated  I cannot.  The  boat  I have,  and  indeed  all 
the  boats,  are  nearly  half  the  timeout  of  repair,  from  the  fact  that  their 


380  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.XXVL 

boilers  are  not  intended  for  salt  water,  and  with  only  one  boat  here  I 
am  at  the  mercy  of  these  accidents.  Cannot  a second  boat  (the  George 
Washington,  for  instance)  be  placed  at  my  disposal?  Permit  me  re- 
spectfully to  suggest  that  if  a battery  were  erected  on  Daufuskie  Island 
at  the  point  where  the  Cooper  Biver  runs  into  Calibogue  Sound,  and 
guns  were  mounted  on  the  late  rebel  earthworks  at  Braddock’s  Point, 
the  blockade  of  Savannah  would  be  entirely  perfect,  the  battery  at 
Daufuskie  to  be  an  intrenched  camp,  with  guns  mounted  on  the  water 
front  and  land  side,  so  that  one  regiment  would  be  ample  both  for 
manning  the  guns  and  picketing  the  island.  I should  add  by  way  of 
explanation  that  the  channel  alluded  to  in  the  above  extract  from  my 
letter  of  29th  July,  leading  from  Calibogue  Sound  to  sea,  as  being  3 
miles  from  our  battery  at  the  Martello  Tower,  is  the  one  which  would 
ordinarily  be  taken  by  vessels  running  out  by  that  passage.  The  Emma, 
however,  by  reason  of  her  very  light  draught,  could  have  gone  out  by 
a shallower  channel  5 miles  from  that  battery. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

•WM.  B.  BABTON, 

Colonel  Forty -eighth  Few  Yorh  State  Vols .,  Comdg . Post. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 
No.  216.  f Washington,  September  1,  1862. 

* * # ' # # # # 


III.  Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  De- 
partment of  the  South.  He  will  immediately  repair  to  Hilton  Head, 
S.  C. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 


E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) War  Department,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  123.  f Washington , September  3,  1862. 

The  forces  in  the  Department  of  the  South  will  constitute  the  Tenth 
Army  Corps,  to  be  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  36.  f Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  Sept.  5 , 1862. 

I.  In  obedience  to  orders  from  Major-General  Hunter  the  under- 
signed assumes  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South. 

II.  The  following  officers  are  announced  on  the  staff  of  the  general 
commanding : Capt.  Louis  J.  Lambert,  assistant  adjutant-general  and 
chief  of  staff ; Lieut.  Ira  Y.  Germain  ancl  Lieut.  George  W.  Bacon,  aides- 
de-camp. 

J.  M.  BBANNAN, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


381 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  <7.,  September  [10?],  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

| Commander -in- Chiefs  Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : The  steam  ship  Ericsson  arrived  here  this  morning  from 
Fort  Monroe  with  orders  from  the  quartermaster  to  bring  a portion  of 
the  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry.  As  your  instructions  of  the  26th 
and  28th  ultimo  have  not  been  countermanded  by  the  War  Department 
I shall  not  send  any  more  cavalry.  I have  therefore  directed  the 
department  quartermaster  to  send  the  steamship  direct  to  New  York 
to-day,  as  her  services  may  be  required  by  the  Government  immediately 
for  more  important  duty/  I wrote  to  you  yesterday  relative  to  detach- 
ments of  the  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  a copy  of  which  is  herewith 
inclosed. 

Everything  quiet  in  this  department.  The  health  of  the  troops  con- 
tinues good  for  this  climate  ; no  epidemic. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


War  Department, 
Washington , Z>.  (7.,  September  11,  1862. 

Major-General  Mitchel,  Hew  York  : 

(Care  of  George  S.  Coe,  esq.,  president  American  Exchange  Bank.) 

Dispatches  this  moment  received  from  Hilton  Head  render  it  of  the 
utmost  consequence  that  you  should  not  lose  a day  in  proceeding  to 
your  command.  If  there  be  no  vessel  about  to  start  you  will  call  on 
the  assistant  quartermaster- general  for  immediate  transportation. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War . 



Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces  on  the  Savannah  River, 

Fort  Pulaski , Ga .,  September  15,  1862. 

Capt.  Louis  J.  Lambert, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  herewith  to  transmit  a letter  addressed 
to  the  general  commanding,  which  was  brought  from  Savannah  last 
| eveningby  Lieutenant  Hale,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry  Y olunteers, 
who  was  the  bearer  of  the  flag  of  truce  sent  from  this  fort  on  Saturday. 

Lieutenant  Hale  was  stopped  at  the  picket  station  near  Four-Mile 
Point,  the  officer  in  charge  of  which,  as  he  had  no  other  means  of 
communicating  with  headquarters,  sent  him  through  the  obstructions 
in  the  river,  some  2 miles  within  the  enemy’s  lines,  to  a second  picket, 
where  he  was  detained  for  over  twenty-four  hours,  entirely  without 
food  and  almost  without  shelter,  and  even  after  permission  was  given 
him  to  return  to  Pulaski  the  boat  was  brought  to  by  a shot  from  Fort 
Jackson  and  kept  waiting  two  hours  in  a heavy  rain.  I also  send  a 
Savannah  paper  of  the  13th  instant. 

The  Planter  takes  this  as  far  as  Braddock’s  Point,  and  will  there 
await  the  return  of  the  courier. 


382  COASTS  OF  S.  C.}  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


[Inclosure.] 


Confederate  States  of  America, 
Headquarters  Military  District  of  Georgia, 

Savannah,  September  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
communication  of  yesterday,  and  you  will  please  accept  my  thanks  for 
the  information  communicated  therein. 

I regret  to  have  to  say  that  the  flag-of-truee  boat  violated  the  stipu- 
lation heretofore  entered  into  in  regard  to  communicating  with  our  lines, 
viz,  that  the  boat  should  pass  up  the  South  Channel  of  the  river  and 
stop  at  our  lower  picket  on  that  side.  I must  beg  that  in  future  your 
attention  may  be  directed  to  this  point,  as  another  departure  from  the 
understood  arrangement  might  lead  to  unpleasant  consequences.  For 
much  less  cause — indeed,  as  I am  constrained  to  believe,  for  no  cause 
whatever — a flag  of  truce  sent  from  our  lines  a month  ago  was  fired  into 
by  Fort  Pulaski,  more  than  twenty  shots  being  discharged  at  her,  the 
boat  bearing  the  flag  pursued  and  fired  into  by  an  armed  steamer  filled 
with  armed  men,  and  the  officers  on  board  carried  to  Hilton  Head  in 
the  character  of  spies  $ a flagrant  indignity  and  gross  outrage  in  the 
opinion  of  every  officer  here,  and,  as  1 have  reason  to  knowT,  is  the 
opinion  of  some  of  your  own  officers  also. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 


H.  W.  MERCER, 
Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 


\ Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

1 Hilton  Head,  Fort  Royal,  S . C.,  Sept.  17,  1862. 


General  Orders, 


No.  40. 


I.  Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  the  Adjutant- 
General’s  Office,  hereby  assumes  command  of  the  Department  of  the 
South. 

II.  The  following-named  officers  are  hereby  announced  as  members 
of  the  staff  of  the  major-general  commanding  the  department:  MajJ 
W.  P.  Prentice,  assistant  adjutant-general  and  chief  of  staff;  Lieuts.  B- 
Birch,  F.  A.  Mitchel,  and  J.  0.  Williams,  aides-de-camp ; Lieut.  Israel 
R.  Sealy,  acting  assistant  adjutant- general. 

III.  Capt.  E.  W.  Mitchel,  assistant  quartermaster,  is  temporarily 
assigned  to  duty,  and  is  hereby  announced  as  acting  aide-de-camp  on 
the  staff  of  the  major-general  commanding  the  department. 


O.  M.  MITCHEL, 
Major-General,  Commanding . 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  385 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Hilton  Head , S.  C .,  September  20,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief \ Washington , I).  C.: 

General  : I Lave  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  your  orders 
I have  assumed  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South. 

I have  already  inspected  the  troops  stationed  at  Beaufort,  at  Fort 
Pulaski,  and  on  Hilton  Head  Island.  I find  their  condition,  as  well  as 
that  of  the  forts  and  other  works,  highly  satisfactory.  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Terry  has  already  been  ordered  to  an  inspection  of  the  more  south- 
ern posts  of  this  department.  He  left  Hilton  Head  on  the  16th  instant, 
and  I anticipate  his  return  in  a few  days.  The  health  of  the  officers 
and  soldiers  I find  to  be  generally  good. 

I regret  to  say  that  a small  detachment  of  soldiers  which  arrived  at 
this  post  on  the  Delaware  from  Key  West  has  been  found  to  be  in- 
fected with  yellow  fever.  Every  precaution  appears  to  have  been  taken 
by  the  commanding  officer  in  subjecting  the  vessel  to  a vigorous  and 
prolonged  quarantine.  After  the  troops  were  landed  a few  cases  of 
fever  occurred,  two  or  three  of  which  have  resulted  in  death.  The  medi- 
cal director  does  not  anticipate  at  present  that  the  disease  will  spread. 
1 inclose  a copy  of  his  report. 

I need  not  say  to  you,  general,  how  anxious  I am  to  commence  active 
operations  against  the  enemy.  I am  entirely  confident,  from  the  slight 
examination  I have  been  able  to  make,  that  the  most  important  results 
may  be  reached  at  an  early  day,  provided  it  be  possible  to  send  to  this 
department  a moderate  additional  force. 

I most  earnestly  and  respectfully  beg  that  my  old  division,  so  long 
inder  my  command,  may  again  be  placed  under  my  orders  by  trans- 
ferring them  to  the  Department  of  the  South. 

I am  happy  to  say  that  the  most  cordial  feeling  has  already  been 
established  between  Admiral  DuPont  and  myself,  and  I look  forward 
evith  great  pleasure  to  the  early  commencement  of  active  operations, 
n which  the  land  and  naval  forces  will  act  in  conjunction.  I deem  it 
ny  duty  to  omit  no  opportunity  to  harass  and  annoy  the  enemy,  and 
shall  study  with  great  care,  not  only  the  approaches  to  Charleston  and 
Savannah,  but  to  all  the  intermediate  points  on  the  line  of  the  railway 
initing  these  two  cities. 

In  case  my  old  division  could-be  returned  to  my  command  and  another 
livision  from  the  new  levies  I should  then  have  a force  sufficiently 
strong  to  strike  the  most  decisive  blows.  The  moral  and  military  effect 
>f  the  capture  and  occupation  of  Charleston  and  Savannah,  in  my 
>pinion,  cannot  be  overestimated.  Every  day  that  passes  adds  to  the 
strength  of  the  defenses  in  process  of  construction  by  the  enemy  before 
kese  two  important  cities. 

I do  not  intend  to  importune  the  Government  to  increase  the  number 
>f  troops  under  my  command  on  my  own  personal  account,  but  I should 
)e  wanting  in  the  discharge  of  the  duty  which  devolves  upon  me  as 
iommander  of  the  Department  of  the  South  if  I did  not  represent  to  the 
Government  in.  the  strongest  terms  the  vast  importance  of  the  early 
capture  of  Charleston. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  M.  MITCHEL, 

Major -General,  Commanding . 


384 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


[In  closure.] 

Medical  Director’s  Office,  Hilton  Head,  S.  0., 

, September  19,  1862. 

Maj.  W.  P.  Prentice, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Department  of  the  South : 

Major  : In  obedience  to  instructions  received  from  the  major-general 
commanding,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  in  regard 
to  the  origin  and  existence  of  yellow  fever  at  this  place: 

The  steamer  Delaware,  with  General  Terry  and  staff  on  board,  left 
Hilton  Head  on  the  26th  of  July  for  Saint  Augustine,  Key  West,  andi 
Port  Jefferson,  Tortugas.  She  returned  here  on  the  26th  off  August, 
bringing  a detachment  of  soldiers  belonging  to  the  Seventh  Kew  Hamp- 
shire Volunteers,  who  had  been  left  sick  at  Fort  Jefferson,  Tortugas, 
when  the  regiment  left  the  post  in  June  last.  They  were  all  men  who 
had  been  invalids  for  a long  time  and  broken  down  in  constitution. 

The  steamer  left  Key  West  on  the  14th  of  August,  arriving  here,  as 
before  stated,  on  the  26th,  and  was  ordered  to  the  quarantine  at  Saint 
Helena  Sound,  about  20  miles  from  this  place.  Asst.  Surg.  [W.  F.] 
Cornick,  U.  S.  Army,  under  orders  from  this  place,  and  a passenger  on 
board  the  Delaware,  having  been  on  duty  at  Key  West  for  some  time 
past  and  much  exposed  to  yellow  fever,  was  taken  sick  almost  imme- 
diately after  leaving  Key  West  with  what  he  supposed  to  be  a mild 
case  of  yellow  fever,  but  had  entirely  recovered  from  it  before  his  arrival 
here,  and  no  other  case  of  sickness  then  existed  on  board  the  steamer. 
The  vessel  remained  at  quarantine  twelve  days,  and  as  it  was  then  re- 
ported to  me  by  Surgeon  J.  C.  Dalton,  IT.  S.  Volunteers  (who  was  a pas- 
senger), that  there  was  no  sickness  on  board,  she  was  allowed  to  come 
to  Hilton  Head.  Three  days  subsequent  to  the  lauding  of  the  passen- 
gers yellow  fever  developed  itself  among  the  detachment  of  the  Seventh 
New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  and  during  the  last  nine  days  there  have 
been  eight  deaths  in  the  detachment.  The  disease  has  not  spread  be- 
yond it,  and  during  the  last  three  days  there  have  been  no  new  cases. 
As  the  remainder  of  the  detachment  has  been  sent  to  New  York  in  the 
steamer  Delaware  I am  greatly  in  hopes  that  no  more  cases  will  occur. 
The  other  chartered  vessels,  with  Government  stores  on  board,  which 
have  arrived  here  from  Key  West  have  also  been  sent  to  New  York. 
I am  satisfied  that  the  only  method  of  keeping  yellow  fever  away  from ' 
here  is  to  stop  any  and  all  communication  with  any  infected  post. 

In  this  instance  twenty-eight  days  elapsed  between  the  time  that  the 
steamer  Delaware  left  Key  West  (the  only  infected  post  then  visited)! 
and  its  development  after  their  arrival  and  debarkation  here. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  H.  CBANE, 

Medical  Director , Department  of  the  South. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Hilton  Head , S.  0.,  September  20,  1862. 

The  Hon.  the  Secretary  of  War, 

Washington , D.  G.: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  the  Department  my  arrival  at 
these  headquarters  on  the  afternoon  of  Monday,  the  15th  instant. 

On  assuming  command  I immediately  commenced  an  inspection  of 


Ciiap.  XXYI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  385 

the  various  bodies  of  troops  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Hilton  Head, 
and  at  this  post.  This  duty  was  closed  to-day,  and  it  gives  me  great 
pleasure  to  report  that  I have  found  the  officers  and  soldiers  at  Beau- 
fort, at  Fort  Pulaski,  and  on  Hilton  Head  Island  in  a condition  of 
health,  discipline,  drill,  and  esprit  highly  satisfactory. 

If  consistent  with  the  interest  of  the  service,  I most  earnestly  beg 
that  my  old  division  may  be  transferred  to  the  Department  of  the  South 
and  once  more  placed  under  my  command.  I do  not  make  this  appli- 
cation without  due  reflection,  and  I make  it  because  I am  satisfied  that 
when  this  department  comes  to  be  re-enforced,  which  I trust  may  be 
speedily  done,  I can  accomplish  more  with  the  troops  who  have  been 
trained  by  me,  who  know  me  personally,  and  to  whom  I am  devotedly 
attached,  than  with  twice  the  number  of  troops  to  whom  I am  an  entire 
stranger.  I am  satisfied  that  while  a soldier  may  enlist  through  mo- 
tives of  patriotism  he  fights  for  his  general. 

I feel  it  my  duty  to  inform  the  Secretary  of  War  that  the  independent 
command  given  to  General  Saxton  has  not  thus  far  been  productive 
of  the  best  results.  Some  friction,  and  even  collision,  has  taken  place 
already  between  the  officers  of  the  two  independent  commands,  and  I 
am  entirely  certain  that  no  matter  how  harmoniously  General  Saxton 
and  myself  may  be  able  to  work  together  there  will  be  trouble  con- 
stantly arising  among  the  subordinates. 

It  is  my  duty  to  report  to  the  War  Department  and  to  the  Government 
that  I find  a feeling  prevailing  among  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  preju- 
dice against  the  blacks,  founded  upon  the  opinion  that  in  some  way  tbe 
negroes  have  been  more  favored  by  the  Government  and  more  privileges 
granted  to  them  than  to  the  volunteer  soldier.  I do  not  pretend  to  say 
that  this  feeling  has  any  foundation  in  fact,  but  I am  entirely  certain 
that  under  the  existing  organization  there  is  little  hope  of  allaying  or 
^destroying  a feeling  widely  prevalent  and  fraught  with  the  most  injurious 
| consequences.  I would  therefore  earnestly  recommend  that  the  officers 
in  charge  of  the  negroes,  the  plantations,  and  the  interests  attaching 
thereto  be  placed  under  the  direct  control  of  the  general  commanding 
the  department.  I am  not  prompted  to  make  this  recommendation  by 
any  desire  to  extend  my  own  authority  or  to  increase  the  responsibilities 
already  devolved  upon  me,  but  solely  in  the  hope  that  the  change  pro- 
posed will  diminish,  if  not  destroy,  all  the  causes  of  controversy  which 
Shave  hitherto  existed. 

I have  been  diligently  engaged  in  the  study  of  the  maps  presenting 
the  topography  and  hydrography  of  the  region  extending  from  Char- 
leston to  Savannah,  and  I am  not  quite  sure  that  it  is  possible,  even 
with  the  force  now  under  my  command,  to  do  something  to  harass  and 
annoy  the  enemy.  While  it  is  not  my  intention,  without  sufficient 
object,  to  jeopardize  my  troops,  I shall  omit  no  opportunity  of  striking 
a blow,  no  matter  how  unimportant,  at  the  enemy’s  lines  of  intercom- 
!munication. 

May  I venture  to  ask  your  attention  to  the  promotion  of  my  staff, 
which  now  only  requires  the  sanction  of  the  President,  since  the  troops 
in  the  department  now  constitute  the  Tenth  Army  Corps. 

The  names  of  the  officers  recommended  by  me  are  in  the  hands  of  the 
President. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

O.  M.  MITCHEL, 

Major-General , Comdg.  Department  of  the  South. 

25  R R— VOL  XIV 


386 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Hdqrs.  IT.  S.  Forces,  Fort  Pulaski,  Key  West,  &c., 
Hilton  Head , S.  (7.,  September  23,  1862. 

Maj.  W.  P.  Prentice, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  South  : 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  orders  re- 
ceived from  Brigadier-General  Brannan,  then  commanding  the  De- 
partment of  the  South,  I on  the  16th  instant  left  this  place  for  Saint 
Augustine,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  execution  of  certain  orders  j 
issued  by  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  the  superintendent  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  abandoned  plantations  in  this  department,  by  which  Lieut.  I 
Col.  O.  T.  Beard,  provost-marshal,  was  directed  to  expel  from  Saint 
Augustine  and  send  to  Jacksonville  all  such  of  the  people  of  the  city  i 
as  should  refuse  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Government  of  the  ; 
United  States,  &c.  I arrived  at  Fernandina,  Fla.,  on  Wednesday,  the 
17th  instant,  and  learning  that  if  I proceeded  directly  to  Saint  Augus- 
tine the  steamer  Burnside,  with  the  expelled  persons  on  board,  might 
pass  me  in  the  night,  I went  first  to  the  mouth  of  the  Saint  John’s,  for 
the  purpose  of  awaiting  her  arrival.  On  Thursday  morning  she  was 
off  the  bar  of  the  Saint  John’s,  with  a large  number  of  women  and  chil- 
dren on  board.  I immediately  caused  her  to  return  to  Saint  Augustine  j 
and  proceeded  there  myself. 

On  my  arrival  I caused  all  those  persons  who  had  been  expelled  or  j 
placed  in  arrest  to  be  released,  and  instructed  the  commandant  of  the 
post  to  permit  no  more  arrests  to  be  made  by  authority  of  General 
Saxton. 

I inclose  a copy  of  General  Saxton’s  instructions  to  Colonel  Beard,* 
a copy  of  a letter  from  General  Saxton  to  Colonel  Putnam,  Seventh 
New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  whose  regiment  garrisons  the  post,*  and 
a list  of  the  names  of  the  persons  placed  on  board  the  Burnside.* 

Among  the  expelled  persons  were  some  who  now  desire  to  leave 
Saint  Augustine.  In  anticipation  of  the  expulsion  they  sold  whatever 
property  they  possessed  and  converted  their  means  into  funds  current 
in  the  Southern  States  only.  They  now  find  themselves  without  the 
means  of  subsistence.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  many  of  them  are 
already  and  others  will  soon  become  dependent  on  the  Government 
for  subsistence,  I respectfully  recommend  that  such  of  them  as  may 
desire  to  do  so  be  permitted  to  leave  the  city. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfullv,  jour  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  H.  TERRY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Exped’ry  Forces,  St.  John’s  Biyer,  Fla., 

Jacksonville , October  7,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication of  the  5th  instant. 

I return  by  the  U.  S.  transport  Boston  the  Seventh  Regiment  Con- 
necticut Volunteers,  Colonel  Hawley  commanding,  and  will  return 
myself  with  the  balance  of  my  command  on  the  Boston  being  sent 
back.  The  transport  Cosmopolitan,  having  in  crossing  the  bar,  unforj 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


387 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

tunately  run  aground  and  knocked  a hole  in  her  bottom,  is  in  the  river 
and  cannot  be  removed  until  thoroughly  repaired.  The  guns,  carriages! 
ammunition,  &c.,  are  now  on  board  the  transport  Neptune  and  will  be 
forwarded  to  Hilton  Head  forthwith.  The  batteries  and  works  on  Saint 
John’s  Bluff  are  completely  destroyed,  and,  as  I have  since  found  it  im- 
practicable to  remove  the  corn  on  the  banks  of  Saint  John’s  River  the 
object  of  the  expedition  has  been  attained  sooner  than  I had  antici- 
pated when  writing  my  last  communication. 

I have  sent  an  expedition  up  the  river  for  the  purpose  of  destroying 
some  rebel  steamboats  said  to  be  concealed  some  miles  from  this.  It  is 
expected  back  early  to-morrow,  October  8,  when  I shall  be  ready  to 
return,  and  merely  awaiting  the  Boston. 

Many  refugees,  with  their  families,  and  about  100  contrabands  have 
placed  themselves  under  my  protection,  and  it  is  my  intention  to  bring 
them  to  Hilton  Head  on  my  return. 

Since  my  last  communication  I have  discovered  another  battery  not 
yet  mounted  but  ready  for  the  reception  of  guns.  This  the  gunboats 
will  destroy  before  leaving  the  river. 

I am  deeply  indebted  to  Captain  Steedman,  IT.  S.  Navy,  commandiu0* 
the  gunboats  in  this  river,  for  his  prompt  offer  of  assistance  to  relieve 
the  transport  Cosmopolitan  and  for  his  hearty  co-operation  durino-  the 
entire  expedition.  & 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  M.  BRANNAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Comm  anding. 


General  Orders,  ) 
No.  46. 


Hdqbs.  Department  of  the  South, 

( Hilton  Head,  Fort  Royal,  S.  C .,  October  27, 1862. 

!n  consequence  of  the  temporary  illness  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan  will  assume  command  of  the  De- 
partment of  the  South. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel : 

„ , ISBAEL  B.  SEALY, 

second  Lieutenant,  Forty-seventh  Y.  Y.  Vols.,  A.  A.  A.  Q. 


lUtmct  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan  com- 
mandmg,  for  the  month  of  October,  1862,  headquarters  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent  at  last 
monthly  return. 

1 

o 

ss 

O 

s 

g 

•epartment  staff 

38 

134 

133 

110 

415 

29 

3,  508 
3,  556 

2,  682 

68 
4,  561 

4,  957 

3,  251 

70 
5,  094 
5,  806 
3,  462 

64 
5,  230 
5,  826 
3,  482 

^Hc.dand  Fort  Seward,  S.  C.,  and  Graham’s  Plantation. 

ort  Pulaski,  Ga  Key  West,  Fla.,  Fernandina  and  Fort 
Clinch,  Fla.,  Old  Town  and  Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

Grand  total 

9,  775 

12,  837 

14,432  | 14,602 

388  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.- [Chap.  XXVI. 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  South , commanded  by 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan , headquarters  Hilton  Head , S.  (7.,  October 


31,  1862. 

HILTON  HEAD  AND  FORT  SEWARD,  S.  C. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry  commanding. 

3d  New  Hampshire,  Colonel  J.  H.  Jack- 
son. 

47th  New  York,  Col.  J.  L.  Fraser. 

76th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  D.  C.  Straw- 
bridge. 

97th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  H.  R.  Guss. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Lieut.  Col.  S. 
R.  Bucklin. 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E,  Lieut.  E. 
Gittings. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Col.  E.  W.  Ser- 
rell. 

graham’s  plantation. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (detachment), 
Lieut.  J.  G.  Thayer. 

FORT  PULASKI,  GA. 

48th  New  York,  Col.  W.  B.  Barton. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Company  G, 
Capt.  J.  H.  Gould. 

FORT  CLINCH,  FLA. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  C, 
Capt.  J.  E.  Place, 


OLD  TOWN,  FLA. 

1st  N.  Y.  Eng’s,  Co.  E,  Lieut.  H.  Farrand. 

BEAUFORT,  S.  C. 

Col.  T.  H.  Good  commanding  post. 

6th  Connecticut,  Maj.  L.  Meeker. 

7th  Connecticut,  Col.  J.  R.  Hawley. 

8th  Maine,  Col.  J.  D.  Rust. 

4th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Louis  Bell. 
47th  Penn.,  Lieut.  Col.  G.  W.  Alexander. 
55th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Richard  White. 
1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (battalion), 
Maj.  A.  H.  Stevens,  jr. 

1st  Connecticut  Light  Battery,  Capt.  A. 
P.  Rockwell. 

1st  New  York  Eng’s,  Co.  H,  Capt.  F.  H. 
Cruso. 

KEY  WEST,  FLA. 

90th  New  York,  Col.  J.  S.  Morgan. 

FERNANDINA,  FLA. 

9th  Maine,  Col.  Rishworth  Rich. 

SAINT  AUGUSTINE,  FLA. 

7th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  H.  S.  Putnam. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  47.  j Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  November  1, 1862. 

The  Tenth  Army  Corps  will  learn  with  regret  of  the  death  of  its  com- 
mander, Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel,  who  departed  this  life  at  6.30  o’clock 
on  the  evening  of  the  30th  October,  1862,  at  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Maj.  Gen.  O.  M.  Mitchel  was  a graduate  of  the  Military  Academy, 
West  Point,  1829,  but  retired  from  the  Army  after  a short  period  of 
service  until  the  danger  of  his  country  again  called  him  to  arms.  At 
the  outbreak  of  the  present  rebellion  and  in  the  West,  where  he  com- 
manded a division  of  our  Army  as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  he 
proved  himself  to  be  a gallant  and  efficient  commander. 

Brief  as  was  his  career  in  the  Department  of  the  South,  yet  had  he 
already  won  the  esteem  and  regard  of  all  by  his  energy  and  activity 
in  directing  the  movements  of  the  corps  against  the  adjoining  rebels 
and  the  firmness  and  tempered  justice  with  which  he  conducted  the  ad- 
ministrative duties  of  the  department. 

He  died  with  the  calm  fortitude  of  a believing  Christian,  and  while 
we  lament  the  death  of  a gallant  soldier  and  a kind  friend,  let  us  en- 
deavor to  emulate  the  virtues  and  soldierly  qualities  of  our  late  com- 
mander. 

As  an  appropriate  tribute  of  respect  to  his  memory,  on  the  day  fol- 
lowing the  receipt  of  this  order,  at  every  military  post  of  this  depart- 
ment, thirteen  minute  guns  will  be  fired,  commencing  at  meridian,  and 
the  flag  of  the  Union  to  be  displayed  at  half-mast  from  that  hour  to 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  389 

sunset  on  the  same  day,  and  for  thirty  days  the  prescribed  badge  of 
mourning  will  be  worn  by  the  officers  of  the  Tenth  Army  Corps. 

J.  M.  BRANNAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  51.  ( Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  C .,  November  6, 1862. 

The  general  commanding  desires  to  express  to  that  portion  of  the 
corps  composing  the  late  expedition  to  Pocotaligo,  S.  C.,  under  his  per- 
sonal command,  viz,  the  First  and  Second  Brigades,  the  First  New  York 
Engineer  Corps,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  and  Forty-eighth  New 
York  Regiments,  with  the  Third  Battalion  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry, 
and  sections  of  light  artillery  from  the  First  and  Third  U.  S.  Artillery 
Regiments,  his  approbation  of  their  gallant  and  distinguished  conduct 
during  that  expedition. 

Though  laboring  under  many  disadvantages,  yet  by  superior  courage 
and  determination  was  a greater  force  of  the  rebels  driven  from  their 
strong  and  well  studied  positions  at  Caston  and  Frampton,  and  pursued, 
i flying  and  in  confusion,  to  their  intrenchments  on  the  Pocotaligo. 

The  commanding  general  has  learned  from  the  events  of  this  expe- 
dition that  he  can  place  the  most  implicit  confidence  in  the  bravery 
and  devotion  of  his  troops,  and  feels  satisfied  that  in  all  subsequent 
operations  the  Tenth  Army  Corps  will  proudly  maintain  the  good  repu- 
tation they  so  hardly  earned  on  the  plains  of  the  Pocotaligo. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan: 

LOUIS  J.  LAMBERT, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Tenth  Army  Corps. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  352.  f Washington , November  18,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  Truman  Seymour,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  will  repair  to  Hilton 
| Head,  S.  C.,  and  report  for  duty  to  the  commanding  officer  Department 
of  the  South. 

# * # * * * * 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Abstract  from,  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan  com- 
manding, for  the  month  of  December,  1862,  headquarters  Hilton  Head , S.  C. 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
ana  absent. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent  at  last 
monthly  return. 

1 

§ 

g 

X 

Department  staff 

80 

136 

169 

114 

29 

3,407 

3,  969 
3,  023 

59 
4, 476 

5, 135 
3,  702 

<4 

4,  906 

5,  615 
3,  881 

66 
4,  926 

5,650 
3,  939 

Saint  Helena  Island,  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  A.  H. 
Terry. 

Port  Royal  Island,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  T.  Seymour 

Port  Pulaski,  Ga.,  Key  West,  Fla.,  Fernandina,  Fla.,  Fort 
Clinch,  Fla.,  Old  Town,  Fla.,  Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

Grand  total 

447 

10,  428 

13,  370 

14,  464 

14, 579 

380  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  South , commanded  by 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Brannan , headquarters  Hilton  Head , S.  G .,  December 
31,  1862. 


SAINT  HELENA  ISLAND,  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry  commanding. 

3<1  New  Hampshire,  Col.  J.  H.  Jackson. 
47th  New  York,  Maj.  G.  Van  Brunt. 

76th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  D.  C.  Straw- 
bridge. 

97th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  H.  R.  Guss. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Company  M, 
Lieut.  J.  G.  Thayer. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Art’y,  Col.  E.  Metcalf. 
3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E,  Capt.  J. 
Hamilton. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Lieut.  Col.  J. 
F.  Hall. 

FORT  PULASKI,  GA. 

48th  New  York,  Col.  W.  B.  Barton. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Company  G, 
Capt.  J.  H.  Gould. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  F, 
Capt.  S.  C.  Eaton. 

FERNANDINA,  FLA. 

9th  Maine,  Col.  Rish worth  Rich. 

OLD  TOWN,  FLA. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  E, 
Lieut.  H.  Farrand. 


PORT  ROYAL  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  Seymour  commanding. 

6th  Connecticut,  Col.  J.  L.  Chatfield. 

7th  Connecticut,  Col.  J.  R.  Hawley. 

8th  Maine,  Col.  J.  D.  Rust. 

4th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Louis  Bell. 

90th  New  York,  Col.  Joseph  S.  Morgan. 

55th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Richard  White. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (battalion), 
Maj.  A.  H.  Stevens,  jr. 

1st  Connecticut  Light  Battery,  Capt.  A. 
P.  Rockwell. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  B,  D,  and 
M,  Capt.  L.  L.  Langdon. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  H, 
Capt.  F.  H.  Cruso. 

KEY  WEST,  FLA. 

47th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  T.  H.  Good. 

FORT  CLINCH,  FLA. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  C, 
Capt.  J.  E.  Place. 

SAINT  AUGUSTINE,  FLA. 

7th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  H.  S.  Put- 
nam. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  C .,  January  20,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  JJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  arrival  in  this  department 
af^er  a very  boisterous  and  stormy  voyage  through  weather  to  which 
I fear  some  of  the  re-enforcements  ordered  from  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  may 
have  been  exposed.  I found  on  arriving  here  the  steamer  Ironsides 
already  at  anchor  and  the  iron-clad  Mon  tank  came  in  a few  hours  a fter, 
it  being  reported  from  the  signal  station,  though  as  yet  not  confir  med, 
that  two  more  of  the  monitor  iron-clads  were  visible  outside  the  bar. 

The  storm  of  wind  and  rain  still  continues  so  fierce  that  I have  not 
been  able  to  communicate  with  Admiral  DuPont,  and  therefore  am 
without  definite  information  on  this  subject. 

I find  the  aggregate  strength  of  the  department  to  be  14,305  men  and 
officers,  and  that  the  health  of  the  command  appears  fully  up  to  the 
average,  all  traces  of  the  yellow  fever  having  disappeared,  and  the 
small  pox,  of  which  we  have  had  some  cases  at  Beaufort  and  on  this 
island,  being  thus  far  confined  to  the  contrabands,  who  have  been  placed 
in  quarters  at  a distance  from  the  camps. 

I have  earnestly  to  request  that  a regiment  of  cavalry  may  be  sent 
to  this  department,  as  we  have  here  but  four  reduced  troops  of  the  First 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


391 


Chap.  XXVI.] 

Massachusetts  Cavalry,  and  shall  be  greatly  straitened  for  the  want  of 
this  arm  when  wg  debark  upon  tbe  main-land,  the  enemy,  as  usual, 
being  doubtless  well  supplied  with  horse. 

I would  ask,  if  consistent  with  the  good  of  the  service,  that  the  Sixth 
United  States  Cavalry,  my  own  regiment,  might  be  the  one  sent,  my- 
self and  Brigadier- General  Emory,  its  lieutenant-colonel,  being  both 
detached  from  it. 

Previous  to  my  leaving  the  department  I made  last  August  an  ap- 
plication for  cavalry  in  lieu  of  the  two  battalions  of  the  First  Massa- 
chusetts Cavalry  then  ordered  North,  stating  the  absolute  necessity  that 
existed  here  for  such  troops,  and  to  the  terms  of  that  application  I 
must  respectfully  refer  you. 

Believe  me  to  remain,  general,  with  sincere  respect,  your  most  obe- 
dient servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  3.  1 Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  January  20,  1863. 

Agreeably  to  special  instructions  from  the  Government  the  under- 
signed hereby  resumes  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South.  It 
is  with  sincere  pleasure  that  the  general  commanding  returns  to  this 
department— the  brave  men  of  the  North,  whose  destiny  has  been  cast, 
having  never  failed,  although  without  many  opportunities  for  great  dis- 
tinction, to  do  their  whole  duty  when  called  upon— as  witness  Port  Royal, 
Pulaski,  James  Island,  and  Pocotaligo,  names  to  which  every  soldier  of 
the  command  may  look  back  with  pride.  Although  not  always  suc- 
cessful—a thing  depending  on  causes  often  beyond  their  control— they 
have  the  fully  equal  merit  of  always  having  deserved  success.  In  view 
of  the  active  operations  about  to  commence  in  this  department  the  gen- 
eral commanding  would  remind  officers  and  enlisted  men  of  the  absolute 
necessity  of  a strict,  prompt,  and  unquestioning  obedience  to  all  orders. 
Without  implicit,  complete,  and  hearty  obedience  an  army  is  a mere 
mob.  With  discipline  there  is  safety,  honor,  and  the  full  assurance  of 
being  able  to  render  substantial  service  to  our  country.  The  general  com- 
manding would  deeply  regret  should  a single  man  be  killed  while  basely 
deserting  his  colors  j but  he  would  remind  all  officers  that  it  is  their  im- 
perative duty  instantly  to  put  to  death  any  officer  or  enlisted  man  who 
shall  be  found  deserting  his  brave  comrades  who  are  doing  their  duty 
in  front.  Each  officer  who  may  find  it  necessary  to  execute  this  prompt 
punishment  of  cowardice  and  treason  will,  as  soon  after  the  act  as  the 
exigencies  of  the  service  may  permit,  report  what  he  has  done  to  these 
headquarters,  giving  the  name  of  the  traitor  slain  and  of  such  witnesses 
as  can  prove  the  justification  of  the  penalty. 

No  officer  or  soldier  will  leave  the  battle-field  for  the  purpose*  of  tak- 
ing off  the  wounded,  who  will  be  much  better  attended  to  by  the  am- 
bulance men  and  the  nurses.  Poor  wounded  men,  helpless  in  the  hands 
of  their  torturers,  are  often  mangled  to  death  while  being  improperly  car- 
ried from  the  battle-field  by  renegades,  who  use  the  pretense  of  humanity 
as  a cloak  for  their  anxiety  to  secure  their  own  safety,  regardless  of  the 
sufferings  of  their  victims.  The  attention  of  all  commanding  officers 
in  this  department  is  urgently  drawn  to  General  Orders,  No.  20,  from 
these  headquarters,  dated  Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  0.,  August  15, 
series  of  1862,  and  the  same  will  be  read  at  the  head  of  each  brigade, 


392 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


regiment,  company,  and  detachment  on  the  parade  next  succeeding  the 
issuing  and  receipt  of  this  order.  The  general  commanding  desires  that 
in  all  ways  and  by  every  means  within  their  power  regimental  and  com- 
pany officers  will  impress  upon  their  men  the  importance  of  having  a 
perfect  mastery  of  and  reliance  upon  their  bayonets. 

The  following-named  officers  are  announced  as  the  staff  of  the  major- 
general  commanding,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accordingly : Brig. 
Gen.  Truman  Seymour,  chief  of  staff  and  chief  of  artillery ; Lieut.  Col. 
Charles G.  Halpine,  assistant  adjutant- general ; Maj.  Edward  W.  Smith, 
assistant  adjutant-general ; Lieut.  Israel  R.  Sealy,  acting  assistant  ad- 
jutant-general ; Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Wilson,  assistant  in spector- general ; 
Lieut.  Col.  M.  R.  Morgan,  chief  commissary  of  subsistence;  Surg. 
Charles  H.  Crane,  medical  director;  Maj.  E.  E.  Paulding,  chief  pay- 
master ; Capt.  James  C.  Duane,  chief  of  engineers ; Capt.  John  W.  Todd, 
chief  of  ordnance ; Col.  James  D.  Fessenden,  aide-de-camp;  Maj.  Ed- 
ward Wright,  aide-de-camp ; Capt.  R.  W.  Thompson,  A.  0.  S.,  acting 
aide-de-camp;  Capt.  William  R.  Dole,  aide-de-camp;  Capt.  Yolney 
Hickox,  aide-de-camp;  Capt.  Samuel  W.  Stockton,  aide-de-camp;  Capt. 
Arthur  M.  Kinzie,  aide-de-camp;  Lieut.  Charles  E.  Hay,  acting  aide-de- 
camp  ; Lieut.  Richard  Skinner,  acting  aide-de-camp.  Such  vacancies 
as  exist  in  the  staff  will  be  filled  and  announced  in  subsequent  orders. 

D,  HUNTER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces,  Port  Royal  Island, 

Beaufort , 8.  C.  January  25,  1863. 
(Received  at  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  South  January  27,  1863.) 
Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  effective 
strength  of  my  command,  together  with  the  number,  kind,  and  caliber 
of  arms  in  use  : 


Present 

strength. 


© 

rO 


Regiments. 


90th  New  York  Vol- 
unteers. 

Gth  Connecticut  V ol- 
unteers. 

55th  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers. 

8th  Maine  Volun- 
teers. 

4th  New  Hampshire 
Volunteers. 

Volunteer  Engineers. 

1st  Massachusetts 
Cavalry. 


10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

1 

3 


27 

23 

25 

31 


2 

6 


465 

536 

570 


527 

582 


164 


134 


307 


289 


553 

52 

196 


52 


•Total 


54 


144 


3,  032 


134 


1, 468 


164 


Arms. 


106 

56 


162 


672 


672 


32 


32 


0 © 
Be 


Ji-a 

'T  © 
_a  t-, 

is 


425 


425 


*30 


30 


Extra-duty  men  included. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


393 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


The  men  detailed  on  extra  duty  and  provost  guard  are  not  included 
in  this  report,  with  the  exception  of  the  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry. 

T.  SEYMOUR, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Fort  Boyal,  S.  (7.,  January  26,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Cliief  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C.: 

General:  The  Star  of  the  South  going  North  this  afternoon,  I have 
the  honor  to  report  the  arrival  here  of  the  One  hundred  and  fifteenth 
Regiment  New  York  State  Volunteers  in  good  condition.  We  are 
anxiously  expecting  the  arrival  of  the  re-enforcements  from  New  Berne, 
N.  0.,  but  none  have  yet  come,  the  regiment  above  named  having  come 
from  Fortress  Monroe. 

Let  me  not  be  thought  troublesome  in  again  urging  upon  your  atten- 
tion the  importance  of  having  all  the  requisitions  from  this  department 
sent  by  the  last  and  preceding  mails  filled  as  speedily  as  possible,  in 
order  that  the  Army  may  not  be  behind  when  the  Navy  is  ready.  It 
would  be  a reproach  to  our  branch  of  the  service,  or  at  least  a chance 
of  honorable  distinction  lost,  should  we  not  be  able  to  take  part  in  the 
reduction  of  Charleston.  I would  much  prefer  assisting  the  Navy  and 
receiving  assistance  from  the  gallant  men  under  Admiral  DuPout  to 
merely  entering  Charleston  as  a garrison  of  occupation  under  cover  of 
the  guns  of  the  fleet.  I will  briefly  advise  you  of  events  here,  if  any,  by 
each  mail. 

Believe  me,  with  high  esteem,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major - General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Heady  Port  Boyal , S.  C .,  January  26,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  Hew  Orleans , La.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication, dated  the  10th  instant,  forwarding  a request  from  Colonel 
Holabird,  chief  quartermaster  of  your  department,  for  coal,  forage,  in- 
trenching tools,  &c.,  and  in  reply  I have  to  state  that  I have  much 
pleasure  in  sending  as  much  coal  and  forage  as  the  vessel  sent  will  carry, 
but  that,  as  we  are  about  to  commence  immediately  upon  the  arrival  of 
re-enforcements  daily  expected,  operations  for  the  reduction  and  occu- 
pation of  Charleston,  I find  myself  unable  to  comply  with  Colonel  Hola- 
bird’s  request  for  intrenching  tools.  Far  from  having  any  to  spare,  re- 
quisitions for  a larger  amount  of  engineering  material  were  forwarded 
to  General  Totten  by  the  steamer  Arago,  which  left  here  last  Saturday, 
and  I am  only  anxious  lest  the  supplies  called  for  may  not  arrive  in 
time. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


394  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  tCnAP.  Xxvl. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  8.  ) Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  <7.,  February  6, 1863. 

I.  Lieut.  Ool.  J.  J.  Elwell,  quartermaster,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  is  hereby 
announced  as  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Tenth  Army  Corps  and  of  the 
Department  of  the  South. 

II.  First  Lieut.  H.  S.  Tafft  is  announced  as  chief  signal  officer  of  the 
Department  of  the  South. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

ED.  W.  SMITH, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  February  7,  1863. 

(Deceived  at  Headquarters  of  the  Army,  February  13,  1863.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army , Washington , H.  C.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  re-enforcements  or- 
dered to  this  department  from  North  Carolina,  10,000  infantry  with  600 
artillery,  arrived  safely  here  on  the  1st  instant,  accompanied  by  Major- 
General  Foster,  who  kindly  came  here  on  my  invitation,  expecting  that 
operations  against  Charleston  would  commence  immediately,  in  which 
case  his  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  harbor  and  its  defenses  would 
have  proved  of  the  highest  service. 

I regret  to  say,  however,  that  in  consequence  of  the  non-arrival  of 
the  two  monitor  iron-clads  Patapsco  and  Nahant,  and  the  serious  in- 
juries sustained  by  the  monitor  Weehawken  in  her  voyage  hither,  ren- 
dering it  requisite  for  the  admiral  to  send  North  for  complete  new  ma- 
chinery in  her  case,  the  Navy  will  not  be  ready  to  undertake  its  part 
for  the  next  three  or  four  weeks,  although  the  land  forces  under  my 
command  are  now  ready  to  embark  at  six  hours’  notice.  This  point  I 
wish  clearly  understood,  the  complaint  having  been  too  frequent  here- 
tofore that  in  joint  operations  the  Navy  has  been  retarded  by  having 
to  wait  for  the  land  forces. 

In  view  of  this-  unavoidable  delay  I learn  that  Major-General  Foster 
intends  returning  immediately  to  the  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

The  health  of  the  troops  is  unusually  good. 

Captain  Duane,  U.  S.  Engineers,  arrived  by  the  Star  of  the  South 
last  Wednesday;  an  officer  on  whose  military  skill  and  judgment  I place 
the  highest  reliance. 

I find  Brigadier-General  Seymour,  my  chief  of  staff  and  of  artillery, 
all  that  could  be  desired. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  the  highest  respect,  your  obe- 
dient servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  9.  J Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  C .,  February  7, 1863. 

In  view  of  the  military  necessities  of  this  department,  which  require 
all  the  lands  now  held  within  our  posts  and  lines  for  the  use  of  the  sol- 


Chap.  XX VI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — tfNlON. 


395 


diers  and  the  support  of  the  colored  population,  and  in  further  view  of 
legislation  now  pending,  all  sales  of  lands  which  have  become  forfeited 
to  the  United  States  by  reason  of  the  non-payment  of  the  direct  taxes 
charged  thereon,  under  the  act  entitled  “An  act  to  provide  increased 
revenue  from  imports,  to  pay  interest  on  the  public  debt,  and  for  other 
purposes,”  approved  August  5, 1861,  and  an  act  entitled  “An  act  for  the 
collection  of  direct  taxes  in  insurrectionary  districts  within  the  United 
States,  and  for  other  jiurposes,”  approved  J une  7, 1862,  are  hereby  sus- 
pended ; and  all  advertising  of  said  lands  and  all  steps  looking  to  the 
sale  of  the  same  shall  cease  until  the  pleasure  of  the  Government  in  the 
premises  shall  be  made  known. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter: 

OHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

No.  — . / Flag-ship  Farran , February  7,  1863. 

During  the  temporary  absence  of  General  Foster  the  detachment  of 
the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  in  the  department  will  be  under  the  com- 
mand of  Brigadier-General  Naglee. 

As  the  detachment  is  only  intended  to  co-operate  with  the  troops  in 
this  department  the  command  will  be  considered  distinct. 

The  troops  will  be  immediately  landed  at  Saint  Helena  Island  and 
the  transports  will*  be  thoroughly  cleansed  and  supplied  afresh  with 
subsistence  stores,  coals,  and  water  for  ten  days. 

Requisition  will  be  made  on  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  for  surf- 
boats  and  scows,  which  will  be  put  in  order  for  the  disembarkation  of 
troops. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Foster: 

J.  F.  ANDERSON, 

Major  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Navy  Department,  February  9,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : The  Department  has  information  that  the  rebel  gunboat  Chatta- 
hoochee is  now  in  the  Apalachicola  River  waiting  a suitable  oppor- 
tunity to  run  out,  and  that  there  are  also  other  gunboats  building  up 
that  river  within  reach  of  our  light-draught  steamers.  It  is  thought  that 
a joint  naval  and  military  expedition  upon  a small  scale  could  effect 
the  capture  or  destruction  of  those  vessels  and  inflict  other  serious  in- 
jury upon  the  insurgents  in  that  quarter.  I would  therefore  respect- 
fully request  that  a suitable  military  force  may  be  detailed  to  co-oper- 
ate with  such  a naval  force  as  Acting  Rear-Admiral  Bailey  at  Key 
West  may  consider  necessary  for  the  purpose  indicated. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GIDEON  WELLES, 
Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


396 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV 1. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  IS.  C .,  February  11,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army,  Washington , D.  <7.  : 


General:  On  the  1st  instant  General  Naglee  arrived  here  with  a 
portion  of  the  forces  ordered  by  the  Government  to  re-enforce  this  de-  ! 
partment.  A few  days  after  General  Foster  arrived  and  reported  ver- 
bally with  the  remaining  portion  of  the  command. 

As  I had  invited  General  Foster  into  this  department  I of  course 
received  him  with  cordiality  and  kindness.  He  left  yesterday  or  the  day 
before,  I understand,  for  Washington. 

On  calling  on  General  Naglee  for  a return  of  his  command,  in  order  i 
to  make  up  our  department  report  for  the  10th  instant  (certified  copy  j 
inclosed),  I received  from  him  a reply,  a certified  copy  of  which  is  here-  j 
with  transmitted. 

As  the  conduct  of  Major-General  Foster  has  been  disrespectful,  in- 
subordinate, and  tending  to  excite  mutiny  and  insubordination  among 
the  troops  ordered  to  re-enforce  this  department,  in  this  matter  I shall 
deem  it  my  duty,  should  General  Foster  return  here,  immediately  to 

arrest  him.  _ 

During  the  present  distracted  state  of  the  country  I regret  exceed- 
ingly that  General  Foster  should  have  so  iar  lost  sense  of  his  duty  5 
but  in  view  of  the  best  interests  of  the  service  and  my  own  responsi- 
bility as  commander  of  this  department  no  other  alternative  is  lett. 

I inclose  herewith  copy  of  my  general  orders  assuming  command  of 


the  re-enforcements. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general, 
obedient  servant, 


with  the  highest  esteem,  your  most 

D.  HUNTEK, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


[Inclosures.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  8.  C.,  February  9,  1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  H.  M.  Nag-lee, 

Commanding  Division,  Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C. : 

General:  I am  instructed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  in- 
form you  that,  having  to  make  up  our  department  returns  to-morrow, 
it  will  be  necessary  for  you  to  send  us  a return  of  the  forces  under  your 
command  at  your  earliest  convenience. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 


servant, 


CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Detachment  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 
Harbor  of  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  February  10, 1863 — 6 p.  m. 

Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Tenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel:  In. reply  to  your  request,  received  some  fifteen  minutes 
since  I would  respectfully  inclose  the  roster  of  the  colonels  of  my  divis- 
ion and  of  others  so  far  as  they  are  known  to  me ; at  the  same  time,  in 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  397 

the  absence  of  any  order  from  the  War  Department  transferring  the 
troops  of  the  department  of  General  Foster  to  that  of  General  Hunter, 
or  of  any  order  of  General  Hunter  assuming  the  command  thereof,  I 
would  respectfully  protest  against  the  request  of  General  Hunter,  it 
being  in  direct  violation^  of  the  written  and  verbal  orders  of  General 
Foster  to  me,  which  I am  preparing  to  transmit  to  you. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

HENRY  M.  NAGLEE, 
Brigadier -General , Commanding. 

General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  13.  j Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  (7.,  February  11, 1863. 

The  undersigned  hereby  assumes  command  of  the  re-enforcements 
recently  arrived  in  this  department  from  North  Carolina- — such  troops, 
on  their  arrival  here,  having  become  a portion  of  the  Tenth  Army 
Corps. 

Brig.  Gens.  Henry  M.  Naglee  and  Orris  S.  Ferry,  commanding  divis- 
ions, will  cause  the  various  staff  officers  of  their  commands  to  report 
and  make  due  returns  and  reports  to  these  headquarters.  They  will 
also  cause  the  chief  quartermasters  of  their  divisions  to  turn  over  all 
marine  transportation  brought  down  with  them  to  Lieut.  Col.  J.  .1.  El- 
well,  chief  quartermaster  of  this  department. 

The  divisions  commanded  by  Brig.  Gens.  Henry  M.  Naglee  and  Orris 
S.  Ferry  will  remain  intact  as  at  present  organized — General  Naglee, 
as  senior  officer,  assuming  command  of  all  the  United  States  forces 
on  Saint  Helena  Island,  with  the  exception  of  those  stationed  at  Bay 
Point,  who  will  continue  to  report  to  post  headquarters,  Hilton  Head 
Island,  until  further  orders. 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


February  11,  1863. 

Major-General  Foster,  Eighteenth  Corps  : 

My  Dear  General:  The  dispatches  I send*  will  explain  them- 
selves, and  advise  you  of  the  changes  here  since  your  departure.  I 
have  done  all  in  my  power  to  place  you  and  myself  properly  on  the 
record.  You  will  learn  from  Darr  all  not  referred  to  within. 

You  must  get  the  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War  or  your  position 
and  those  connected  with  you  will  be  most  disagreeable  and  unsatis- 
factory. 

We  will  wait  with  the  greatest  impatience  to  hear  from  you. 

Yours,  faithfully  and  sincerely, 

NAGLEE. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  (7.,  February  11,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  3.  Army , Washington , D.  G. : 

General:  Since  sending  my  communication  of  this  day’s  date,  cover- 
ing certified  copies  of  correspondence  and  orders  in  reference  to  the  re- 


Copies  of  inclosures  to  Hunter  to  Halleck,  February  11,  1863,  p.  396. 


398  COASTS  OF  S.  e.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 

enforcements  ordered  to  this  department  from  North  Carolina,  I have 
received  from  General  Henry  M.  Naglee  a further  communication,  certi- 
fied copy  of  which  is  inclosed  herewith. 

On  this  further  communication  it  can  only  be  necessary  to  remark 
that  as  General  Foster  reported  to  me  verbdlly  on  his  arrival,  and  as 
it  never  entered  my  mind  that  he  could  put  upon  his  position  (which  I 
regarded  as  that  of  a guest),  in  my  department,  the  interpretation  now 
manifest  in  his  orders  to  General  Naglee,  I never  thought  while  he 
was  here  of  raising  any  question  with  him  as  to  the  status  of  the  troops 
sent  by  Government  to  re-enforce  my  command.  As  the  troops  had 
been  sent  for  service  in  my  department,  I no  more  thought  of  formally 
assuming  command  of  them  than  of  assuming  command  of  a detachment 
or  regiment  arriving  at  these  headquarters  from  any  of  the  outlying 
posts.  Moreover,  my  ranking  General  Foster  would  have  precluded 
any  suspicion  that  such  a claim  as  is  now  made  could  have  been  con- 
ceived, while  the  peculiar  circumstances  under  which  General  Foster 
was  here,  on  my  invitation,  caused  me  to  be  perhaps  oyerscrupulous 
in  taking  any  steps  that  might  be  construed  into  a too-hasty.  assumption 
of  my  rightful  authority. 

General  Foster  reported  verbally  the  strength  of  his  command  imme- 
diately on  arriving,  and  day  after  day  I was  expecting  that  he  would,  of 
his  own  motion,  cause  the  staff  officers  of  Generals  Naglee’s  and  Ferry’s 
divisions  to  send  in  the  proper  reports.  At  length,  upon  the  9th,  my 
assistant  adjutant-general  reporting  that  he  could  not  make  up  his  de- 
partment returns  (prescribed  by  general  orders  of  the  War  Department 
to  be  made  upon  the  10th,  20th,  and  last  days  of  each  month),  for  the 
reason  that  Generals  Naglee  and  Ferry  had  not  reported  the  strength 
of  their  commands,  I ordered  him  to  make  application  to  General 
Naglee,  as  the  senior  officer  of  the  re-enforcements,  it  having  been  re- 
ported to  me  that  General  Foster  had  already  left  here  on  a reconnais- 
sance to  Charleston.  I have  entered  into  these  particulars  only  to  remove 
the  misconception  under  which  General  Naglee  evidently  labors,  and 
which  is  shown  in  his  letter,  to  the  effect  that  I had  deliberately  abstained 
from  raising  the  question  of  command  while  General  Foster  was  here. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  Detachment  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

Harbor  of  Port  Royal , February  11,  1863. 

Lieutenant- Colonel  H alpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel  : I would  respectfully  submit  the  following  statement : 

General  Foster,  prior  to  his  departure,  ordered  that  “during  his  tem- 
porary absence  his  detachment  should  be  kept  distinct”  and  detached 
from  those  of  the  Tenth  Army  Corps,  and  stated  that  he  had  come  to 
South  Carolina  for  an  especial  purpose,  and  that  as  soon  as  that. was 
accomplished,  if  not  before,  it  would  return  to  his  department  ; that  his 
absence,  caused  by  the  necessary  delay  of  the  Na  yy,  would  be  short,  and 
that  it  was  expressly  understood  between  “General  Hunter  and  himself 
that  the  immediate  command  of  the  force  to  operate  in  the  present  ex- 
pedition was  to  be  in  his  hands,  in  accordance  with  the  wish  of  the  Sec- 
retary of  War,  Mr.  Stanton.” 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


399 


You  are  probably  aware  that  the  expedition  was  intended  to  go  to 
Wilmington,  in  General  Foster’s  department,  and  that  after  it  was  pre- 
pared to  move  the  monitor  sank,  and  it  was  found  the  other  iron-clad 
vessels  could  not  cross  the  bar,  and  that  the  Government,  in  order  not 
to  lose  the  preparations  made,  ordered  General  Foster  to  co-operate  in 
the  contemplated  attack  upon  Charleston.  This  purpose  was  unknown 
to  any  of  the  command  until  after  the  sailing  of  the  vessels;  on  the  con- 
trary, they  believed  Wilmington  to  be  the  object  of  the  movement,  and 
were  assured  that  they  would  return  to  North  Carolina. 

General  Foster  arrived  at  Hilton  Head  on  the  2d  of  February  at 
9 a.  m.,  and  remained  until  the  10th  at  8 a.  m.,  during  which  time  Gen- 
eral Hunter  did  not,  so  far  as  I am  able  to  learn,  exercise  any  command 
over  General  Foster  or  any  of  his  troops. 

Three  hours  after  the  departure  of  General  Foster  an  aide-de-camp  of 
General  Hunter  delivered  communications,  of  which  copies  are  hereunto 
attached,  marked  Nos.  1 and  2,*  both  dated  before  the  departure  of  Gen- 
eral Foster,  but  addressed  to  me,  the  one  requesting  a return  of  the  forces 
of  General  Foster’s  command  as  necessary  to  make  up  the  Tenth  Army 
Corps’  return,  which  request  had  also  been  made  of  General  Ferry. 

At  1 p.  m.  I received  your  note  indicating  General  Hunter’s  intention 
to  review  the  troops  of  General  Foster  at  12  m.  on  the  11th,  and  at  the 
same  time  there  was  delivered  to  me  the  series  of  orders  from  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Department  of  the  South.  At  3 p.  m.  General  Potter, 
chief  of  General  Foster’s  staff,  and  myself  called  upon  General  Hunter 
and  explained  the  unfortunate  position  in  which  we  were  placed  by 
the  discovery  that  a full  understanding  did  not  exist  between  Gen- 
erals Hunter  and  Foster,  as  supposed  by  the  latter  at  the  time  of  his 
departure. 

At  5.45  p.  m.  an  aide  delivered  your  request  that  I should  name  a 
colonel  of  my  command  to  be  detached  by  General  Hunter  on  a mili- 
tary commission,  and  was  instructed  to  await  the  answer. 

At  7.40  p.  m.  a request  was  received  that  I should  furnish  copies  of 
certain  orders  of  General  Foster,  and  at  the  same  time  there  were  handed 
a copy  and  original  communication  of  General  Saxton,  with  a request 
that  certain  criminals  should  be  punished. 

I cannot  but  express  a regret  that  some  one  of  these  requests  had 
not  been  made  of  General  Foster,  or  some  other  means  adopted  during 
the  eight  days  of  General  Foster’s  stay  by  which  the  subject  matter  at 
issue  might  have  been  determined,  and  thus  have  saved  me  the  un- 
pleasant duty  of  upholding  in  his  temporary  absence  the  position  as- 
sumed by  General  Foster  and  expected  by  the  officers  and  soldiers  of 
the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  who  may  find  themselves  transferred  to 
another  department  in  direct  opposition  to  the  representations  made  to 
them  by  their  favorite  commander,  that  this  absence  from  their  old  com- 
rades in  arms  would  be  but  a temporary  one. 

I inclose  herewith  the  orders,  returns,  and  other  information  requested 
by  you.  An  unqualified  compliance  with  your  several  requests  would 
soon  be  considered  a direct  acknowledgment  that  I considered  the 
command  of  General  Foster  merged  in  that  of  General  Hunter,  which 
T respectfully  decline  to  do.  But,  the  contrary,  in  order  to  sustain  the 
position  in  which  I am  placed,  disclaiming  any  disrespect  to  Major-Gen- 
eral Hunter,  my  duty  compels  me  to  protest  that  the  course  indicated 
by  General  Hunter  will  cause  a direct  failure  on  my  part  to  carry  out  the 
orders  of  my  immediate  superior  officer,  indicated  by  him,  and  of  those 


* Not  found,  but  see  Halpine  tp  Naglee,  p.  396. 


400 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 


confidentially  made  to  me  and  intended  to  be  used  only  under  contin- 
gencies which  have  not  as  yet  transpired. 

I protest  that  we  came  here  with  the  full  assurance  of  General  Fos- 
ter that  he  was  sent  by  the  Secretary  of  War  and  General  Halleck  to 
command  the  troops  brought  by  him,  and  that  the  same  assurance  has 
been  repeated  by  him  since  his  conferences  with  General  Hunter,  and 
that  during  his  stay  I have  been  informed  that  no  communication  has 
been  made  to  him  to  show  the  intention  of  General  Hunter  to  assume 
command. 

I protest  for  the  reason  that  in  going  away  to  procure  material  of  a 
character  which  would  render  the  operations  intended  more  complete 
and  certain  General  Foster  left  his  chief  of  staff,  his  chief  of  artillery, 
his  medical  director,  his  quartermaster,  his  ordnance  officer,  engineer, 
and  several  of  his  aides-de-camp,  all  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  of 
the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  which,  it  would  seem,  cannot  well  be 
merged  in  another  department. 

I protest  that  no  mere  act  of  mine  in  responding  to  the  various  re- 
quests of  General  Hunter  shall  be  hereafter  used  as  evidence  of  a sur- 
render of  my  command  to  General  Hunter  in  the  absence  of  a direct 
order  from  General  Hunter  assuming  command. 

I would  again  respectfully  request  that  General  Hunter  will  relieve 
me  of  further  responsibility  and  embarrassments  by  formally  and  clearly 
announcing  his  intention  to  assume  the  command  of  the  troops  brought 
to  South  Carolina  by  General  Foster. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  M.  NAGLEE, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 

Since  writing  the  above  General  Hunter’s  Orders,  No.  13,  assuming 
command  of  the  re-enforcements  recently  arrived  from  North  Carolina, 
has  been  received.  Yielding  all  obedience  to  this  order,  I yet  consider 
it  my  duty  respectfully  to  file  the  above  protest,  that  the  same  may  be 
of  record. 

HENRY  M.  NAGLEE, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  February  13,  1863—8  p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief: 

I have  just  arrived  from  the  South  to  obtain  more  heavy  guns  and 
ammunition.  I have  reconnoitered  the  whole  coast  from  Charleston 
to  the  Ogeechee,  and  can  give  full  information  of  the  state  of  affairs, 
both  naval  and  military.  While  the  ordnance  is  being  loaded  I can 
come  to  Washington  to  report  in  person,  and  with  your  permission  will 
do  so. 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major-  General. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  February  15,  1863. 

Major-General  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South  : 

General  : Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster  has  just  received  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Naglee’s  protest  to  you  on  the  11th  instant  against  the  consolidation 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  401 

l of  the  detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  in  your  department 
with  the  Tenth  Corps,  which  protest  and  accompanying  papers  has  been 
submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

There  seems  to  be  a misunderstanding  in  this  matter  on  both  sides. 

General  Foster  and  his  command,  while  serving  in  your  department, 
was  to  be  subject  to  your  general  orders  and  direction  ; but  that  com- 
mand was  to  form  no  part  of  the  Tenth  Army  Corps.  It  was  organized 
as  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  by  the  President,  and  no  subordinate 
authority  could  change  its  organization.  You  will  therefore  rescind  so 
much  of  your  orders  as  consolidates  it  with  the  Tenth  Corps.  But 
while  this  command  remains  as  a distinct  organization,  with  its  own 
officers,  as  assigned  by  its  proper  chief,  the  command  itself,  so  long  as 
it  remains  in  your  department,  will  be  subject  to  your  orders.  The 
transportation  which  belongs  to  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  will  so 
continue.  It  will  of  course  be  used  for  any  temporary  purposes  you 
may  direct,  but  will  afterward  be  restored  to  the  North  Carolina  forces, 
to  which  it  properly  belongs.  In  line,  general,  these  forces  are  merely 
assigned  for  temporary  duty  under  your  orders,  and  their  organization, 
both  in  men  and  material,  will  be  retained,  so  that  the  corps  can  at 
any  time  be  returned  entire  (except  casualties)  to  its  proper  department. 

General  Foster  will,  as  you  requested,  immediately  return  to  South 
Carolina  to  take  the  direct  charge  of  the  expedition  (under  your  direc- 
tion), and  will  remain  so  long  as  he  may  deem  it  safe  to  be  absent  from 
his  own  department. 

This  letter  has  been  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War  and  to  the 
President,  and  is  approved  by  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 

(Copy  to  General  Foster.) 


Washington,  February  16, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South : 

General  : Your  letters  of  the  11th  instant  with  inclosures  are  just 
received.  I received  yesterday  a copy  of  your  order  merging  the  de- 
tachment of  the  Eighteenth  Corps  with  the  Tenth,  and  also  a copy  of 
General  Naglee’s  protest.  These  papers  were  immediately  submitted 
to  the  Secretary  of  War  and  the  President,  and  I wrote  to  you,  as 
directed  by  them. 

Your  letters  of  the  11th  are  also  submitted,  and  no  reason  is  seen  for 
changing  the  instructions  then  given.  Nor  is  anything  perceived  in 
General  Foster’s  orders  that  conflict  with  those  instructions  or  with  the 
verbal  understanding  with  you  in  the  office  of  the  Secretary  of  War  be- 
fore you  left  for  your  present  command.  If  General  Foster  or  any  part 
of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  while  in  your  department  shall  attempt 
to  act  independently  of  your  authority  or  in  violation  of  proper  orders 
from  you  they  will  be  liable  to  censure  and  punishment.  But  it  is  not 
understood  that  General  Foster  makes  any  such  claim ; on  the  con- 
trary, on  being  furnished  with  a copy  of  my  letter  to  you  of  yesterday, 
he  expressed  himself  entirely  satisfied,  as  he  considered  himself  and  his 
corps  while  in  your  department  subject  to  your  orders. 

26  R R — yol  xiv 


402  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV£ 

Your  threatened  arrest  of  General  Foster  is  therefore  disapproved, 
It  is  to  be  regretted,  general,  that  on  the  eve  of  important  movements, 
when  the  most  cordial  co-operation  of  all  the  officers  of  the  Government 
is  imperatively  required,  anythiug  should  be  permitted  to  occur  which 
is  calculated  to  disturb  the  harmony  of  the  service.  If  the  plans  of  the 
Government  should  fail  to  be  carried  out  for  want  of  this  harmony,  those 
who  have  engendered  or  fostered  animosities  and  jealousies  will  incur 
a very  serious  responsibility. 

General  Naglee’s  protest  to  you  being  disapproved,  the  Secretary  of 
War  has  directed  that  he  be  relieved  from  duty  in  your  department. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Washington,  February  16,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  Commanding , &c. : 

General  : Colonel  Townsend,  of  the  Adjutant- General’s  Depart- 
ment, will  furnish  you  a copy  or  show  you  the  original  of  my  letter  of 
this  date  to  Major-General  Hunter.  This,  with  my  letter  of  yesterday 
to  General  Hunter,  of  which  you  have  a copy,  will  furnish  you  with  the 
views  of  the  Government  in  regard  to  the  relations  between  yourself 
and  General  Hunter  in  regard  to  your  commands  in  South  Carolina. 
While  youi  command  will  remain  as  a distinct  corps  organization,  not 
to  be  merged  into  the  Tenth  Army  Corps,  both  you  and  it  will  be  sub- 
ject to  General  Hunter’s  orders  so  long  as  you  are  on  duty  in  his  de- 
partment. 

As  the  course  pursued  by  General  Naglee  in  objecting  to  furnish  his 
superior  officer  with  proper  returns  and  the  spirit  of  his  protest  are 
disapproved,  the  Secretary  of  War  directs  that  you  release  him  from 
further  duty  in  the  Department  of  the  South. 

Colonel  Townsend  has  instructions  from  the  War  Department  to  re- 
lieve under  certain  contingencies  other  officers. 

Harmony  of  action  and  a cordial  co-operation  of  all  officers  in  the 
contemplated  expedition  are  absolutely  essential  to  its  success.  Those 
who  in  any  way  interfere  with  this  harmony  will  be  dealt  with  as  they 
deserve. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in- Chief. 


Baltimore,  Md.,  February  16,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 
Major-General  Halleck:,  General-in-Chief : 

I have  just  received  your  letter  of  this  date,  by  the  hands  of  Colonel 
Townsend,  the  train  having  been  delayed  by  an  accident.  It  is  with 
regret  that  I receive  your  order  to  relieve  General  Naglee,  because  he 
only  carried  out  my  instructions.  General  Hunter  will  probably  regard 
it  as  a triumph  over  the  respectful  action  of  General  Naglee,  and  this 
will,  I fear,  lead  to  interferences  and  mortifications  inflicted  on  me 
when  I return.  This  action  after  I left,  in  direct  violation  of  our  verbal 
understanding,  leaves  me  little  to  expect  from  his  magnanimity.  I 
would  respectfully  suggest  that  some  other  officer  of  experience,  as 
General  Burnside,  be  sent  down  instead  of  me,  since  he  will  go  free 
from  all  misunderstapding,  and  thus  be  able  to  render  greater  service,  ‘ 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


405 


j CnAr.  XXVI.] 


i I therefore  respectfully  request  to  be  allowed  to  return  to  my  command 
in  North  Carolina  and  to  make  all  the  diversion  possible  with  my  re- 
maining forces.  I propose  to  send  General  Palmer  or  General  Prince 
to  relieve  General  Naglee,  as  you  direct.  I will  await  your  answer  at 
Port  Monroe. 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major - General. 


Baltimore,  Md.,  February  16,  1863 — 10.30  p.  m. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton: 

General  Foster  is  very  unwilling  to  go  back  to  Hilton  Head  since 
receipt  of  General  Halleck’s  last  letter  delivered  by  me.  He  does  not 
wish  to  relieve  Naglee,  and  he  fears  he  will  lose  his  command  of  Depart- 
ment of  North  Carolina,  thinking  from  something  said  by  General 
Hall eck  that  Burnside  will  be  sent  to  North  Carolina.  The  train  was 
delayed  an  hour  by  an  accident  and  I have  not  had  much  time  to  talk 
with  him.  He  telegraphs  you,  and  we  go  down  to  Old  Point  imme- 
diately. I have  shown  him  the  last  letter  to  General  Hunter,  leaving 
out  about  arrest. 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Col.  E.  D.  Townsend: 


Washington,  D:  0., 

February  16,  1863. 


On  reaching  Fort  Monroe  you  had  better  proceed  at  once  on  one  of 
the  boats,  leaving  General  Foster  to  follow  in  the  other  boat  with  the 
ordnance  and  ammunition.  You  will  thus  precede  him  by  some  hours. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON. 


War  Department, 
Washington , February  17,  1863. 
Major-General  Foster,  Fort  Monroe , Va.  : 

Your  dispatch  from  Baltimore  is  received.  It  is  optional  with  you 
to  return  to  South  Carolina  or  not,  and,  if  you  go,  to  remain  or  not. 
It  was  determined  when  General  Burnside  was  relieved  from  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac  that  he  should  resume  command  in  North  Carolina, 
either  immediately  or  on  the  expiration  of  his  leave. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
February  17,  1863 — 6.30  p.  m. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

We  arrived  here  at  5 p.  m.  Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  is  received. 
General  Foster,  on  General  Halleck’s  dispatch  of  this  date,  decides  not 
to  go  back  to  South  Carolina,  but  await  further  orders.  Will  not  this 


404  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

decision  require  modification  of  the  letters  to  General  Hunter  of  15th 
and  16th? 

Very  respectfully, 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  0.,  February  17,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army , Washington , D.  C.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  certified  copies  of  > 
a formal  protest  received  from  Brigadier-General  Naglee  against  my| 
assumption  of  command  over  the  re-enforcements  ordered  by  Govern-  - 
ment  to  this  department,*  together  with  my  reply  thereto.  This  cor-| 
respondence  so  fully  sets  forth  the  issues  raised  and  the  manner  in 
which  they  have  been  met  as  to  require  no  further  explanation. 

It  cannot  be  necessary  to  call  your  attention  to  the  extraordinary 
character  of  the  position  assumed*  by  General  Foster  or  to  the  impossi-J 
bility  of  conducting  any  military  movements  successfully  with  two  gen-^i 
erals  in  separate  and  in  independent  commands  over  the  active  columns. 

Apart  from  this  difficulty  I am  happy  to  state  that  my  official  rela- 1 
tions  with  Brigadier-General  Naglee  have  been  thus  far  very  satisfac- 1 
tory,  although  certain  of  the  staff  officers  left  behind  by  Major  General 
Foster  on  his  going  North  have  attempted  to  interpose  technical  objec-J 
tions  and  misconstructions  in  the  execution  of  my  necessary  orders. 

I find,  with  the  exception  of  General  Naglee’s  division,  that  the  re- 
enforcements  received  from  North  Carolina  are  in  a greatly  demoralized  < 
and  undisciplined  condition,  and  are  far  inferior  on  the  average  to  the 
original  troops  of  this  department,  who  during  the  long  and  for  the  < 
most  part  peaceful  period  of  their  service  here  have  attained  very  high 
excellence  in  all  soldierly  qualities  of  drill  and  discipline.  It  is  there- j 
fore  my  intention  to  place  the  least  desirable  regiments  of  the  re-enforce- j 
ments  in  the  garrisons  and  forts  of  the  department,  taking  with  me  to 
the  attack  on*  Charleston  only  ray  best  and  most  reliable  troops. 

All  the  ordnance,  ordnance  stores,  &c.,  for  the  expedition  will  be  on 
board  the  transports  this  evening,  ready  to  sail  at  an  hour’s  notice  foil 
Stono  Inlet,  which  will  bo  the  immediate  base  of  operations,  being  in 
the  vicinity  of  Charleston  and  affording  a secure  and  commodious! 
anchorage. 

All  our  preparations  are  now  complete,  and  in  fact  could  have  been 
completed  on  twenty-four  hours’  notice  at  any  time  within  the  last  four- 
teen days.  We  only  await  the  readiness  of  the  Navy,  and  with  the 
additional  iron-clads  which  have  been  ordered  to  report  to  Admiral  S. 
F.  DuPont  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  a glorious  success  will  await! 
our  efforts. 

I further  inclose  copy  of  General  Naglee’s  reply  to  my  letter  and  ol 
General  Foster’s  confidential  instructions  to  General  Naglee. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

* gee  Naglee  to  Halpine,  February  11,  p.  398, 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  405 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  C .,  February  12,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  M.  Kaglee, 

Comdg.  U.  S.  Forces , Landis  End,  St.  Helena  Island , $.  (7. ; 

General  : I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication 
of  yesterday,  in  which  you  protest  against  allowing  the  forces  under 
your  command  to  be  considered  a portion  of  this  department  and  army 
corps,  and  in  which  you  further  speak  of  possessing  confidential  or- 
ders, only  to  be  used  in  a certain  contingency,  which  contingency  (you 
say)  has  not  yet  arisen;  your  letter  further  announcing  that  the  troops 
recently  sent  under  orders  of  the  Government  to  re-enforce  this  depart- 
ent  had  been  promised  (you  do  not  specify  particularly  by  whom)  a 
speedy  return  to  Korth  Carolina,  and  that  they  are  specially  anxious  to 
serve  under  a favorite  general. 

It  is  high  time  that  the  imputation  against  American  troops  that  they 
are  only  willing  to  serve  under  particular  generals  of  their  own  choice 
and  not  those  assigned  to  their  command  by  Government  should  be 
set  at  rest.  In  two  prominent  instances  it  was  clamorously  raised,  with 
threats  of  a general  mutiny,  &c.,  by  a few  interested  parties ; but  on 
the  matters  being  put  to  the  test  of  experiment  the  prompt,  unques- 
tioning, and  hearty  fidelity  of  the  troops  showed  how  little  foundation 
there  bad  been  for  the  charges  prejudicial  to  their  loyalty.  I am  far 
from  wishing  to  suggest  that  in  the  manner  of  your  protest  on  this  point 
there  has  been  any  spirit  of  insubordination  manifested ; but  as  the  mere 
statement  of  the  point  was  utterly  irrelevant  to  the  discussion  of  a tech- 
nical question  of  army  laws,  usages,  and  discipline  I have  given  it  this 
notice.  Considering  it  highly  improper  and  destructive  of  all  military 
discipline  that  subordinate  officers  should  be  furnished  with  confidential 
or  secret  instructions  by  intermediate  commanders,  such  instructions 
being  withheld  from  the  general  commanding  in  chief,  and  only  to  be 
used  by  the  subordinate  general  in  the  event  of  secret  contingencies,  I 
hereby  call  upon  and  order  you  to  furnish  to  these  headquarters  a cer- 
tified copy  or  report  of  all  the  secret  instructions,  verbal  or  written,  re- 
ceived by  you  from  Major-General  Foster  or  from  any  other  person  and 
dwelt  upon  in  your  protest. 

Knowing  that  General  Foster  had  not  originally  be§n  ordered  to  ac- 
company the  re-enforcements  brought  down  by  you,  but  had  come  here 
on  my  invitation,  as  an  officer  well  acquainted  with  Charleston  Harbor, 
and  therefore  likely  to  be  of  much  service  by  his  suggestions  and  by  the 
interest  he  would  feel  in  the  operations,  I confess  I regarded  him  rather 
as  a guest  than  as  a subordinate,  and  from  a spirit  of  courtesy  forbore 
as  much  as  possible  from  giving  any  orders  that  would  look  like  a too- 
hasty  assumption  of  command.  I regret  exceedingly  that  this  courtesy 
should  have  been  so  strangely  and  wholly  misconstrued  as  to  be  consid- 
ered a license  for  insubordination.  All  my  u requests,”  on  which  you  lay 
so  much  stress,  were  regarded  by  me  as  orders  to  be  promptly  obeyed, 
the  word  “ request”  being  frequently  substituted  by  army  usage  for 
“order”  in  the  case  of  superior  officers.  Thus  when  I requested  you 
to  land  your  troops,  the  first  day  of  your  arrival,  on  Saint  Helena  Island, 
it  was  by  me  regarded  as  an  order,  and  should  most  certainly  have  been 
adhered  to  and  enforced  had  you  then  given  me  the  least  reason  to  in- 
fer that  you  doubted  my  competeucy  to  issue  orders  to  your  command. 
As  you  did  not  raise  the  question,  however,  but  represented  merely  that 
General  Foster  was  following  you  and  might  be  expected  at  any  moment, 


406  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  tCnAP.  XXVT. 

I waived  the  request  or  order  for  the  time  being,  and  consented  that 
the  troops  should  remain  on  board  the  transports  until  further  advised. 
As  to  the  further  point  made  by  you  that  the  “ request”  to  be  furnished 
with  a return  of  your  command  was  not  received  by  you  until  three 
hours  after  General  Foster’s  departure  for  the  North,  the  context  evi- 
dently implying  the  assumption  that  the  question  of  command  was  pur- 
posely held  in  abeyance  by  me  during  General  Foster’s  presence  here,, 
there  are  three  abundant  answers,  each  sufficient  to  do  away  with  your 
objection : 

1st.  That  no  possibility  of  any  such  controversy  ever  entered  my 
mind,  and  that  I was  daily  in  expectation  of  receiving  without  order  the 
reports  and  returns  prescribed  by  Army  Regulations,  and  that  with 
my  then  view  of  General  Foster’s  position  as  an  honored  visitor  of  this 
department  and  Army  Corps  I much  preferred,  if  possible,  that  the 
returns  should  be  made  and  the  acknowledgment  of  the  transfer  of 
command  be  given  of  his  own  motion. 

2d.  That  I did  not  know  that  General  Foster  was  going  to  leave  the 
department,  it  being  reported  to  me  that  he  was  about  to  visit  Stono 
Inlet  on  a reconnaissance,  from  which  he  might  be  expected  back  in  a 
couple  of  days.  The  request  or  order,  moreover,  was  written  on  the 
9th,  and  was  only  not  delivered  to  you  on  that  afternoon  or  evening  by  * 
Captain  Thompson,  one  of  my  aides,  because  he  could  not  find  you  in 
your  division  encampment,  you  not  having  left  your  headquarters  aboard 
the  transport. 

3d.  And  lastly,  you  did  not  receive  this  request  or  order  until  the  9th 
inst.  partly  for  the  reasons  stated  in  the  first  part  of  these  answering 
paragraphs  and  also  because  my  department  return  called  for  by  gen- 
eral orders  of  the  War  Department  was  not  required  to  be  made  up 
until  the  10th.  Finding  on  the  9th  that  your  report  was  necessary  and 
was  not  forthcoming,  I then  directed  Colonel  Halpine,  my  assistant 
adjutant -general,  to  address  you  on  the  subject,  telling  him  to  state  in 
connection  with  my  request  or  order  the  cause  which  made  it  necessary. 

As  to  your  not  receiving  any  other  documents  of  a nature  to  suggest 
that  I regarded  myself  as  in  command  until  the  10th  instant  no  expla- 
nation can  be  seriously  asked.  For  three  of  the  eight  days  referred  to 
I was  at  Fort  Pulaski,  and  having  no  orders  or  correspondence  of  any 
pressing  moment  to  send  you  I was  unwilling  thatyou  should  be  troubled 
until  your  command  had  been  disembarked  and  put  in  order. 

In  conclusion,  general,  let  me  add  that  the  tone  of  your  letter  is  so1 
far  removed  from  the  tenor  of  your  conversation  upon  these  points  that 
' I cannot  but  regard  it  as  suggested  to  you  by  extraneous  influences. 
You  have  received  a regular  military  education,  and  I believe  you  to  be 
so  good  a soldier  that  you  cannot  but  agree  with  me  in  the  views  ex- 
pressed in  this  letter. 

I shall  expect  in  the  operations  about  to  be  taken  in  this  department 
your  hearty  and  best  co-operation,  and  have  the  honor  to  be,  very  re- 
spectfully, your  obedient  servant, 

’ D.  HUNTER, 

Major-General. 

[Tnclosure  No.  3.] 

Hdqrs.  Detachment  Eighteenth  Corps, 

Saint  Helena  Island , February  13,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  A.  A.  £.,  Tenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel  : I would  respectfully  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  coni' 
munication  of  General  Hunter  of  the  12th  instant. 


Ohap.  XXVt] 


COftftESffONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


407 


I regret  very  much  that  General  Hunter  indicates  an  impropriety  of 
expression  not  warranted  by  my  communication.  I did  not  assert  “ that 
the  troops  were  specially  anxious  to  serve  under  a favorite  general,” 
but  that  they  had  been  promised,  from  representations  made  to  them 
by  their  favorite  commander,  that  thp  absence  from  their  old  comrades 
in  arms  would  be  but  a temporary  one, 

I am  surprised  that  General  Hunter  should  consider  it  a great  im- 
propriety in  American  troops  that  they  should  have  favor  and  affection 
for  a brave  and  gallant  officer  with  whom  they  have  long  served,  and 
am  yet  to  learn  that  it  is  any  indication  of  insubordination  or  that  they 
would  fight  the  less  for  their  country  when  led  by  one  that  was  their 
favorite  and  in  whom  they  had  great  confidence ; on  th$  contrary,  as 
you  admit  in  instances  referred  to  by  you,  it  was  fully  demonstrated 
that  it  did  not  indicate  any  insubordination.  The  just  discrimination 
and  intelligence  of  the  American  citizen  has  always  been  admitted, 
and  I cannot  admit  that  they  lose  this  character  in  becoming  “ Ameri- 
can troops.” 

There  is  no  difference  between  General  Hunter  and  myself  in  regard 
to  the  form  of  an  order  or  to  his  authority  to  assume  the  command, 
but  in  the  manner  in  which  he  made  known  his.  intentions  to  assume 
the  command  of  General  Foster’s  forces,  and,  with  due  respect,  I still 
believe  that  the  requests  or  orders  referred  to  should  have  been  preceded 
by  a notification  to  the  whole  command  of  over  10,000  persons  that  a, 
change  of  so  important  a character  had  been  determined  upon. 

I regret  that  General  Hunter  had  not  suspended  his  opinion  in  regard 
to  certain  confidential,  not  “secret,”  instructions  until  he  should  have 
an  opportunity  to  read  them,  at  all  events.  The  impropriety  of  conduct 
charged  against  General  Foster  in  this  regard  is  a subject  for  which  he 
alone  is  responsible.  In  reviewing  the  whole  subject  I can  find  no  just 
grounds  for  the  intimation  of  insubordination  made  by  General  Hunter, 
and  feel  that  my  jmsition  in  the  absence  of  General  Foster  required  a 
respectful  and  formal  protest. 

In  order  that  there  shall  be  no  misapprehension  I would  here  insert 
that  Generals  Hunter  and  Foster  went  together  to  Pulaski  5 that  Gen- 
eral Foster  made  a reconnaissance  to  Stono;  that  we  returned  and  were 
at  General  Hunter’s  headquarters  during  his  absence  on  the  afternoon 
of  the  9th,  and  that  General  Foster  left  between  8 and  11  a.  m.  of  the 
10th  of  February,  stating  in  written  orders  and  in  the  communication 
hereto  attached  that  he  should  return  in  a short  time. 

On  the  10th  General  Hunter  assumed  command  of  the  forces  brought 
by  General  Foster  to  South  Carolina,  and  ordered  that  his  marine  trans- 
portation should  be  turned  over  to  his  (General  Hunter’s)  departmenr. 

I might  answer  many  if  not  all  the  points  raised  by  General  Hunter, 
but  I am  reminded  that  in  a controversy  between  a superior  and  his 
junior  officer  the  advantages  are  all  on  one  side;  besides,  such  a contro- 
versy could  lead  to  no  better  understanding  between  us.  Our  country 
requires  our  best,  most  harmonious,  united  efforts,  and  in  the  common 
cause  to  sink  all  personal  considerations. 

Yery  respectfully,  &c., 

HENRY  M.  NAGLEE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


[Sub-inclosure.] 


Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  February  9,  1863. 

General  Naglee,  Present: 

General:  In  the  orders  I gave  you  on  the  7th  instant  (expecting  to 


408 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


sail  on  the  following  day)  I mentioned  the  circumstance  of  keeping  the 
command  distinct.  This  is  important,  because  it  may  be  necessary  in 
the  emergency  of  an  attack  on  New  Berne,  N.  0.,  to  recall  the  whole 
force  to  North  Carolina  at  the  shortest  notice. 

I now  write  this  note  to  inform  you  in  confidence  that  it  is  understood 
by  General  Hunter  and  myself  that  the  immediate  command  of  the 
whole  force  to  operate  in  the  present  expedition  is  to  be  in  my  hands. 
This  is  also  the  wish  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  Mr.  Stanton. 

Of  course  in  my  absence,  after  the  opening  of  the  operations,  you 
will  be  second  in  command  only  to  myself  of  the  operating  force. 

In  haste,  very  respectfully  and  truly, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

P.  S. — If  the  Navy  happens  to  be  ready  to  move  before  I return  you 
will  have  all  the  necessary  preparations  made  and  the  troops  of  the 
corps  embarked  5 and  if  the  Navy  moves,  move  your  command  in  con- 
junction with  them  and  operate  as  agreed  upon  verbally. 

Yours,  &c., 

J.  G.  FOSTER. 


Fort  Monroe,  . February  18, 1863. 

General  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander -in-  Chief,  TJ.  8.  Army , Washington , D.  C. : 

General:  I have  received  your  dispatch.  Under  the  circumstances 
I think  it  will  be  for  the  best  for  me  not  to  return  to  South  Carolina. 
I shall  therefore,  agreeably  to  your  permission,  return  to  New  Berne 
at  once. 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General , Volunteers. 


War  Department, 
Washington , February  18,  1863. 

Major-General  Foster,  Fort  Monroe , V a. : 

As  you  decide  not  to  return  to  South  Carolina,  General  Hunter  has 
been  authorized  to  retain  General  Naglee  in  command  of  the  detach- 
ment of  your  corps  or  to  relieve  him,  as  he  deems  proper.  In  all  other 
respects  the  instructions  remain  as  before. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Washington,  February  18, 1863. 

Colonel  Townsend,  Fort  Monroe : 

It  is  the  wish  of  the  Secretary  that  you  proceed  to  Hilton  Head  and 
ascertain  the  condition  of  affairs  so  as  to  be  able  to  report  to  him  on 
your  return. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION, 


409 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal , 8.  C.,  February  19,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  TJ.  8.  Army,  Washington,  JD.  G.  : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  certified  copy  of 
an  order  directing  the  members  of  General  Foster’s  staff  to  quit  this 
department  by  the  first  steamer  going  North.  I have  been  reluctantly 
compelled  to  adopt  this  decisive  measure  by  the  unbridled  license  of 
the  statements  made  by  various  members  of  General  Foster’s  staff‘d 
by  repeated  acts  of  insubordination  on  their  part,  and  by  their  persist- 
ently deliberate  and  systematic  adoption  of  a course  directly  tending  to 
create  a general  disaffection,  if  not  an  organized  mutiny,  amongst  the 
re-enforcements  brought  from  North  Carolina  to  this  department  by 
order  of  the  Government. 

I found  that  General  Potter,  chief  of  General  Foster’s  staff,  and  Cap- 
tain Slaght,  his  chief  quartermaster,  had  surreptitiously  sent  out  of 
this  department,  with  private  dispatches  to  General  Foster,  the  steamer 
Cahawba,  one  of  the  finest  and  largest  vessels  of  the  transportation 
fleet,  and  this  after  my  order  assuming  command  and  directing  that  all 
the  marine  transportation  brought  down  with  the  troops  from  North 
Carolina  be  turned  over  to  my  chief  quartermaster.  For  this  offense 
and  for  refusing  to  turn  over  such  transportation  as  directed  I have 
placed  Captain  Slaght  in  arrest. 

The  same  spirit  of  insubordination  was  manifested  by  General  Foster’s 
chief  medical  officer,  chief  commissary,  and  other  heads  of  staff  depart- 
ments, every  conceivable  obstacle  being  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  exe- 
cution of  my  necessary  orders,  and  everything  done  that  could  be  done 
to  breed  disaffection  amongst  the  re-enforcements.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances I have  no  alternative  but  either  to  resign  the  command 
into  the  hands  of  these  mutineers  or  to  vindicate  my  authority  by  get- 
ting rid  of  their  pretensions. 

I am  happy  to  be  able  to  add  that  the  spirit  and  course  of  conduct 
herein  described  were  confined  strictly  to  the  personal  attaches  of  Gen- 
eral Foster,  Generals  Naglee  and  Ferry  having  taken  no  part  therein 
(further  than  General  Naglee’s  formal  protest);  and  that  the  troops 
brought  down  from  North  Carolina,  most  of  them  fresh  from  Yorktown, 
and  never  really  incorporated  in  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  appear 
in  good  spirits,  and  well  satisfied  with  the  prospect  of  soon  being  called 
upon  to  take  part  in  the  operations  of  the  department,  which  are  now 
only  delayed  for  the  arrival  of  the  additional  iron-clad  monitors  daily 
expected  by  the  admiral. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  high  esteem,  your  very  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTEE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Special  Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  97.  j Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  8.  G.,  February  19, 1863. 

Two  members  of  General  Foster’s  staff,  now  sojourning  within  the 
limits  of  this  department,  having  been  engaged  in  sending  North  a 
steamer  belonging  to  this  command  and  necessary  for  the  operations 
about  to  commence,  such  steamer  being  sent  away  clandestinely  and 
without  the  knowledge,  consent,  or  order  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding, and  it  being  found  that  many,  if  not  all,  the  members  of  Gen- 


410  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.'  [Chap.  XXVi. 

.eral  Foster’s  staff  have  indulged  in  statements  and  remarks  of  a char- 
acter tending  to  create  disaffection,  insubordination,  and  mutiny,  it  is 
hereby  ordered  that  all  the  members  of  the  staff*  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  G. 
Foster,  commanding  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  now  within  the 
limits  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  shall  quit  this  department  by 
the  first  steamer  going  North. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Hunter : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  C.,  February  24,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief  TJ.  8.  Army , Washington , J).  C.  : 

General  : Your  attention  is  respectfully  but  urgently  called  to  the 
comparatively  defenseless  condition,  both  as  regards  armament  and 
garrison,  of  the  permanent  works  at  Key  West  and  the  Tortugas.  It 
is  unnecessary  to  do  more  than  refer  to  the  facts.  Of  the  importance 
of  these  works  no  question  can  be  raised ; and  it  is  in  view  of  existing 
complications  of  foreign  policy,  by  which  a firm  possession  of  these 
works  is  made  doubly  necessary,  that  these  representations  are  made, 
for  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  large  foreign  naval  and  military  forces 
are  nigher  these  points  now  than  any  re-enforcements  that  can  be  thrown 
into  them. 

The  garrison  at  Key  West  is  about  900  men ; that  of  Tortugas  about 
200;  and  even  these  can  ill  be  spared  from  this  department,  in  view  of 
operations  actually  requiring  more  men  than  are  now  at  command. 
Sufficient  re-enforcements  to  increase  these  garrisons  to  their  proper 
standard,  viz,  that  of  Key  West  to  1,200  and  that  of  Tortugas  to  1,000 
men,  should  be  sent  at  once.  It  is  suggested  that  regiments  be  raised 
for  this  especial  duty  of  men,  if  possible,  to  some  extent  acclimated,  and 
under  officers  of  some  artillery  experience.  Regiments  of  blacks  might 
find  proper  service  here ; and  the  command  of  these  two  works  should 
be  given  to  an  old  artillery  officer  with  the  necessary  rank,  and  there 
are  numbers  of  such  in  the  service  who  are  perhaps  incapable  of  field 
duty  elsewhere. 

The  armament  of  Fort  Taylor,  Key  West,  is  now  six  10-inch  and 
forty-one  8-inch  columbiads,  two  100-pounders,  six  84-pounders,  and 
nine  30-pounders,  rifled ; total,  64  guns. 

That  of  Fort  Jefferson,  Tortugas,  is  six  10-inch,  thirty  8-inch,  and 
nine  42-pounder  guns,  and  six  84-pounders,  rifled ; total,  51  guns. 

Both,  I submit,  should  be  armed  to  their  utmost  capacity  with  a large 
proportion  of  guns  of  the  heaviest  caliber  known.  Either  of  these  works, 
as  at  present  armed,  it  is  believed,  could  be  carried  by  a coup  de  main, 
and  the  enemy  once  in  possession  it  would  require  great  efforts  and 
sacrifices  to  regain  these  indispensable  positions. 

I have  respectfully  but  most  earnestly  to  invite  your  early  attention 
to  this  matter,  particularly  with  respect  to  a prompt  supply  of  guns  of 
the  heaviest  calibers. 

With  the  highest  esteem,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


3hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  411 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South. 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal , S.  C.,  February  24,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  TJ.  8.  Army , Washington , D.  G. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  let- 
ters of  the  15th  and  16tli  instant,  and  must  confess  that  I was  much 
surprised  at  their  contents.  But  I reserve  any  remarks  I have  to  make 
3ii  them  for  a more  convenient  occasion.  I must  disclaim,  however,  any 
intention  of  interfering  with  the  President’s  organization  of  the  Eight- 
3enth  Army  Corps.  Such  a thing  never  entered  my  mind.  Nearly  a 
year  since,  long  before  General  Foster’s  army  corps  was  even  thought 
of,  I was  promised  such  re-enforcements  as  would  enable  me  to  act 
efficiently  iirthis  department.  When  these  long-delayed  re-enforcements 
it  length  arrived,  therefore,  I could  not  for  a moment  imagine  that  they 
were  not  to  constitute  a part  of  the  Tenth  Army  Corps,  agreeably  to  the 
inclosed  order,  which,  you  see,  directs  that  all  troops  serving  in  the  De- 
partment of  the  South  should  constitute  the  Tenth  Army  Corps.*  The 
mere  fact  that  these  re-enforcements  passed  through  General  Foster’s 
command,  tarrying  but  a very  few  days,  cannot  without  any  special 
assignment  of  the  President  constitute  them  a part  of  the  Eighteenth 
Army  Corps  any  more  than  their  being  in  this  department  makes  them 
i part  of  the  Tenth  Army  Corps.  I confess  I should  as  soon  have 
[thought  of  calling  these  re-enforcements  detachments  from  the  various 
army  corps  from  which  they  came  in  Virginia  as  to  term  them  a de- 
tachment of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps.  This,  however,  is  a matter 
bf  no  consequence,  as  I certainly  never  expect  them  to  return  to  North 
Carolina,  as  their  services  will  be  indispensable  here,  and,  in  addition,  I 
[must  most  earnestly  beg  you  to  send  at  once  to  this  department  20,000 
additional  troops,  to  be  used  in  co-operation  with  the  Navy  against 
Savannah.  We  confidently  expect  to  have  Chai-leston  in  ten  or  twelve 
lays,  and  the  country  cannot  afford  to  lose  the  services  of  the  iron  clads: 
for  a single  hour.  I inclose  herewith  a certified  copy  of  General  Fos- 
ter’s secret  instructions  to  General  Naglee,  from  the  postscript  to  which 
fou  will  perceive  that  he  orders  General  Naglee  to  embark  his  command, 
move  in  conjunction  with  the  Navy,  “and  operate  as  agreed  upon  ver- 
bally,” without  any  reference  whatever  to  me.f  Could  there  be  anything 
more  disrespectful  or  insubordinate,  and  where  can  you  find  a soldier 
who  would  not  have  arrested  General  Foster  under  like  circumstances'? 

Your  remarks  with  regard  to  “those  who  have  fostered  animosities 
and  jealousies”  I do  not  take  to  myself.  I hope  they  were  not  intended 
tor  another  quarter.  You  should  know  that  I am  not  troubled  in  this 
way.  When  I had  but  a handful  of  men  in  Kansas  I gave  you  what 
little  assistance  was  in  my  power  to  secure  your  victory  at  Fort  Don- 
clson,  and  at  the  same  time  sent,  on  my  own  responsibility,  Slough’s 
regiment  of  Colorado  Volunteers  to  Colonel  Canby,  which  saved  New 
Mexico  at  the  Canon  Glorieta. 

The  last  time  I had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  at  your  own  house  I 
believed  General  Foster  to  be  a good  soldier,  and  it  struck  me  that  his 
local  knowledge  might  be  of  great  service  in  the  operations  against 
Charleston . Sincerely  wishing  that  no  expectation  on  my  part  to 
command  in  this  department  should  interfere  with  the  public  weal,  I 
then  candidly  asked  you  to  send  Foster  to  command  in  this  department 
and  to  give  me  another  command  elsewhere.  Your  reply  was,  “Foster 

* See  General  Orders,  No.  123,  p.  380.  t See  p.  407, 


412 


COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVt 


cannot  be  spared  from  North  Carolina.”  Coming  here  under  these  cir- 
cumstances I certainly  expected  to  be  treated  as  a soldier,  and  not  to 
have  re-enforcements  sent  here  with  written  orders  to  act  independ- 
ently. I am  fully  convinced,  general,  that  you  have  been  deceived  in 
this  case,  and  that  on  reviewing  it  you  will  send  me  word  that  no  sol- 
dier could  have  done  differently. 

I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  certified  copy  of  general  or- 
ders of  this  department  revoking  the  consolidation  of  the  re-enforce- 
ments from  North  Carolina  with  the  Tenth  Army  Corps. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 


servant, 


D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 


General  Orders,  » Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  15.  ( Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal , 8.  0.,  Feb.  23,  1863. 

*###*** 

III.  In  conformity  with  instructions  received  from  Headquarters  of 
the  Army,  so  much  of  General  Orders,  No.  13,  from  these  headquarters, 
current  series,  as  incorporates  the  re-enforcements  ordered  by  the  Gov- 
ernment to  this  department  from  North  Carolina  with  the  Tenth  Army 
Corps  is  hereby  revoked,  and  such  re-enforcements  will  hereafter  be 
regarded  and  returned  as  a detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 
serving  in  the  Department  of  the  South,  and  forming  a portion  of  this 
command.  The  division  organization  of  these  troops  will  continue  as 
at  present. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter:  T_T„_ 

J CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Department  op  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Fort  Royal , S.  C.,  February  27,  1863. 

General  H.  M.  Naglee, 

Comdg.  TJ.  S.  Forces , Saint  Helena  Island , S.  C. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication, dated  the  25th  instant/  in  which  you  recite,  from  a copy 
furnished  to  you  on  the  22d  instant,  the  following  extract  from  a letter 
written  by  Major-General  Halleck  to  General  Hunter  on  the  16th  in- 
stant : 

General  Naglee’s  protest  being  disapproved,  the  Secretary  of  War  has  directed  that 
he  be  relieved  from  duty  in  your  (General  Hunter’s)  department. 

And  in  reply  to  your  letter  I am  instructed  by  the  major-general  com- 
manding to  transmit  herewith  certified  copy  of  a telegram,  dated  the 
18th  instant,  sent  by  Major-General  Halleck,  general-m-chief  U.  S. 
Army  through  Col.  E.  D.  Townsend,  assistant  adjutant-general,  U.  S. 
Army’  from  which  you  will  perceive  that  the  matter  of  relieving  you  or 
retaining  you  in  command  of  the  re-enforcements  is  left  to  General 
Hunter’s  discretion. 


Not  found, 


CHAP.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


413 


This  telegram  was  undoubtedly  based  on  General  Hunter’s  emphatic 
statement,  made  and  repeated  to  General  Halleck  in  every  letter  to 
which  the  controversy  regarding  the  status  and  command  of  the  re- 
enforcements from  North  Carolina  has  given  rise,  to  the  effect  that 
your  conduct  in  the  matter  had  been  blameless,  in  General  Hunter’s 
judgment,  and  that  you  had  only  done  your  duty  in  bringing  before 
these  headquarters,  on  General  Hunter’s  assumption  of  command,  in- 
structions from  your  former  commanding  officer,  which  set  up  on  his 
behalf  a claim  to  retain  independent  command  of  the  re-enforcements 
ordered  by  the  Government  to  General  Hunter’s  department. 

Such  being  the  facts  of  the  case,  it  must  be  unnecessary  to  add  that 
General  Hunter  uses  the  discretion  given  him  by  Major-General  Hal- 
leck to  retain  your  services  in  this  department  $ and  that,  fully  appre- 
ciating your  many  excellent  qualities  as  a brave,  experienced,  and 
efficient  officer,  it  is  his  hope  that  you  will  have  no  cause  to  regret  your 
service  in  this  department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

OHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  op  the  South, 

No.  116.  f Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  Feb.  28,  1863. 

I.  The  infantry  of  the  detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps 
serving  in  this  department  will  be  divided  into  two  divisions,  com- 
manded by  Generals  Henry  M.  Naglee  and  Orris  S.  Ferry.  Brig.  Gen. 
Thomas  G.  Stevenson  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  a brigade  in  one 
of  these  divisions,  which  brigade  will  include  the  two  regiments  re- 
cently commanded  by  him  if  they  have  not  been  otherwise  disposed  of, 
and  General  Naglee  is  charged  with  this  assignment. 

II.  All  returns  and  reports  hereafter  will  be  by  divisions,  and  will  be 
forwarded  through  Brigadier-General  Naglee,  as  commanding  officer  on 
Saint  Helena.  The  artillery  detachments  and  companies  will  send  their 
returns  consolidated  through  the  senior  officer  of  the  Third  New  York 
Artillery  present  on  duty  and  Brigadier- General  Naglee  as  a separate 
regimental  organization,  and  that  regiment  will  not  be  attached  to  any 
division. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Hunter : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal , S.  C., , 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  M.  Naglee, 

Commanding  JJ.  S.  Forces,  Saint  Helena,  S.  C. : 

General  : Your  Special  Orders,  No.  19,  having  been  officially  referred 
to  these  headquarters  by  Surg.  C.  H.  Crane,  U.  S.  Army,  medical  director, 
it  is  deemed  proper  to  inform  you  that  no  corps  organization  is  con- 
templated with  respect  to  the  detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Army 
Corps  now  in  this  department,  and  that  after  the  removal  of  the  de- 
tachment from  Saint  Helena  Island  you  will  under  present  orders  only 
command  your  division,  except  in  so  far  as  military  operations  may 


414  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

cause  present  instructions  to  be  modified  by  orders  from  these  head- 
quarters. 

For  these  reasons  the  organization  of  the  staff  for  such  separate  corps 
organization  is  unnecessary  and  will  be  revoked,  and  the  organization 
of  the  troops  on  Saint  Helena  Island  will  be  as  prescribed  in  Special 
Orders,  No.  116,  from  these  headquarters  (current  series). 

By  command  of  Major-General  Hunter  : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 

(Communication  without  date  received  with  Special  Orders,  No.  116.) 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  February  28,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Orris  S.  Ferry, 

Commanding  Division,  Saint  Helena : 

General  : The  division  under  your  command  will  during  the  army 
operations  upon  Charleston  be  kept  for  some  time  afloat  and  in  reserve — 
this  pending  some  preliminary  labor  that  will  probably  be  accomplished 
by  other  troops. 

It  is  probable  that  the  subsistence  and  ammunition  designated  in 
previous  instructions  will  suffice  for  the  time  that  your  command  may 
be  on  transports,  as  above  indicated. 

Bespectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant. 

T.  SEYMOUB, 

Brigadier- General,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  February  28,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  M.  Naglee, 

Commanding  Division , Saint  Helena  Island  : 

General  : So  far  as  the  nature  of  expected  operations  in  Charleston 
Harbor  can  be  foreseen  on  the  part  of  land  forces,  you  will  be  directed 
to  conduct  those  against  the  north  extremity  of  Sullivan’s  Island.  A 
division — that  under  your  immediate  command — will  probably  be  ample 
for  this  purpose.  It  will  be  landed  on  Long  Island,  on  the  southern 
extremities  of  which  numerous  rifled  guns  will  be  put  under  cover  as 
rapidly  as  possible ; light  mortars,  Goehorns,  &c.,  will  be  made  use  of 
should  the  nature  of  the  ground  admit;  and  under  this  fire,  with  the 
aid  of  that  from  naval  vessels,  it  is  expected  that  whatever  works  or 
batteries  may  exist  on  the  point  referred  to  will  be  overcome ; if  so,  a 
crossing  will  be  made,  all  of  the  heavier  rifles  will  be  passed  over  to  Sul- 
livan’s Island  (with  whatever  additional  artillery  may  prove  necessary], 
and  all  resisting  forces  driven  upon  Fort  Moultrie,  which  will  then  be 
attacked  in  conjunction  with  the  Navy. 

Under  any  circumstances  (should  any  co-operation  on  the  part  of  land 
forces  be  desirable)  the  landing  on  Long  Island  and  the  establishment 
of  works  against  the  battery  at  Breach  Inlet  will  probably  be  an  essen- 
tial part  of  that  co-operation. 

The  artillery  at  your  disposal,  consisting  of  that  recently  arrived  from 
JJorth  Carolina,  is  as  follows  ? Ten  30-pounder  Parrotts,  four  20  pounder 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


415 


Parrotts,  four  12-pounder  Wiards,  six  3-inch  ordnance,  rifled,  four  8 and 
four  10  inch  mortars,  and  additional  mortars  and  Coehorns  will  probably 
be  furnished  from  another  source  should  it  be  found  necessary. 

The  heavy  Parrotts  (100-pounders)  may  possibly  be  required  against 
Fort  Moultrie,  and  should  be  landed  after  the  Breach  Inlet  battery  falls 
if  the  weather  should  permit. 

It  is  believed  that  the  arrangements  that  were  originally  made  with 
respect  to  the  service  of  these  guns  need  not  be  disturbed;  that  the 
same  details  for  service  and  the  same  transportation  already  designated 
are  proper,  and  not  to  be  disarranged  without  good  reasons  on  your 
part.  And  these  instructions  are  given  in  order  that  any  intermediate 
measures  that  may  occur  to  your  mind  may  be  suggested  and  acted 
upon. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

T.  SEYMOUK, 

Brigadier-General  and  Chief  of  /Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Detachment  Eighteenth  Corps, 

Saint  Helena  Island , S.  0.,  March  1,  1863. 
Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  A.  A.  G .,  Tenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel:  I would  respectfully  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  Special 
Orders,  Ho.  116,  and  your  communication  without  date  which  accom- 
panied it. 

It  is  with  profound  regret  that  I find  a determination  to  open  the? 
unfortunate  difficulties  that  I had  sincerely  hoped  were  settled  by 
the  Secretary  of  War.  A contrary  course  diverts  the  necessary  atten- 
tion of  all  from  the  important  preparations  absolutely  necessary  for  our 
success,  and  may  cause  delay,  which  at  this  season  of  the  year  may 
be  most  fatal. 

I had  hoped  that  “ with  its  own  officers,  as  assigned  by  its  proper' 
chief,”  the  organization  of  the  command  from  North  Carolina  would  not 
have  been  disturbed,  and  that  whilst  cheerfully  responding  to  the 
“general  orders  and  directions”  of  General  Hunter  the  management 
of  my  command  in  all  other  regards  would  have  been  left  as  indicated 
by  General  Foster,  General  Hunter  holding  me  only  responsible  for  the 
full  and  faithful  performance  of  every  duty. 

To  assist  in  the  complicated  and  hazardous  undertaking  against 
Charleston,  the  most  important  of  the  war,  General  Foster  brought  an 
efficient  staff,  who  had  prepared  all  the  material  necessary  with  the 
greatest  possible  care,  and  who  would  gladly  have  assisted  in  its  ex- 
penditure; but  by  Special  Orders,  No.  97,  this  entire  organization  was 
broken  up,  and  the  gentlemen  have  all  returned  to  North  Carolina.  In 
my  attempt  to  provide  for  their  absence  and  to  appoint  the  necessary 
officers  to  carry  out  the  purposes  for  which  the  troops  were  brought  into 
this  department,  I am  met  with  your  especial  instructions,  which  re- 
quire me  to  revoke  an  order  appointing  a surgeon  to  act  in  the  absence 
of  the  medical  director  brought  here  by  General  Foster,  and  advised 
“ that  no  corps  organization  is  contemplated  with  respect  to  the  detach- 
ment of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  now  in  this  department,”  in  which 
we  entirely  agree;  at  the  same  time  you  certainly  will  admit  that  I cau- 
not  conduct  the  business  of  the  detachment  which  I command  of  12,000 
men  (the  organization  of  which,  made  by  the  President,  General  Halleck 
directs  cannot  be  “changed”)  without  proper  staff  assistance,  and  this 
Js  the  object  for  which  this  apd  other  similar  appoiptpiepts  Were  jnpfle, 


416 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


In  regard  to  your  directions  expressed  in  Special  Orders,  No.  116,  and 
to  your  instructions,  without  date,  received  at  the  same  time,  both  de- 
priving me- of  the  command  left  by  General  Foster  and  limiting  it  here- 
after to  that  of  one  division,  again  referring  to  the  directions  of  General 
Halleck,  I will  add  nothing  more  than  simply  to  assure  you  that  no 
trial  to  which  I may  now  be  subjected  will  drive  me  from  the  purpose 
of  serving  my  country,  for  which  I have  come  a long  distance  with 
great  personal  inconvenience  and  sacrifice. 

Considering  it  my  duty,  as  required  by  the  order  of  General  Foster, 
who  left  me  in  charge  of  all  that  he  brought  from  North  Carolina,  I | 
hereby  respectfully  refer  you  to  the  directions  of  General  Halleck  to 
General  Hunter,  indicated  in  the  letters  of  the  15th  and  16th  ultimo, 
which  required  that  the  distinct  “organization,  both  in  men  and  ma- 
terial, will  be  retained,  so  that  the  corps  can  at  any  time  be  returned 
entire  to  its  proper  department,”  and  that  “General  Hunter  will  rescind 
so  much  of  his  orders  as  consolidates  it  with  the  Tenth  Corps,”  and  I 
would  respectfully  request  that  you  would  advise  me  of  the  intentions 
of  General  Hunter  in  regard  to  the  above  instructions,  so  far  as  they 
refer  to  the  material,  that  I may  report  to  General  Foster  in  the  prem- 
ises. As  now  situated  I am  compelled  to  report  to  him  that,  by  the 
orders  within  referred  to,  the  organization  of  the  detachment  of  the 
Eighteenth  Army  Corps  is  destroyed. 

The  quartermaster  of  General  Hunter’s  department  still  holds  all  the 
transportation  of  the  Eighteenth  Corps,  and  none  of  it  is  under  my  con- 
trol or  orders  except  the  Secor. 

The  medical  director  of  General  Hunter’s  department  holds  all  the 
medical  stores  and  refuses  to  turn  them  over  to  the  acting  medical 
director  of  the  detachment,  and  you  ordered  me  to  revoke  his  appoint- 
ment. 

The  commissary  stores  sent  from  North  Carolina  expressly  for  the 
detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Corps  are  afloat,  and  I am  ordered  not 
to  appoint  a commissary  of  the  detachment  to  receive  them ; all  of 
which  is  in  direct  collision  with  my  orders  from  General  Foster,  and 
does  not  harmonize  with  the  direction  of  the  President  that  “the 
organization,  men  and  material,”  should  not  be  disturbed. 

Being  second  in  command  only  to  General  Hunter  and  the  senior 
officer  commanding  the  forces  from  North  Carolina,  acting  always  under 
the  general  orders  and  instructions  of  General  Hunter,  I had  hoped 
that  I would  have  been  permitted,  without  unnecessary  restraints,  to 
so  command  the  forces  left  under  my  command  as  the  more  effectually 
to  secure  the  great  objects  of  the  Government  for  which  we  had  been 
brought  together. 

Tn  conclusion,  colonel,  assure  the  general  for  me  that  in  again  enter- 
ing my  protest  I mean  no  disrespect,  but  am  guided  only  by  a solemn 
duty,  which  my  position  as  the  senior  officer  commanding  the  detach- 
ment of  the  Eighteenth  Corps  and  my  own  self-respect  demand  of  me. 

I shall  pass  over  in  silence  the  indications  conveyed  by  the  instructions 
and  order  referred  to,  and  in  the  necessities  of  our  common  country 
smother  the  feeling  that  under  no  other  circumstances  would  I attempt 
to  control.  Assure  the  general  that,  regardless  of  all  feelings  in  the 
movement  now  contemplated,  I will  serve  in  any  capacity  in  which  he 


may  place  me. 

Yery  respectfully,  &c., 


HENRY  M.  NAGLEE, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding , 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


417 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne , N.  <7.,  March  2,  1863. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , W ashington  : 


Sir  : Inclosed  you  will  find  a copy  of  Special  Orders,  No.  97,*  issued 
from  the  headquarters  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  commanding 
the  staff  of  General  Foster  to  u quit”  that  department. 

Upon  the  receipt  of  this  order  the  chief  of  staff  addressed  a note  to 
Major-General  Hunter,  asking  to  be  informed  what  two  members  of 
General  Foster’s  staff  were  alluded  to  and  what  statements  and  remarks 
had  been  made  to  warrant  the  charges  conveyed  in  the  above  special 
order.  To  this  note  no  reply  whatever  has  been  made.  Denying  as  we 
do  most  emphatically  the  truth  of  the  accusations  made  against  us  in 
the  same  order,  and  feeling  aggrieved  at  the  uncourteous  treatment 
we  have  received  at  the  hands  of  the  major-general  commanding  the 
Department  of  the  South,  we  respectfully  suggest  that  you  will  order 
a court  of  inquiry  in  the  case  or  take  such  other  action  as  you  may 
deem  proper. 

We  are,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servants, 

EDWARD  E.  POTTER, 

Brigadier-  General.  Chief  of  Staff* 
FRANCIS  DARR, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  Commissary  of  Subsistence. 
JAMES  H.  STRONG, 

Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp . 
GEO.  E.  GOURAND, 

Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp. 
LOUIS  FITZGERALD, 

Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp . 
FRANCIS  U.  FARQUHAR, 

Second  Lieutenant.  TJ.  S.  Army . 

F.  G.  SNELLING, 

TJ.  S.  Volunteers , Medical  Director . 
JAS.  C.  SLAGHT, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Quartermaster. 


« 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  6\,  March  3,  1863. 
daj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok, 

General-in-Chief  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : You  will  be  happy  to  hear  of  the  destruction  of  the  Nash- 
rille  in  the  Ogeechee  River  by  the  guns  of  the  iron-clad  Montauk;  and 
s I write  we  hear  the  bombardment  of  Fort  McAllister  progressing 
iercely,  Admiral  DuPont  having  been  desirous  of  testing  his  untried 
ron-clads  against  its  ramparts. 

Everything  looks  well  for  us  and  the  troops  appear  in  the  highest 
pirits,  the  regiments  under  orders  to  embark  being  the  picked  men 
1 the  department.  The  approaches  to  Beaufort  on  Port  Roval  Island 
lave  been  strongly  fortified,  as  indications  lead  me  to  believe  that  the 
nemy  will  attempt  a diversion  against  that  post  while  the  attack  on 
/harleston  is  in  progress. 


27  R R — yol  xiv 


i 


See  p.  409. 


418  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

We  now  only  await  the  return  of  the  iron-clads  from  Fort  McAllister 
and  the  signal  of  the  admiral  to  start,  all  our  preparations  being  com- 
plete, so  that  nothing  is  left  but  to  embark  them. 

And  now  to  the  only  disturbing  element  in  the  department— an  ele- 
ment, however,  which  shall  not  be  allowed  to  operate  to  the  detriment  of 
the  public  interests. 

I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  certified  copy  of  another  pro- 
test—the  third  altogether,  in  formal  shape*  received  from  Brig.  Gen. 
Henry  M.  Naglee,  who  appears  to  be  devoting  himself  with  all  his 
energies  to  a revival  in  his  own  person  of  those  pretensions  which  were 
disallowed  and  disapproved  in  the  case  of  Major-General  Foster.  I 
say  this  is  the  third  protest  “in  formal  shape”  received  from  General 
Naglee,  the  fact  being  that  every  order  sent  to  him  or  paper  referred 
has  been  made  the  occasion  of  an  informal  protest,  either  by  indorse- 
ment or  answer. 

Previous  to  the  receipt  of  your  decision  on  the  questions  raised  by 
Major-General  Foster  I was  led  to  regard  the  vexatious,  quibbling,  and 
evasive  course  pursued  by  General  Naglee  as  the  result  merely  of  his 
desire  to  protect  interests  that  had  been  confided  to  his  charge  by  his 
former  commanding  officer,  General  Naglee  in  almost  every  instance 
accompanying  his  written  protest  by  verbal  protestations  that  he  was  j 
no  party  to  the  difficulty  himself,  and  that  he  only  acted  as  he  did  in  ' 
order  to  make  a record  which  could  not  be  used  to  his  disadvantage  in 
case  he  should  ever  hereafter  be  returned  to  General  Foster’s  command. 
Frankly  accepting  this  view  of  his  conduct,  and  as  frankly  giving  him 
•credit  therefor,  I failed  to  avail  myself  of  the  authority  by  you  given  to 
relieve  him  of  his  command,  but  on  the  contrary  sent  him  a friendly 
and  even  complimentary  letter,  duplicate  of  which  is  inclosed,*  express- 
ing this  view  of  his  previous  action,  and  stating  my  desire  to  retain  him 
and  my  hope  that  he  would  have  no  reason  to  regret  his  service  in  this 
department.  But  ever  since  the  sending  of  that  letter,  for  which  it 
would  appear  as  if  he  had  been  waiting,  General  Naglee  has  pursued  a 
systematic  course  of  vexatious  delays,  evasive  special  pleadings,  and 
distorted  interpretations  with  regard  to  all  orders  sent  from  these  head- 
quarters, his  object  apparently  being  to  assert  and  obtain  by  indirec- 
tion and  mere  annoyance  an  acknowledgment  in  his  own  person  of  the 
claims  to  separate  and  independent  command  first  raised  by  Major-Geii- 
eral  Foster.  So  far  has  this  gone  that  I much  fear  he  will  compel  me 
to  avail  myself  of  the  privilege  given  by  you  of  relieving  him  from  com- 
mand in  this  department — a privilege,  however,  of  which  I shall  not 
avail  myself  until  the  good  of  the  public  service  makes  such  a step  un- 
avoidable. 

All  the  difficulty  would  be  avoided  by  the  consolidation  of  the  re-en- 
forcements from  North  Carolina  with  the  Tenth  Army  Corps  ; the  whole 
not  making,  even  when  thus  consolidated,  au  aggregate  much,  if  at  all, 
exceeding  22,000  men,  and  I have  most  earnestly  to  beg  that  this  may 
be  done.  1 

I have  also  to  beg  that  some  brigadier-general  senior  to  General 
Naglee  may  be  sent  to  this  department  immediately. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major - General , Commanding. 


* See  p.  412,  Halpine  to  Naglee,  February  27,  1863. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


419 


Saint  Helena,  March  3,  1863. 

[Major-General  Foster:] 

My  Dear  General:  Tlie  within  accompanying  are  sent  confiden- 
tially, and  with  the  purpose  of  informing  you  of  all  of  the  facts,  which, 
with  the  orders,  indorsements,  protest,  &c.,  will  advise  you  that  the 
detachment  organization  is  ordered  to  be  broken  up  and  the  within 
relieved  of  the  command  of  it  and  placed  in  charge  of  a division.*  This 
is  directly  in  disobedience  of  the  positive  orders  of  the  15th  and  16th 
ultimo. 

Captain  [Hook?],  of  the  regular  battery,  has  been  ordered  by  General 
Hunter  to  Key  West,  and  his  company  has  been  ordered  to  join  the 
rest  of  the  regiment  of  the  First  Artillery  at  Beaufort. 

We  were  all  in  hopes  after  the  orders  from  Washington  that  concord 
would  again  prevail,  but  alas,  all  feel  pained  at  the  course  now  pursued 
in  this  most  embarrassing  contest.  I have  done  all  to  place  the  subject 
in  its  proper  light,  and  whilst  I have  tried  to  avoid  unnecessary  collision 
I have  allowed  no  indignity  to  go  unnoticed.  Our  people  have  all  suf- 
fered from  the  effects  of  this  most  unfortunate,  unmeaning  trouble, 
which  could  result  in  no  possible  good,  and  may  result  in  confusion,  if 
not  worse. 

I have  no  knowledge  of  the  plan  of  attack;  uot  one  word  has  been 
asked  or  uttered  upon  the  subject. 

Expect  to  see  me  after  the  problem  is  solved,  and  this  will  be  the  ex- 
ception if  the  truth  does  not  yet  prevail. 

My  kindest  regards  to  all,  Mrs.  F.  and  the  disaffected.  You  will  now 
understand  the  object  of  their  being  sent  away,  for  otherwise  the  com- 
mand could  not  have  been  so  easily  broken  up,  and  the  moment  I at- 
tempted to  supply  their  places  by  acting  appointments  he  rescinded 
my  orders  (see  his  Special,  116,  and  letter  without  date),  and  ordered 
that  there  should  not  be  a separate  corps  organization  in  his  depart- 
ment, forgetting  that  during  the  time  he  had  us  absorbed  in  the  Tenth 
that  Halpine  hinted  to  [George  H.]  Johnston,  my  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  that  a provisional  corps  organization  with  myself  as  commander 
would  be  organized  if  I desired  it. 

All  of  our  time  is  taken  up  in  the  changes  of  detail,  and  the  prepara- 
tions for  so  important  an  issue  are  utterly  impossible,  independent  of 
the  fact  that  these  latter  have  been  now  assumed  entirely  by  General 
Seymour,  of  which  we  are  entirely  ignorant. 

j Your  anticipations  in  regard  to  the  latter  seem  to  have  been  well 
founded.  I will  add  no  more.  Do  write,  that  I may  know  what  is  going 
on,  and  address  me  under  cover  of  the  admiral. 

Sincerely,  yours, 


KAGLEE. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  16.  } Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  March  5,  1863. 

Soldiers  of  the  Department  of  the  South: 

After  long  and  wearying  delays,  due  to  causes  over  which  no  one  in 
tms  department  had  control,  we  have  at  length  the  cheering  prospect 
of  active  and  very  important  service. 

Soldiers  of  the  Tenth  Army  Corps,  you  are  stimulated  by  every  con- 


See  p.  413. 


420 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Bideration  of  honor  to  vie  with  the  gallant  men  from  the  Department  of 
North  Carolina,  who  have  been  sent  by  Government  to  take  part  with 
yon  in  the  dangers  and  the  glory  of  operations  now  pending. 

Officers  and  men  of  the  command,  you  are  adjured  to  the  performance 
of  every  duty.  All  who  earn  distinction,  no  matter  how  humble  their 
positions,  have  my  pledge  that  their  services  shall  be  honorably  ac- 
knowledged and  the  acknowledgment  pressed  to  their  advantage. 

Commanding  officers  of  divisions,  brigades,  and  regiments,  in  making 
their  reports  to  these  headquarters,  will  give  the  name  of  every  officer 
and  a full  descriptive  list  of  every  non-commissioned  officer  and  soldier 
of  their  commands  who  has  attracted  their  observation  as  behaving  with 
special  gallantry  or  good  conduct,  in  order  that  the  names  of  all  such 
may  be  published  with  honor  at  their  own  homes;  and  all  who  are  thus 
mentioned  may  rely  that  no  eifort  shall  be  lacking  on  the  part  of  the 
major-general  commanding  to  secure  their  promotion. 

Should  any  officers  neglect  their  men  or  evince  the  least  disposition  to 
shrink  at  any  moment  from  the  proper  responsibilities  of  their  com- 
missions they  will  be  likewise  reported  and  held  amenable  to  the 
severest  penalties  denounced  by  military  law  for  misconduct  in  pres- 
ence of  the  enemy.  Should  private  soldiers  distinguish  themselves 
while  officers  become  liable  to  censure  it  would  be  treason  to  the 
country  not  to  compel  an  exchange  of  places. 

The  attention  of  all  officers  is  earnestly  called  to  Article  37,  Kevised 
Eegulations  for  the  Army,  in  relation  to  “troops  on  board  transports,” 
paragraphs  861  and  863  of  this  article  being  of  particular  importance. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

OH  AS.  G.  H ALPINE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  127.  j Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  March  5,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee  having  sent  a third  insubordinate  pro- 
test, much  more  objectionable  than  the  first,  to  these  headquarters,  his 
first  having  been  / disapproved  by  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War,  who  in 
consequence  directed  that  he  be  relieved  from  duty  in  this  department, 
afterward  leaving  it  optional  with  the  commanding  general  to  relieve 
or  retain  him,  the  commanding  general,  after  very  mature  reflection 
and  with  a solemn  sense  of  his  responsibilities  to  his  country,  sincerely 
believes  that  the  harmony  of  the  department  and  the  best  interests  of 
the  service  require  that  General  Naglee  should  be  relieved  from  duty. 
The  said  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee  is  therefore  hereby  relieved  from 
duty  in  the  Department  of  the  South,  and  Brig.  Gen.  Orris  S.  Ferry 
will  immediately  assume  command  of  all  the  U.  S.  forces  on  Saint  Helena 
Island. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee  will  proceed  to  the  city  of  New  York  by 
the  first  steamer  and  report  by  letter  to  the  Adjutant-General  of  the 
Army. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Hunter: 

OHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Tenth  Army  Corps  and  Dept,  of  the  South. 


CHAi*.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


421 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

March  6,  1863. 

Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Comdg.  S.  A.  B.  Squad.,  Flag-ship  Wabash , Port  Royal  Harbor: 

Admiral:  I am  sending  Colonel  Higginson,  commanding  First  South 
Carolina  Brigade,  to  execute  an  important  mission  in  the  southerly  part 
of  this  department,  and  have  to  beg,  if  consistent  with  your  views  of  the 
interests  of  the  service,  that  you  will  give  the  colonel  a letter  to  the 
officers  of  your  squadron  on  duty  opposite  the  Florida  coast  to  render 
any  assistance  in  their  power  that  shall  not  interfere  with  your  other 
duties. 

I ha've  the  honor  to  be,  admiral,  with  very  sincere  esteem,  your  obe- 
dient servant. 

D.  HUNTED, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  March  6,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineers,  U.  S.  Army  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  Lieut.  Walter  Mc- 
Farland, U.  S.  Engineers,  arrived  at  this  place  last  night,  in  conformity 
to  Special  Orders,  No.  104,  from  the  headquarters  of  this  department 
(a  copy  of  which  accompanies  this  letter),  and  addressed  to  me  a copy 
of  a communication  from  yourself,  dated  March  25,  1862,  and  a protest 
by  himself,*  in  accordance  with  your  instructions  to  him  in  that  com- 
munication. Copies  of  these  last-mentioned  papers  are  inclosed  here- 
with. 

There  has  been  no  want  of  conviction  on  my  part  as  to  the  para- 
mount importance  of  Key  West  and  the  necessity  of  completing  its  de- 
fenses. An  additional  regiment  has  very  recently  been  sent  to  strengthen 
the  garrison  of  that  post  and  of  the  Tortugas,  and  a competent  officer 
of  the  regular  service  has  been  ordered  there  as  director  of  artillery. 
Full  instructions  as  to  the  great,  consequence  of  these  works  have  been 
communicated  to  the  commanding  officer  and  his  attention  turned  to 
every  measure  that  has  suggested  itself  to  my  mind  as  to  defense.. 

It  was  believed  that  Lieutenant  McFarland  could  be  spared  for  a 
week  or  ten  days  to  assist  in  the  attack  upon  Charleston,  which  will 
probably  involve  operations  of  delicacy  and  skill  too  great  to  be  de- 
volved upon  any  single  officer  unaided,  no  matter  what  liis  ability  may 
be,  and  the  pressing  nature  of  a necessity  that  could  not  be  put  aside 
induced  the  shortest  possible  method  of  arriving  at  the  point  desired. 

Any  desire  to  interfere  with  your  plans  is  therefore  disclaimed,  and 
Lieutenant  McFarland  will  be  ordered  to  return  to  Key  West  as  soon 
as  the  emergency  has  passed  by  ; but  it  is  earnestly  requested  that  you 
will  permit  him  to  remain  here  during  this  emergency,  in  which  his 
services  will  be  as  indispensable  perhaps  as  at  any  other  point. 

I may  add  that  it  is  understood  from  Lieutenant  McFarland  that  his 
short  absence  from  his  station  will,  in  view  of  the  arrangements  made 
by  him,  not  be  any  material  detriment  to  the  public  good. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Not  found. 


422 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


fin  closure  No.  1.] 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  104.  ) Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  8.  C.,  February  21, 1863. 


In  view  of  active  operations  now  pending  in  this  department  render- 
ing an  additional  engineer  officer  necessary  at  these  headquarters,  First 
Lieut.  Walter  McFarland,  U.  S.  Engineers,  now  stationed  at  Key  West, 
will  embark  for  Hilton  Head  on  the  vessel  taking  down  this  order  with- 


out delay. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Hunter  : 

J CHAS.  G.  HALP1NE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Army  Corps. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Engineer  Department, 
Washington,  March  25,  1862. 

Lieut.  W.  McFarland, 

Corps  of  Engineers,  Fort  Taylor,  Fla.: 

Sir  : On  the  subject  of  your  letter  of  the  12th  instant,  received  on  the 
20th,  I have  to  reply  that  your  duties  in  the  preparation  of  the  system 
of  defenses  at  Key  West  are  exclusively  under  the  control  of  the  En- 
gineer Department,  from  which  the  plans  of  those  defenses  and  the  in- 
structions for  their  execution  have  been  and  will  be  supplied,  the  funds 
applied  thereto  being  derived  from  the  Treasury  on  requisition  from 
this  department,  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  War. 

That  this  is  the  case  cannot  but  be  well  understood  throughout  the 
Army,  and  it  must  be  assumed  therefore  by  me  that  no  officer  com- 
manding troops  at  Key  West  or  elsewhere  will  undertake  to  interfere 
in  your  execution  of  those  duties. 

Should,  however,  any  such  interference  take  place,  it  will  be  your 
duty  to  represent  in  writing  to  the  officer  who  may  give  you  orders 
contravening  the  instructions  from  this  department  under  which  you 
are  working,  or  impeding  or  interfering  with  the  construction  of  the  de- 
fenses according  to  the  plans  and  instructions  furnished  you  from  here, 
that  these  plans  have  the  approval  of  the  War  Department,  which  re- 
quires that  they  shall  be  pressed  forward  with  all  the  vigor  permitted 
by  the  appropriation  5 that  you  are  held  responsible  tor  the  execution 
in  strict  conformity  thereto  and  to  the  instructions  furnished  you  from 
the  Engineer  Department,  and. that  you  respectfully  protest  against  any 
orders  touching*  these  duties  being  given  you  by  any  other  authority. 

This  done,  if  the  orders  are  persisted  in  it  will  be  your  duty  to  obey 
them;  but  you  will  in  such  case  at  once  report  to  the  Engineer  Depart- 
ment full  particulars  of  the  occurrence  as  it  takes  place,  in  order  that 
this  office  may  inform  the  Secretary  of  War  that  its  responsibility  as  to 
the  prosecution  of  these  defenses  and  the  expenditure  of  funds  appro- 
priated therefor  has  been  removed  by  such  interference. 

I trust  no  such  question  will  arise  to  impede  the  progress  of  your 
works,  so  indispensable  to  the  preservation  of  the  island  and  harbor  ot 
Key  West  and  to  the  control  by  the  Union  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico; 
and  it  will  diminish  the  probability  of  such  unfortunate  result  for  you, 
in  the  spirit  that  always  governs  the  officers  of  your  corps,  to  have  a 
full  understanding  with  the  commanding  officer  that  you  heartily  de- 
sire to  aid  him  in  every  possible  way  consistent  with  full  success  in  the 
paramount  and  peculiar  duties  of  your  engineer  trust. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  423 


423 


Beaufort,  S.  0.,  March  6,  1863, 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 


Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  sent  the  First  Regiment 
of  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel  Higginson  commanding,  and  the 
portion  of  the  Second  Regiment,  already  mustered  into  service,  under 
Colonel  Montgomery,  up  the  Saint  John’s  River,  Florida,  with  orders 
to  occupy  and  intrench  themselves  at  Jacksonville.  This  place  is  now 
occupied  by  a small  force  of  rebels,  some  of  whom  I hope  to  capture. 

I have  reliable  information  that  there  are  large  numbers  of  able-bodied 
negroes  in  that  vicinity  who  are  watching  for  an  opportunity  to  join  us. 
The  negroes  from  Florida  are  far  more  intelligent  than  any  I have  yet 
seen,  fully  understand  their  position  and  the  intentions  of  the  Gov- 
ernment toward  them.  They  will  fight  with  as  much  desperation  as 
any  people  in  the  world.  I have  many  of  these  Florida  men  in  the  First 
South  Carolina  Regiment,  and  no  one  who  knows  anything  about  that 
regiment  now  doubts  its  efficiency.  It  has  fought  its  way  to  the  esteem 
of  its  enemies.  The  last  expedition  it  made  up  the  Saint  Mary’s  River, 
in  Georgia,  which  I had  the  honor  to  report  to  you,  caused  "a  perfect 
panic  throughout  the  State  of  Georgia.  In  one  engagement  on  that 
occasion,  which  was  not  mentioned  in  my  last  report  to  you  for  want  of 
sufficient  data,  I have  since  learned  that  they  killed  and  wounded  60  of 
the  enemy. 

I feel  great  hopes  that  we  shall  strike  a heavy  blow  in  Florida.  There 
is  at  present  a great  scarcity  of  muskets  and  ammunition  in  this  depart- 
ment. If  this  want  is  supplied  it  is  my  opinion  that  the  entire  State  of 
Florida  can  be  rescued  from  the  enemy,  and  an  asylum  established  for 
persons  from  other  States  who  are  freed  from  bondage  by  the  proclama- 
tion of  freedom,  from  which  they  can  never  be  driven.  The  history  of 
the  Florida  Indian  war  shows  how  strong  this  peculiar  country  is"  for 
a defensive  warfare.  I hope  that  the  attack  of  the  colored  troops  in 
Florida  will  occur  at  nearly  the  same  time  with  that  of  Admiral  DuPont 
upon  Charleston.  I shall  send  early  reports  of  the  operations  of  the 
expedition. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier - General  of  Volunteers . 


Port  Royal,  March  7,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 


U.  S.  Army , New  Berne , N.  G.  : 

General  : The  within,*  with  Orders  (Special),  No.  116,  and  a letter  of 
the  same  date,t  will  inform  you  of  the  last  change  in  the  Department  of 


* Copy  of  Special  Orders,  127,  p.  420. 


t Not  found, 


424 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.-xxvi. 


the  South.  I shall  leave  on  Tuesday,  the  10th,  on  the  Mary  Boardman, 
for  New  York.  You  must  act  promptly  in  the  premises.  Address  me 
under  cover  to  Mr.  James  A.  Burk,  Philadelphia,  of  what  you  desire 
me  to  do  and  to  whom  I shall  apply  to  represent  you  in  Washington. 

Ledlie  has  been  ordered  to  North  Carolina. 

Kindest  regards  to  all  of  our  friends,  and  am,  sincerely,  &c., 

HENRY  M.  NAGLEE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

P.  S. — If  important,  send  duplicate  addressed  to  me  at  the  New  York 
Hotel. 


NAGLEE. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Heady  March  7,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : Everything  being  now  in  a state  of  complete  readiness 
for  the  forces  under  my  command  to  take  the  part  assigned  to  them  in 
the  joint  attack  upon  Charleston,  the  troops  designated  for  the  service 
having  all  their  preparations  completed  and  having  had  all  the  neces- 
sary drill  in  the  surf  boat  exercise  and  in  the  practice  of  embarking  and 
disembarking,  I feel  it  my  duty  (in  the  lull  while  we  wait  the  signal 
from  Admiral  DuPont  that  he  is  ready)  to  lay  before  you  an  exact  ex- 
hibit of  the  forces  available  for  the  expedition  and  of  the  forces  necessary 
to  be  left  behind  as  garrisons  for  the  forts  and  posts  of  this  department. 

The  garrisons  of  Key  West  and  the  Tortugas,  as  I have  already  had 
the  honor  of  reporting,  are  much  less  in  the  number  of  men  and  in  the 
number  and  caliber  of  guns  than  would  seem  requisite  in  view  of  the 
complications  of  French  policy  in  the  immediate  vicinity.  At  Saint 
Augustine  we  have  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire,  under  Colonel  Put- 
nam ; at  Fernandina  the  Seventh  Connecticut,  under  Colonel  Hawley ; 
and  at  Fort  Pulaski  the  Forty-eighth  New  York,  under  Colonel  Barton. 

It  is  self-evident  that  none  of  these  garrisons  can  be  safely  reduced. 
Indeed  if  the  men  could  be  had  it  would  give  me  much  relief  from 
anxiety  to  increase  the  forces  at  Key  West  and  the  Tortugas,  placing 
both  posts  under  the  command  of  an  experienced  artillery  officer  with 
sufficient  rank. 

Deducting  the  garrisons  above  named  and  excluding  the  colored 
troops  who  cannot  consistently  with  the  interests  of  the  service  (in  the 
present  state  of  feeling)  be  advantageously  employed  to  act  in  concert 
with  our  other  forces,  I am  thus  left  with  a total  of  16,748  men  fit  for 
duty,  divided  at  present  as  follows  : 


On  Saint  Helena  Island,  under  General  Orris  S.  Ferry,  the  North  Carolina 

re-enforcements 

Port  Royal  Island,  under  command  of  General  Saxton 

Hilton  Head  Island,  under  General  A.  H.  Terry 


9,  269 
2,  985 
4,  494 


Total  of  effective  men ig,  74g 

As  it  is  altogether  probable  that  the  enemy  on  being  apprised  of  our 
operations  against  Charleston  will  attempt  diversions  by  attacking 
either  Port  Royal  or  Hilton  Head  Island  or  both,  the  garrisons  of  these 
important  posts  cannot  safely  be  much  reduced;  fully  2,500  men  being 
required  for  the  defense  of  the  vast  depots  and  lines  of  works  on  this 
island,  and  at  least  2,000  for  the  retention  of  Port  Royal  Island,  where, 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


425 


on  account  of  its  superior  healtlifulness,  our  chief  hospitals  have  been 
placed.  This  you  see  will  leave  me,  taxing  all  our  resources  to  the 
uttermost,  but  12,250  men  to  take  to  the  attack  on  Charleston  ; while 
from  the  most  reliable  calculations  we  have  been  able  to  make  the 
enemy  will  be  enabled  to  concentrate  not  less  than  65,000  men  (and 
many  estimates  put  these  figures  10,000  higher)  in  and  around  the  de- 
fenses of  Charleston  City  and  Harbor. 

These  statements  are  merely  put  on  record  for  your  information,  and 
not,  so  far  as  the  operations  against  Charleston  are  concerned,  as  a 
demand  for  more  troops.  The  force  named  will  be  sufficiently  powerful 
to  take  permanent  advantage  of  any  successes  gained  by  the  Navy,  as 
at  New  Orleans,  and  will  also,  I trust,  and  shall  strongly  endeavor  so 
to  make  it,  be  able  to  make  a strong  diversion  in  favor  of  the  Navy 
during  the  attack. 

Nevertheless  it  is  but  right  to  call  to  your  notice  one  of  “ the  saddest 
legacies  ” (quoting  the  words  of  a distinguished  officer  of  the  Navy, 
speaking  of  it)  left  by  Major-General  Foster  to  this  department  dur- 
ing his  brief  visit — an  indiscretion  on  his  part  which  I have  reason  to 
apprehend  may  cost  some  time  and  many  valuable  lives  to  repair. 

It  had  been  my  intention  to  have  debarked  the  command  on  tho 
southern  extremity  of  Morris  Island,  near  Light-House  Inlet,  or  along 
the  northern  extremity  of  Folly  Island,  from  whence  Light-House  Inlet 
could  readily  have  been  crossed  and  an  advance  made  against  the  rebel 
batteries  on  Cummings  Point.  Everything  promised  fairly  for  this 
operation,  the  enemy  having  evidently  overlooked  the  accessibility  and 
advantages  of  this  position — a neglect  from  which  they  were  indiscreetly 
aroused  by  Major-General  Foster,  who  landed  some  members  of  his 
staff,  with  15  men,  on  Folly  Island,  about  3 p.  m.  one  afternoon,  in  full 
view  of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  the  apparent  object  being  to  make  a re- 
connaissance of  a stretch  of  sea-beach,  every  foot  of  which  was  under 
the  observation  of  the  glasses  of  the  Navy  and  had  been  for  some 
months.  The  result  is  that  the  enemy  have  now  thrown  up  strong 
works  on  Morris  Island,  commanding  Light-House  Inlet  and  sweeping 
the  northern  extremity  of  Folly  Island;  their  laboring  parties  being 
now  observable  clearing  away  the  small  sand  hills  and  whatever  other 
natural  cover  the  ground  afforded. 

All  these  matters  are  respectfully  submitted  for  your  consideration, 
nut  let  me  add,  neither  in  a complaining  nor  desponding  spirit.  I have 
the  fullest  faith  that  a glorious  victory  awaits  our  arms  at  Charleston, 
ind  you  may  rest  assured,  general,  that  no  efforts  shall  be  lacking  on 
ny  part  to  secure  this  result. 

With  the  highest  esteem,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  very 
obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , 8.  (7.,  March  7,  1863. 

Vlaj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army , Washington , D.  C.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  certified  copy  of 
m order*  relieving  General  Naglee  from  duty  in  this  department  and 

*See  Special  Orders,  No.  127,  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South,  March  5, 
.863,  on  p.  420. 


426 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.j  GA,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


directing  him  to  proceed  to  New  York,  from  which  point  he  will  report 
by  letter  to  the  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army. 

No  act  of  my  official  life  has  cost  me  more  serious  reflection  than  this, 
nor  does  it  often  fall  to  the  lot  of  an  officer  to  perform  a clear  duty 
which  costs  him  so  much  pain.  Personally  prepossessed  in  favor  of 
General  Naglee  I had  resort  to  every  effort  of  conciliation,  but  without 
avail,  in  order  to  ward  off  the  necessity  for  this  step.  Concessions  and 
overlookings  of  minor  irregularities  were  merely  regarded  as  licenses 
for  further  and  yet  graver  breaches  of  discipline,  until  finally  I was 
forced  to  the  belief,  in  which  1 remain  and  believe  I have  substantial 
reasons  for  remaining,  that  General  Naglee  had  made  up  his  mind  not 
to  serve  under  my  command,  and  took  the  extraordinary  course  he  has 
taken  with  a direct  view  to  forcing  my  action  as  indicated. 

Before  General  Naglee  had  been  an  hour  in  the  department  he  com- 
mitted a grave  breach  of  courtesy,  to  say  the  least,  in  visiting  Admiral 
DuPont  before  reporting  to  me,  and  consulting  the  admiral  as  to  the 
condition  of  matters  in  the  department  and  our  future  operations  with- 
out the  least  reference  to  my  authority.  This  was  a day  previous  to 
General  Foster’s  arrival;  and  I only  became  aware  of  the  fact  by  meet- 
ing General  Naglee  in  the  cabin  of  the  Wabash,  while  paying  an  official 
visit  to  the  admiral,  who  by  his  conduct  on  the  occasion  only  too  clearly 
failed  to  conceal  that  he  appreciated  the  irregularity  of  which  General 
Naglee  had  been  guilty. 

In  the  extraordinary  correspondence  which  grew  out  of  General 
Foster’s  claim  to  separate  and  independent  command  you  are  already 
advised  of  the  objectionable  style  of  General  Naglee’s  protests,  so  objec-i 
tionable  as  to  incur  against  him  your  disapproval  and  an  order  that  he 
be  relieved  from  duty  in  this  department. 

Your  order  was  subsequently  modified,  doubtless  ou  my  representa-| 
tions  that  I did  not  wish  to  hold  General  Naglee  responsible  for  acts 
done  in  defense  of  what  he  professed  to  consider  General  Foster’s  rights, 
the  modification  leaving  it  optional  with  me  whether  to  relieve  or  retain 
him.  So  eager  was  I to  avoid  all  further  trouble  in  the  matter  that  I 
gave  ready  credence  to  General  Naglee’s  verbal  protestations  that  all 
difficulties  were  now  at  an  end,  and  frankly  and  in  full  good  faith  ac- 
cepted his  asseverations  that  he  was  no  party  to  the  course  calling  in 
question  my  authority,  but  that  he  had  acted  throughout  the  affair  ex- 
clusively with  a view  to  preserve  a record  which  could  not  be  used  to 
his  disadvantage  in  case  he  should  at  any  time  be  returned  under  Gen- 
eral Foster’s  command.  In  this  view  of  General  Naglee’s  conduct  I was 
strengthened  by  evidence  which  appeared  to  me,  and  appears,  satisfac- 
tory, that  the  first  protest  against  my  authority,  signed  by  General 
Naglee,  had  been  written  by  Brig.  Gen.  E.  E.  Potter,  chief  of  staff'  to 
Major-General  Foster. 

No  sooner,  however,  acting  under  this  view,  had  I exercised  my  option 
in  favor  of  retaining  General  Naglee’s  services,  conveying  the  announce- 
ment of  my  intention  in  language  calculated  to  remove  all  previous 
asperities,  bury  former  differences,  and  clear  a smooth  path  for  future  ! 
harmony,  than  General  Naglee  instantly  commenced  to  set  up  on  his  j 
own  behalf  substantially  all  the  pretensions  which  bad  been  disallowed  j 
and  disapproved  in  the  case  of  Major-General  Foster,  demanding  in 
effect  to  have  a staff  corps  organization  for  the  troops  brought  down  ; 
from  North  Carolina  wholly  separate  from  and  independent  of  the 
department  staff*,  this  claim  being  apparently  based  on  his  refusal  to 
regard  my  staff'  organization  as  that  of  the  general  commanding  the 
department,  but  insisting  that  it  was  merely  a staff' for  the  Tenth  Army 


ap.  XXVI.  J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


427 


jrps,  and  as  such  could  exercise  no  functions  looking  to  a supervision 
1 my  behalf  of  the  affairs  of  the  detachment  from  the  Eighteenth  Army 
orps. 

With  the  highest  esteem,  general,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  very 
jedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Washington,  D.  0.,  March  13,  1863. 

ajor-General  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C. : 

General:  Yours  of  the  3d  instant,  with  accompanying  papers,  is  re- 
ived. 

Your  former  letter  on  the  subject  of  your  difficulties  with  General 
aster  was  handed  to  the  Secretary  of  War  for  such  instructions  as  he 
ight  deem  proper  to  order.  He  has  given  none  to  me. 

The  instructions  sent  to  you  by  Adjutant- General  Townsend  were 
’awn  up  under  the  Secretary’s  direction,  and  cannot  be  changed  with- 
it  his  orders. 

In  regard  to  General  Naglee,  it  was  left  optional  with  you  to  retain 
m or  send  him  to  the  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-Chief. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  <7.,  March  13,  1863. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck:, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acquaint  you  that,  having  had  an 
iterview  yesterday  with  Rear-Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont,  I find  that  the  re- 
mt  experiments  with  the  iron  clads  against  Fort  McAlister  have  dem- 
lstrated  certain  defects  grave  enough  in  the  opinion  of  the  admiral 
> call  for  a postponement  of  active  operations  until  they  shall  have 
3en  remedied.  The  exact  nature  of  the  alterations  shown  to  be  neees- 
iry  I need  not  precisely  detail,  but  may  say  in  general  that  the  deck 
lating  will  have  to  be  strengthened  and  the  magazines  more  securely 
rmored.  Large  fatigue  parties  of  my  command  are  now  at  work  cut- 
ng  timber  to  coat  the  decks,  and  the  admiral  has  sent  North  the 
earner  Ericsson  for  a fresh  layer  of  iron  plates  for  each  deck. 

The  result  of  the  torpedoes  which  exploded  under  the  Montauk  has 
Iso  made  the  admiral  auxious  for  certain  submarine  torpedo-exploders, 
>r  which  he  has  also  sent  North. 

Owing  to  these  causes  a delay  of  some  weeks  would  appear  now  iu- 
ritable — a thing  to  be  regretted,  but  which  is  wholly  unavoidable.  The 
ipose  shall  be  used  to  perfect  the  troops  selected  in  all  matters  neces- 
iry  to  the  work  before  them,  and  I respectfully  ask  that  to  this  end 
ou  will  assign  to  service  in  this  department  the  two  brigadier-generals 
sked  for  in  my  last. 

There  is  nothing  of  the  least  consequence  new.  Three  deserters  from 
avannah  to-day  announce  that  a third  ram  is  now  ready  to  receive  her 
rmament,  the  Atlanta  and  Georgia  being  complete  and  afloat  below 


428 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai>.  XXVI 


Fort  Jackson,  and  that  two  additional  rams  have  been  commenced 
The  men  are  Northern  and  appear  reliable. 

Last  night  the  enemy  made  a dash  across  Skull  Creek,  near  Spanisl 
Wells,  and  captured  an  officer  and  some  few  men  belonging  to  thi 
Signal  Corps,  immediately  getting  back  into  their  boats  and  escaping 
before  our  infantry,  though  very  alert,  could  overtake  them. 

I take  this  occasion  of  again  renewing  my  request  for  a regiment  o 
cavalry,  the  one  battalion  of  the  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry  stationed 
in  the  department  being  utterly  unable  to  furnish  the  necessary  reliefi 
for  patrols  and  pickets,  while  the  exposed  situation  of  these  islands1 
liable  to  sudden  forays  of  the  enemy  from  the  main-land,  renders  ii 
peculiarly  desirable  that  we  should  have  speedy  means  for  the  trans 
mission  of  intelligence. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  high  esteem,  your  most  obedien 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head)  8.  0.,  March  14,  1863. 
General  M.  0.  Meigs,  Quartermaster- General  TJ.  8.  Army : 

General:  We  have  not  a pound  of  coal.  Full  estimates  have  beer 
sent,  but  it  does  not  arrive.  Unless  it  is  sent  immediately  great  delay 
and  possibly  disaster,  may  occur. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Saint  Nicholas,  New  York , March  15,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

General:  I send  you  the  order  of  General  Hunter  ordering  me  froir 
his  department.*  I had  attempted  to  send  the  order  by  the  Quakei 
City,  but  that  failed. 

I have  just  arrived,  and  am  therefore  yet  unable  to  do  anything  oi 
te  say  what  course  I shall  pursue.  We  have  everything  in  our  hands 
if  only  used  to  advantage.  I consider  the  conduct  of  Hunter  in  every 
thing  pertaining  to  your  department  as  outrageously  indecent,  uncivil 
illegal,  and  despotic  in  the  extreme. 

He  is  now  doing  his  best  to  place  us  in  a false  position  by  insinuatiot 
and  garbled  partial  statements.  Not  knowing  who  are  your  especial; 
friends,  I do  not  know  how  to  find  your  friends  and  those  of  the  gentle 
men  of  your  staff.  I was  surprised  that  I received  no  letter  from  you 
excepting  only  the  one  that  was  sent  by  Darr. 

Truly  and  sincerelv,  yours, 

HENRY  M.  NAGLEE. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  March  16,  1863. 


Major-General  Hunter, 

Commanding , &c.,  Hilton  Head , 8.  C. : 

General:  Yours  of  the  7th  and  11th  instant  are  just  received.  Briga- 


See  p.  4*20. 


(AP.  XX YI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


429 


ler-General  Garfield  was  ordered  to  the  West  by  the  War  Department 
i;  his  own  request.  If  he  was  previously  ordered  to  the  Department  of 
ie  South  and  you  were  not  notified  of  the  change  it  was  an  oversight 
:•  the  Adjutant- General’s  Department. 

Your  want  of  good  and  instructed  brigadier-generals  is  one  very  gen- 
tly felt  in  the  service,  and  nearly  every  general  commanding  an  army 
as  made  the  same  request.  Each  one  must  take  his  proportion  of  the 
ood  and  the  poor.  You  certainly  have  your  share  of  the  first  class, 
ad  I can  send  you  any  number  of  the  second  class  which  you  may 

Generals  Stevenson  and  Heckman  are  confirmed.  In  the  order  issued 
ist  summer  assigning  Pensacola  to  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  it  was 
itended  to  include  Key  West  and  the  Tortugas,  as  being  more  acces- 
Lble  from  Hew  Orleans  than  Hilton  Head,  but  they  were  omitted  by 
n oversight.  This  will  now  be  done. 

Lieutenant  McFarland  should  be  immediately  returned  to  Key  West 
n being  relieved  from  duty  at  Hilton  Head.  Another  engineer  officer 
dll  be  sent  to  you  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. 

Ho  more  heavy  artillery  can  at  present  be  furnished  by  the  Ordnance 
)epartment  for  the  forts  in  the  South. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in - Chief, 


Engineer  Department, 
Washington , March  16,  1863. 

iCaj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , Hilton  Head , S.  C . : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
*th  instant,  stating  that  you  had  ordered  Lieut.  W.  McFarland,  Corps 
>f  Engineers,  from  Key  West  to  report  to  you  at  Hilton  Head. 

Considering  the  great  necessity  which  exists  for  the  presence  of  Lieu- 
enant  McFarland  with  his  duties  at  Key  West,  I have  asked  to  have 
mother  officer  of  engineers  sent  to  you  for  service  in  your  operations, 
md  I have  to  request  that  Lieutenant  McFarland  may  be  restored  to 
lis  duties  at  Key  West  as  soon  as  possible. 

Yery,  &e., 

JOS.  Or.  TOTTEN, 

Brevet  Brigadier- General  and  Colonel  of  Engineers, 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

Ho.  24.  ) Hilton  Head , Fort  Royal , S.  C.,  March  19, 1863. 

I.  All  able-bodied  negroes  employed  by  the  Engineer  Department  on 
permanent  fortifications  are  exempted  from  the  operation  of  General 
Orders,  Ho.  17,  current  series,  from  these  headquarters. 

II.  All  plantation  superintendents,  tradesmen,  sutlers,  landholders, 
speculators,  and  others  within  the  department  are  hereby  cautioned 
against  harboring,  secreting,  or  keeping  in  their  employ  able-bodied 
male  negroes  liable  to  the  draft.  All  negroes  in  private  service,  except 
those  in  the  employ  of  commissioned  officers,  as  provided  for  in  General 
Orders,  Ho.  17,  will  be  immediately  reported  to  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton, 
commanding  United  States  forces,  Port  Royal  Island,  and  none  will  be 


430 


COASTS  OF  S.  C;  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chaw  xx\ 

exempted  except  on  medical  certificate  of  disability,  to  be  ammm 
after  personal  examination  of  a board  of  not  less  than  three  medic 

&3SttTth‘e4qby  GTraI  8aXt°“  fr0UJ 

wntrabandf  A D nf  J 1C  S"rSeon-General  for  attendance  on  tl 
comm  bands.  All  persons  contravening- the  provisions  of  thi« 

themselves  to  a confiscation  of  their  goods  and  to  be  sei 
oiitof  the  department  by  the  first  vessel  going  North. 

1 loT*  Va,ri0U!?  complaints  having  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  tbp< 

!nSU»  era  °v tbe  Sffect  tLat  IIC8’roes  emiiloyed  otherwise  than  in  tl 
public  service  have  been  and  are  defrauded  of  their  just  earnimrs  h 
the  avarice  of  masters,  who  take  advantage  of  their  ignorance  alf  sue 

ft  whfeb  the1!'  !'eaf  tei'  ^Y0Ugh  1 bef0?e  the  commander  of  the  2 
n which  the  employers  reside,  and  will  be  investigated  and  rwilp 

upon  by  an  officer  who  will  be  detailed  to  this  dutv  by  such  nost  con 

thTuofi.  °“  tba  I0J>0rt.0f  thls  ofiicer  the  post  commander  will  issu 
the  necessary  orders  giving  redress  to  the  injured  party. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  I).  Hunter : 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen. , Tenth  Army  Corps  andbfpt^fthe^s’outh.  \ 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South 

RiUon  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  C.,  March  20,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army , Washington,  1).  C.  ; 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  tha 

Sth'p!,68!™”'8  and  detachments  in  the  forces  recently  arrived  ftor 
Berth  Carolina  were  mustered  in,  some  for  two  vears  theft  time  3 
piriug  23d  of  April  next;  some  for  nine  months,^ their  time  exnirim 
early  next  May,  and  have  to  ask  instructions  with  regard  to  the  same 
In  more  than  one  instance  numbers  of  recruits  for  three  years  have  bem 
assigned  to  two-years’  regiments,  and  applications  hav^  been  made  t! 
me  by  the  colonels  of  three-years’  regiments  to  have  such  recruits  as 
bigued  to  fill  up  theft  ranks  when  the  term  of  the  two-years’  , 

expires.  I should  add,  in  justice  to  the  men  and  offlJCers  Who!e Te™ 

expires  within  the  next  two  months,  that  most  ofThem 

nftlr  H,a  " ' but  a strong  desire  to  remain  in  the  service  until 

The  health  of  the  command  is  excellent.  I have  sent  a reiriment  to 

dai'lve'at®  cd operations. ^here^s ^lottiing^newT^The^dmiral  is 
sonwififffnP  fthe  arnval  of  the  Keokuk  and  tbe  return  of  tbe  Erics- 

3ZElUIA,sgs£3g~  “•  •**•— — *»■  <*. 

diemtsen-ant*10001 10  b6’  genera1’  with  sincere  esteem,  your  very  obe- 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


hap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


431 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  0.,  March  20,  1863. 

General  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

U.  8.  Engineers , Washington : 

General  : I liave  the  honor  to  call  your  attention-to  the  fact  that 
he  extent,  condition,  and  importance  of  the  permanent  fortifications 
)f  this  department  would  seem  to  demand  the  supervision  of  an  officer 
>f  the  Engineer  Corps. 

The  very  important  works  at  Key  West  and  the  Tortugas  are  still  in 
m incomplete  condition  as  to  construction  and  armament,  and  the 
vork  at  Fernandina  is  under  charge  of  an  officer  of  the  Volunteer  En- 
gineers. 

It  is  respectfully  requested,  therefore,  that  Col.  J.  C.  Duane,  chief 
mgineer  of  this  department,  be  appointed  inspector  of  such  works. 

I have  the  honor  to  be  general,  with  very  high  esteem,  your  most 
)bedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  0.,  March  28,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army , Wrasliington , D.  C.: 

General:  As  an  old  soldier  you  must  be  fully  aware  that  all  the 
trouble  in  this  department  has  resulted  from  the  astonishing  fact  that 
L0,000  men  Vere  sent  here  without  any  written  orders,  and,  so  far  as  I 
^an  learn,  without  any  orders  at  all,  but  all  evidently  holding  the  be- 
lief that  they  were  not  to  be  under  my  orders.  Yet  I am  gravely  re- 
minded in  your  letter  of  the  16th  February  that — 

If  the  plans  of  the  Government  should  fail  to  be  carried  out  for  want  of  harmony 
those  who  have  engendered  and  fostered  animosities  and  jealousies  will  incur  a very 
serious  responsibility. 

I am  also  informed  in  your  letter  of  the  15th  of  February  as  follows: 

But  while  this  command  remains  as  a distinct  organization,  with  its  own  officers, 
as  assigned  by  its  proper  chief , the  command  itself,  so  long  as  it  remains  in  your  de- 
partment, will  be  subject  to  your  orders. 

I was  thus  saddled  with  pro-slavery  generals  in  whom  I have  not  the 
least  confidence,  and  who  were  encouraged  by  orders  from  Washington 
to  protest  against  my  authority.  Under  these  circumstances  I think 
the  country  will  decide  “if  the  plans  of  the  Government  should  fail  to 
be  carried  out  for  want  of  harmony”  that  the  blame  will  attach  at 
Washiugton,  and  that  the  people  will  determine  that  “ those  who  have 
engendered  or  fostered  animosities  ” do  not  reside  in  this  department. 
And  how  can  you  hold  me  wholly  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  gen- 
erals in  whom  I have  no  confidence,  when  every  act  of  the  authorities 
in  Washington  has  tended  to  disorganize  and  demoralize  my  com- 
mand? I do  not  say  this,  general,  in  anger,  but  in  sorrow.  I may  fall 
at  Charleston,  and  I deem  it  a duty  I owe  my  friends  to  have  this 
simple  statement  of  facts  on  record. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


432 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , 8.  C .,  March  27,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  JJ.  8 Army , Washington , D.  C.: 

General  : I Jiave  the  honor  to  report  that  the  last  of  the  irou-clads 
(the  Keokuk)  has  arrived,  and  that  I have  sent  a brigade  of  troops  tc 
occupy  North  Edisto ; also  a regiment  to  occupy  Cole’s  Island,  at  the 
mouth  of  Stono  Inlet. 

All  the  troops  destined  to  take  part  in  the  expedition  are  in  completes 
readiness  to  move  whenever  the  necessary  repairs  and  additions  to  the! 
iron-clads  shall  have  been  made.  The  navy  transport  Ericsson  has  re-i 
turned,  I am  informed,  with  all  the  requisite  material  for  pushing  for- 
ward promptly  the  completion  of  the  monitors,  and  I hope  by  the  mid- 
dle of  next  week  that  the  joint  expedition  will  be  under  way. 

I have  ordered  up  here  all  the  troops  who  were  temporarily  occupy- 
ing Jacksonville,  Fla.;  also  five  companies  of  the  Seventh  Eegimentj 
Connecticut  Volunteers  from  Fernandina,  and  five  companies  Seventh 
Eegiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  from  Saint  Augustine. 

There  is  nothing  further  of  interest  to  report.  The  health  of  the 
troops  continues  excellent,  and  those  from  North  Carolina  have  much- 
improved  in  discipline.  Deserters  continue  to  come  in  from  the  main-  i 
land,  and  all  speak  of  the  great  scarcity  of  provisions  amongst  the  rebels. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  the  highest  esteem,  your  very 
obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTEE, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  8.  (7.,  March  28,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C.  : 

Sir:  I am  impelled  by  a sense  of  duty  to  call  3rour  attention  to  the 
condition  of  affairs  at  Key  West,  more  especially  in  regard  to  the  politi- 
cal sentiments  and  attitude  of  certain  civil  officers  who  are  the  repre- 
sentatives of  Government  at  that  post.  Key  West  being  no  longer 
under  my  jurisdiction  I can  only  lay  the  matter  before  you,  assured  that 
it  will  receive  the  action  needed.  If  the  place  were  still  within  my 
department  the  evidence  to  my  mind  is  so  clear  and  the  culpability  of 
the  officers  so  flagrant  that  I should  not  hesitate  to  take  the  responsibil- 
ity of  relieving  the  loyal  residents  of  the  island  from  the  incubus  of 
having  such  unfit  men  in  positions  so  powerful  for  evil. 

From  all  the  evidence  before  me,  evidence  extending  back  to  my 
earliest  connection  with  this  department,  and  constantly  increasing  in 
volume  and  directness,  I have  been  forced  to  regard  Judge  Marvin  as  a 
man  in  active  sympathy  with  the  rebellion,  and  who  is  only  restrained 
from  taking  sides  avowedly  with  treason  by  the  consideration  that  he 
can  best  serve  it  under  the  violated  sanctity  of  the  United  States 
ermine. 

I have  received  evidence  which  I cannot  mistrust  that  there  is  now 
in  the  hands  of  certain  leading  secessionists  at  Key  West  either  a duly 
certified  copy  or  the  original  of  a letter  from  Judge  Marvin  to  the  rebel 
authorities  at  Montgomery,  written  in  the  early  part  of  the  rebellion, 
stating  that  he  only  held  the  United  States  court  at  Key  West  until 
they  should  have  nominated  and  sent  his  successor,  and  there  is  proof' 


433 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

wholly  incontestable  that  when  a certain  official,  publicly  claiming  to 
be  the  Confederate  States  judge,  appeared  at  Key  West  Judge  Marvin, 
though  urged  to  do  so,  failed  to  issue  a warrant  for  his  arrest,  but  on 
the  contrary  publicly  consorted  with  the  traitor  in  social  relations  and 
opposed  no  obstacle  to  his  leaving  the  island.  His  whole  course  has 
been  a consistent  effort  to  shield  traitors  (active  and  passive)  from  the 
due  operations  of  the  law,  and  to  keep  open  communication  between 
the  rebellion  and  its  chief  entrepots  at  Nassau,  Havana,  and  elsewhere 
via  Key  West.  To  the  loyal  residents  he  has  been  an  oppressor;  to 
the  traitorous  residents  and  messengers  a shield.  My  respect  for  his 
station  made  me  long  reluctant  to  take  this  view  of  his  character,  but 
more  recent  developments  left  me  no  possibility  of  doubt,  and  it  had 
been  my  intention  to  have  arrested  him  and  sent  him  North  under  guard 
as  a public  enemy  on  his  return  to  Key  West  but  for  the  order  taking 
that  island  from  my  department  and  attaching  it  to  that  of  the  Gulf,  to 
which  (geographically)  it  more  properly  belongs. 

In  regard  to  Mr.  Boynton,  United  States  district  attorney,  I know 
little,  except  that  I have  before  me  a letter  of  his  stating  that  he  had 
advised  all  the  residents  of  Key  West  “to  resist  to  the  death”  an  order 
issued  from  these  headquarters — an  order  issued  after  the  most  mature 
and  even  painful  consideration  and  in  view  of  the  most  serious  danger 
to  Key  West  from  enemies  without  its  limits  assisted  by  enemies  within. 
I am  unwilling  to  think  of  Mr.  Boynton  more  harshly  than  that  he 
allowed  himself  to  be  too  softly  molded  to  Judge  Marvin’s  purposes, 
and  that  his  judgment  had  been  biased  and  clouded  by  those  social 
influences  which  throughout  our  unhappy  contest  have  played  in  favor 
of  the  rebellion.  Mr.  Boynton  appears  to  have  passed  wholly  under  the 
domination  of  Judge  Marvin’s  will,  and  while  he  may  not  deliberately 
ever  have  harbored  a disloyal  thought,  he  was  in  every  instance  the 
pliant  agent  and  active  executive  officer  of  men  in  full  sympathy  with 
the  rebellion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Engineer  Department, 
Washington , March  31,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding , Headquarters  Department  of  the  South  : 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  20th  March  is  received.  I am  fully  impressed 
with  the  force  of  your  statement  that  the  extent,  condition,  and  impor- 
tance of-  the  permanent  fortifications  within  the  limits  of  your  depart- 
ment demand  the  supervision  of  an  engineer  officer.  The  proper  con- 
duct and  care  of  these  works  require,  I am  confident,  the  services  of 
several  officers  of  engineers.  But  there  is  no  officer  within  my  control 
that  can  possibly  be  spared  for  this  service  at  present  except  Lieutenant 
McFarland,  and  I entertain  the  hop  3 that  when  this  letter  reaches  you 
you  will  have  been  able  to  dispense  with  his  services,  and  he  will  again 
i'e  at  his  post  at  Key  West,  and  directing  the  operations  there  and  at 
Fort  Jefferson,  to  which  he  has  been  specially  assigned.  Lieutenant 
S liter,  Corps  of  Engineers,  has  been  placed  on  duty  with  you,  for  the 
purpose  of  enabling  Lieutenant  McFarland  to  resume  immediately  his 

28  r r — you  XIV 


434  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap!  XXVL 

care  of  the  extensive  and  important  works  at  those  places  which  have 
been  placed  in  his  keeping.  Whenever  you  can  dispense  with  the 
services  of  Captain  Duane  or  Lieutenant  Suter  I shall  be  glad  to  place  j 
the  permanent  works  at  Fernandina  and  other  points  within  the  De- 
partment of  the  South  in  their  trust,  unless,  iudeed,  in  the  great 
urgency  which  presses  upon  me  for  want  of  engineer  officers,  some 
other  point  may  have  claims  even  more  extreme  than  these  shall  then 
possess. 

Respecting  armament,  it  is  beyond  my  power  to  do  more  than  to  bring 
the  state  of  readiness  of  our  works  in  this  respect  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  War  Department  and  the  Ordnance  Office. 

I am,  &c., 

JOS.  G.  TOTTEN, 

Brevet  Brigadier - General  and  Colonel  of  Engineers. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter  command- 
ing, for  the  month  of  March,  1863;  headquarters  Hilton  Head,  S.  C. 


Present  for 
duty. 

<D 

© 

+3 

P 

© 

en 

© Hi 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent  last 

monthly  return. 

Command. 

Officers. 

Men. 

P- 

I 

bt 

<B 

bC 

bD 

<1 

© 

03 

?• 

fc.  CS 

bt 

bt 

Department  staff 

21 

30 

51 

51 

50 

Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C. : 

First  Division,  Detachment  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

206 

4,  385 

4,  960 

6, 105 

4, 960 

Brig.  Gen.  0.  S.  Ferry. 

Second  Division,  Detachment  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

210 

3,  337 

4,  229 

5,  545 

8,  369 

Brig.  Gen.  C.  A.  Heckman. 

Marine  Artillery,  Lieut.  C.  J.  Sands 

2 

53 

55 

60 

60 

Third  New  York  Artillery,  Maj.  T.  J.  Kennedy 

18 

529 

586 

595 

629 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry 

201 

4,  662 

5,  688 

5,995 

6,  085 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  II.  Saxton 

187 

3,  760 

4,  749 

5, 430 

4,  286 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  Col.  W.  B.  Barton 

32 

803 

984 

1,019 

1,  020 

Ossabaw  Island,  Ga.,  Maj.  D.  A.  Allen 

15 

433 

507 

588 

594 

Key  West  and  Tortugas,  Fla.,  Col.  T.  H.  Good  

Fernandina,  Fla.,  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley  

30 

582 

835 

899 

1,607 

1,091 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla  , Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  Abbott 

J7 

269 

379 

402 

780 

En  route  for  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  Col.  H.  S.  Putnam  (five 

16 

319 

362 

371 

companies). 

Grand  total 

955 

19,162 

23,385 

27,  060 

29,  531 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  South , commanded  by  Maj. 
Gen.  David  Hunter , March  31, 1863 ; headquarters  Hilton  Head , S.  C. 

SAINT  HELENA  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


First  Division,  Detachment  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 
Brig.  Gen.  Orris  S.  Ferry  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  G.  Stevenson  commanding. 

23d  Massachusetts 
9th  New  Jersey. 

81st  Now  York. 

98th  New  York. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  W.  W.  H.  Davis  commanding. 

10th  Connecticut. 

24th  Massachusetts. 

52d  Pennsylvania.  % 

104th  Pennsylvania. 


;hap.  xxvi.] 


435 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


Second  Division , Detachment  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 
Brig.  Gen.  C.  A.  Heckman  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  J.  J.  De  Forest  commanding. 

11th  Maine. 

OOtli  New  York. 

ndependent  Battalion,  New  York. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  J.  B.  Howell  commanding. 

56th  New  York. 

85th  Pennsylvania. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  T.  O.  Osborn  commanding. 

30th  Illinois. 

62d  Ohio. 

67  th  Ohio. 


Not  brigaded. 

Marine  Artillery  (detachment),  Lient.  C.  J.  Sands. 
3d  New  York  Artillery,  Maj.  T.  J.  Kennedy. 


HILTON  READ,  S.  C. 

Detachment  Tenth  Army  Corps. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry  commanding. 

3d  New  Hampshire. 

15th  New  York. 

76th  Pennsylvania. 

97th  Pennsylvania. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Company  M. 
3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery. 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E. 

1st  New  York  Engineers. 

FORT  PULASKI,  GA. 

3th  New  York,  Col.  W.  B.  Barton. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Company  G. 
1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  F. 

KEY  WEST  AND  TORTUGAS,  FLA. 

3th  New  York,  Col.  J.  S.  Morgan.  ' 

7th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  T.  H.  Good. 

SAINT  AUGUSTINE,  FLA. 

th  New  Hampshire  (five  companies), 
Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  Abbott. 


BEAUFORT,  S.  C. 

Detachment  Tenth  Army  Corps. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  Saxton  commanding. 

1st  Connecticut  Battery. 

6th  Connecticut. 

8th  Maine. 

4th  New  Hampshire. 

55th  Pennsylvania. 

174th  Pennsylvania. 

17Cth  Pennsylvania. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Third  Bat- 
talion. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  D and  M. 

OSSABAW  ISLAND,  GA. 

47th  New  York,  Maj.  D.  A.  Allen. 
Detachment  First  New  York  Engineers. 

FERNANDINA,  FLA. 

7th  Connecticut,  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley. 

EN  ROUTE  FOR  HILTON  HEAD,  S.  C. 

7th  New  Hampshire  (five  companies),  Col. 
H.  S.  Putnam. 


Executive  Mansion, 

Washington , D.  0.,  April  1,  1863. 

lajor-General  Hunter  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I am  glad  to  see  the  accounts  of  your  colored  force 
t Jacksonville,  Fla.  I see  the  enemy  are  driving  at  them  fiercely,  as 
5 to  be  expected.  It  is  important  to  the  enemy  that  such  a force  shall 
ot  take  shape  and  grow  and  thrive  in  the  South,  and  in  precisely  the 


436 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXYI 


same  proportion  it  is  important  to  us  that  it  shall.  Hence  the  utmosl 
caution  and  vigilance  is  necessary  on  our  part.  The  enemy  will  mah 
extra  efforts  to  destroy  them,  and  we  should  do  the  same  to  preserv 
and  increase  them. 

Yours,  truly, 

A.  LINCOLN. 


Nayy  Department,  April  2,  1863. 

Bear- Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Comdg.  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron,  Port  Royal , S.  C. : 

Sir  : The  exigencies  of  the  public  service  are  so  pressing  in  the  Gul 
that  the  Department  directs  you  to  send  all  the  iron-clads  that  ar» 
in  a fit  condition  to  move,  after  your  present  attack  upon  Charleston 
directly  to  New  Orleans,  reserving  to  yourself  only  two. 

Very  respectfully, 

GIDEON  WELLES, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy,  i 


Nayy  Department,  April  2,  1863. 

Bear-Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Comdg.  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron , Port  Royal , S.  C. : 

Dear  Admiral:  Matters  are  at  a stand-still  on  the  Mississipp 
Biver,  and  the  President  was  with  difficulty  restrained  from  sending 
off  Hunter  and  all  the  iron-clads  directly  to  New  Orleans,  the  opening 
of  the  Mississippi  being  considered  the  principal  object  to  be  attained! 
It  is,  however,  arranged,  as  you  will  see  by  to-day’s  order,  that  you  arc 
to  send  all  the  iron-clads  that  survive  the  attack  upon  Charleston  im 
mediately  to  New  Orleans,  reserving  for  your  squadron  only  two.  W< 
must  abandon  all  other  operations  on  the  coast  where  iron-clads  ar< 
necessary  to  a future  time.  We  cannot  clear  the  Mississippi  Bive 
without  the  iron-clads,  and  as  all  the  supplies  come  down  the  Bed  Bive 
that  stretch  of  the  river  must  be  in  our  possession.  This  plan  has  beei 
agreed  upon  after  mature  consideration  and  seems  to  be  imperative.  ; 

With  my  sincere  prayers  in  your  behalf,  my  dear  admiral,  I remain 
sincerely,  vours, 

G.  Y.  FOX. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

On  board  the  Ben  I)e  Ford , North  Edisto  River , April  3,  1863.  ] 
Maj.  Gen.  II.  W.  IIalleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army , Washington , B.  C.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  one-half  the  commanc  i 
intended  to  co-operate  with  the  Navy  in  the  joint  attack  upon  Charles! 
ton  is  now  safely  in  this  vicinity,  on  Cole’s  and  North  Edisto  Islands! 
and  that  the  remainder,  at  the  time  of  my  leaving  Hilton  Head  thkl 
forenoon,  were  partially  embarked  and  ready  to  sail.  It  is  possibhl 
they  may  be  detained  a day  or  two  by  a violent  easterly  storm,  whicl d 
sprang  up  late  this  afternoon  ; but  as  the  Navy  cannot  move  until  the! 
storm,  which  may  detain  them,  has  fully  subsided,  the  possible  dela;,  j 
is  not  material,  I have  seen  Admiral  DuPont  this  afternoon,  and  fiue 


CORfiESUONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


437 


OlTAP.  XXVI.] 


that  he  is  merely  awaiting  fine  weather,  all  his  preparations  being  com- 
plete in  so  far  as  the  means  at  his  disposal  will  permit.  On  the  first 
day  that  is  clear  and  calm  he  will  move  into  action. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  the  highest  esteem,  your  very 
obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Ironsides,  April  8,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

My  Dear  General  : I attempted  to  take  the  bull  by  the  horns,  but 
he  was  too  much  for  us.  These  monitors  are  miserable  failures  where 
forts  are  concerned;  the  longest  was  one  hour  and  the  others  forty  - 
five  minutes  under  fire,  and  five  of  the  eight  were  wholly  or  partially 
disabled. 

I write  this  to  say  that  the  Flambeau  will  leave  this  morning,  or  as 
soon  as  you  may  be  ready,  for  Fortress  Monroe.  She  has  very  small 
accommodations,  but  if  you  desire  to  send  a staff  officer  home  I will 
direct  Captain  Upshur  to  give  him  a passage. 

I have  sent  the  Patapsco  to  help  take  care  of  Port  Royal. 

I am,  general,  yours,  most  truly, 

s.  f.  Dupont. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

U.  S.  Transport  Ben  Be  Ford , April  8,  1863. 

Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Steamship  New  Ironsides , off  Fort  Sumter : 

Admiral  : Not  knowing  yet  what  have  been  the  results  of  your  at- 
tack of  yesterday,  so  far  as  Fort  Sumter  is  concerned,  I cannot  but  con- 
gratulate you  on  the  magnificent  manner  in  which  the  vessels  under 
|/our  command  were  fought.  A mere  spectator,  I could  do  nothing  but 
>ray  for  you,  which,  believe  me,  I did  most  heartily,  for  you  and  for  all 
he  gallant  men  under  your  command  who  sailed  so  calmly  and  fear- 
essly  into  and  under  and  through  a concentric  fire  which"  has  never 
leretofore  had  a parallel  in  the  history  of  warfare.  That  you  are  unin- 
ured and  so  many  of  your  vessels  still  fit  for  service  is  a cause  of  deep 
gratitude  to  Almighty  God.  I confess  when  the  Weehawken  first  ran 
mder  Sumter’s  guns,  receiving  the  casemate  and  barbette  broadsides 
rom  that  work  simultaneously  with  the  similar  broadsides  from  Fort 
doultrie  and  all  the  other  works  within  range,  I fairly  held  my  breath 
111  til  the  smoke  had  cleared  away,  not  expecting  to  see  a vestige  of  the 
ittle  vessel  which  had  provoked  such  an  attack.  With  each  of  the 
•thers  the  same  scene  was  re-enacted,  my  interest  in  the  fate  of  the 
ronsides  being  perhaps  the  keenest  from  the  knowledge  of  her  coin- 
>arative  vulnerability  and  of  the  deep  loss  the  country  would  sustain 
f anything  were  to  happen  to  you. 

Thank  God  for  the  results  so  far  as  they  go,  and  may  He  have  you 
n His  keeping  through  whatever  chances  are  jet  before  you.  No 
ountry  can  ever  fail  that  has  men  capable  of  facing  what  your  iron-clads 
iad  yesterday  to  endure.  God  bless  you  and  keep  you  safe,  admiral, 


438 


COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  FAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

and  believe  me,  with  the  highest  esteem,  ever  your  true  friend  anc 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major  General,  j 

P.  S. — I sincerely  trust  Captain  Rodgers  is  also  unharmed. 


Flag-ship  New  Ironsides, 
Charleston  Harbor , S.  (7.,  April  8,  18C3. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , off  Charleston : 

General  : I am  this  moment  in  receipt  of  your  most  gratifying  lette: 
of  this  date.  I did  not,  however,  require  this  to  satisfy  me  of  your  deej 
sympathy  in  our  operations  of  yesterday,  intensified  by  the  fact  tha 
circumstances  beyond  your  control  prevented  that  which  of  all  thing; 
you  would  most  have  desired — an  immediate  and  active  co  operation.  \ 
shall  have  your  letter  read  on  every  iron -clad  of  this  fleet,  so  that  ever;- 
man  under  my  command  shall  know,  what  has  long  been  familiar  to  me 
the  heartfelt  sympathy  of  the  commanding  general  of  the  Army  of  tha 
Department  of  the  South. 

I am,  general,  with  the  highest  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant! 

S.  F.  DuPONT, 
Rear-Admiral , Commanding.  K 


Ironsides,  April  9,  1863.  I 

Major-General  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South: 

My  Dear  General  : I have  nothing  of  an  official  character  to  coidi| 
municate.  I am  lingering  here  to  destroy  theKeok.uk,  and  waiting  fo] 
the  tides  to  carry  this  ship  over  the  bar.  In  the  mean  time  they  arl 
building  batteries  around  us. 

I desire  to  thank  you  for  that  glorious  letter  you  wrote  me.  You  ca  j 
hardly  imagine  the  effect  it  had  upon  the  officers  and  men  who  weH 
around  me  when  it  came.  You  must  not  be  surprised  if  you  see  it  i I 
print,  and  must  put  it  upon  my  officers  and  not  upon  me  for  being  then  j 
though  I felt  it  not  less  than  any  of  them  I can  truly  say. 

1 feel  very  comfortable,  general,  for  the  reason  that  a merciful  Prov  j 
dence  permitted  me  to  have  a failure  instead  of  a disaster,  and  if  I ha 
ever  entertained  for  a moment  any  misgiving  as  to  my  course  the  dis 
patches  just  handed  me  would  remove  it. 

1 find  the  President  is  greatly  alarmed  about  things  on  the  Missis 
sippi,  and  I am  directed  to  send  all  the  iron-clads  immediately  to  Pei 
sacola  except  two. 

In  great  haste,  not  to  detain  Colonel  Fessenden,  gratefully,  your  frienc 

S.  F.  DuPONT. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 
No.  189.  j Stono  Inlet , April  11,  18G3. 

I.  General  Orris  S.  Ferry  will  proceed  to  Hilton  Head,  with  his  staf 
there  to  await  further  orders. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


439 


II.  General  A.  H.  Terry’s  division  will  return  to  Port  Royal  Harbor. 
Its  disposition  will  be  made  in  further  orders. 

III.  The  Seventh  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Colonel  Hawley, 
will  return  immediately  to  Fernandiua,  Fla. 

IV.  The  Seventh  Regiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  Colonel  Put- 
nam, will  return  immediately  to  Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

V.  -The  One  hundredth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Dandy,  will  garrison  Cole’s  Island,  reporting  to  Brigadier-General 
Vogdes,  Folly  Island. 

VI.  The  four  regiments  of  Brigadier-General  Vogdes’  brigade  will 
occupy  Folly  Island,  and  Brigadier-General  Vogdes  is  hereby  placed  in 
command  of  all  the  forces  that  are  to  remain  in  the  Stono  River  and  in 
its  vicinity.  Captain  Jenney’s  company,  Third  Regiment  New  York  Ar- 
tillery, and  Captain  Cruso’s  company  Volunteer  Engineers,  will  remain 
on  Folly  Island  with  General  Vogdes. 

VII.  Brigadier-General  Stevenson’s  brigade  will  occupy  Edisto  Island. 
Lieutenaut  Morrison’s  company  Third  New  York  Artillery,  and  Cap- 
tain Walker’s  company  Volunteer  Engineers,  will  remain  on  Edisto 
Island,  reporting  to  General  Stevenson. 

VIII.  The  Artillery  Brigade,  Colonel  Metcalf,  is  disposed  of  as  fol- 
lows: The  Third  Regiment  Rhode  Island  Artillery  will  proceed  to  Hil- 
ton Head,  the  Third  New  York  Artillery  (foot)  to  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

IX.  The  Third  New  York  Artillery ‘batteries,  Lieutenant  Thomas  and 
Captain  Angel,  will  proceed  to  Saint  Helena. 

X.  The  detachment  of  Marine  Artillery,  now  on  duty  in  this  depart- 
ment, will  proceed  to  Saint  Helena  Island,  there  to  be  mustered  out  of 
service. 

******* 

By  command  of  Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  A.  A.  G.,  Tenth  Army  Corps , Dept.  South. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 
Seahrooh  Island , S.  C.,  April  12,  1863. 


Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 


Assistant  Adjutant- General : 


I 


The  extract  from  special  orders  from  Department  Headquarters,  dated 
April  II,  which  I have  justreceived,  states  that  “ Brigadier-General  Ste- 
venson will  occupy  Edisto  Island.  Lieutenant  Morrison’s  battery  Third 
Regiment  New  York  Artillery,  and  Captain  Walker’s  company  Volun- 
teer Engineers  will  remain  on  Edisto  Island,  reporting  to  General  Ste- 
venson.” 

I presume  yon  intend  that  I shall  remain  on  Seabrook  Island,  which 
I now  occupy,  and  therefore  shall  not  move  my  command  to  Edisto  Island 
until  I hear  further  from  you. 

Captain  Walker’s  company  Volunteer  Engineers  is  not  here. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  G.  STEVENSON, 
Brigadier- General.  U.  S.  Volunteers , Commanding. 


P.  S.— The  enemy  continue  to  annoy  our  pickets.  Yesterday  they 
wounded,  it  is  feared  fatally,  Sergeant  [George  S.]  Peach,  of  Company 
B,  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 


440  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI.  j 

[Indorsement.] 

Write  to  General  Stevenson  that  his  interpretation  of  special  orders 
is  correct,  and  that  Edisto  is  a clerical  mistake,  Seabrook  having  been 
intended.  Say  that  Walker’s  company  will  be  sent  to  him,  and  order  it 
to  be  sent.  Also  order  25  cavalry  to  Folly  Island  to  report  to  Briga- ; 
dier*General  Yogdes,  1 lieutenant,  2 sergeants,  4 corporals,  and  18  en- 
listed men. 

O.  G.  H. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  190.  j Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  C .,  April  12,  1803. 

It  having  been  officially  represented  to  the  major-general  command-  < 
ing  by  Brigadier-General  Heckman,  Maj.  Solomon  Giles,  Third  New 
York  Artillery,  and  Capf.  H.  W.  Hutchings,  of  the  staff  of  Brigadier-  i 
General  Stevenson,  that  Major-General  Foster,  commanding  Depart- 
ment of  North  Carolina,  is  besieged  and  in  danger  of  being  captured  by 
the  enemy  at  Washington,  N.  C.,  Brigadier- General  Heckman,  U.  S.  -i 
Volunteers,  is  hereby  ordered  to  proceed  with  his  brigade,  consisting  of 
the  following  regiments:  Ninth  New  Jersey,  Twenty -third  Massachu- 
setts, Eighty-first  New  York,  and  Ninety  eighth  New  York,  to  New  Berne,  • 
N.  C.,  where  he  will  report  to  Brigadier-General  Palmer,  or  whoever  may 
be  the  general  in  command,  for  service  in  the  relieving  of  Major-General 
Foster.  This  duty  executed,  or  it  being  found  that  Major-General  Fos-  ; 
ter  has  been  already  relieved,  Brigadier-General  Heckman  will  forthwith 
return  with  his  command  to  this  department. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

ED.  W.  SMITH, 
Assistant  A djutant - General. 


Executive  Mansion, 
Washington , April  13,  1863. 

Admiral  DuPont: 

Hold  your  position  inside  the  bar  near  Charleston,  or  if  you  shall 
have  left  it,  return  to  it,  and  hold  it  till  further  orders.  Do  not  allow 
the  enemy  to  erect  new  batteries  or  defenses  on  Morris  Island.  If  he 
has  begun  it,  drive  him  out.  I do  not  herein  order  you  to  renew  the 
general  attack.  That  is  to  depend  on  your  own  discretion  or  a further 
order. 

A.  LINCOLN. 


War  Department, 
Washington , April  13,  1863 — 3.50  p.  m. 

Major-General  Hunter, 

Department  of  the  South : 

Dispatches  have  been  sent  to  Admiral  DuPont  to  continue  operations 
against  Charleston.  You  will  co-operate  with  your  forces  with  Ad- 
miral DuPont  as  you  and  he  may  deem  best.  It  is  the  President’s  desire 
that  these  operations  be  continued. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in- Chief. 


CHAP.  XXVI.1  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — -UNION.  441 

Executive  Mansion, 
Washington , April  14,  1863. 

General  Hunter  and  Admiral  DuPont: 

This  is  intended  to  clear  up  an  apparent  inconsistency  between  the  re- 
cent order  to  continue  operations  before  Charleston  and  the  former  one 
to  remove  to  another  point  in  a certain  contingency.  No  censure  upon 
you  or  either  of  you  is  intended.  We  still  hope  that  by  cordial  and 
judicious  co-operation  you  can  take  the  batteries  on  Morris  Island  and 
Sullivan’s  Island  and  Fort  Sumter.  But  whether  you  can  or  not,  we 
wish  the  demonstration  kept  up  for  a time  for  a collateral  and  very  im- 
portant object.  We  wish  the  attempt  to  be  a real  one  (though  not  a 
desperate  one)  if  it  affords  any  considerable  chance  of  success.  But  if 
prosecuted  as  a demonstration  only  this  must  not  become  public,  or  the 
whole  effect  will  be  lost.  Once  again  before  Charleston  do  not  leave 
till  further  orders  from  here.  Of  course  this  is  not  intended  to  force 
you  to  leave  unduly  exposed  Hilton  Head  or  other  near  points  in  your 
charge. 

Yours,  truly, 

A.  LINCOLN. 

P.  S. — Whoever  receives  this  first  please  send  a copy  to  the  other 
immediately. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , 8.  (7.,  April  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  TI.  8.  Army , Washington , D.  C.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  certified  copy  of 
the  official  notice  served  upon  me  by  Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont  of  his  in- 
tention to  withdraw  the  iron-clad  squadron  from  the  attack  upon  Charles- 
ton : 

Without  desiring  to  go  over  the  ground  which  General  Seymour,  my 
chief  of  staff,  has  doubtless  already  explained  to  you  in  full  by  word  of 
mouth,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Stevenson’s  brigade  of  2,000  men 
occupies  Seabrook  Island,  commanding  Edisto  Harbor,  and  that  the 
Stono  Inlet  is  held  by  the  brigade  of  General  Vogdes  on  Folly  Island, 
with  one  regiment  on  Cole’s  Island. 

The  remaining  troops  of  the  recent  expedition  returned  safely  to  Port 
Royal  Harbor  without  the  loss  Of  a man  or  a pound  of  stores.  The  troops 
are  in  good  spirits,  regarding  the  postponement  of  the  expedition  as 
merely  a brief  delay  while  certain  necessary  alterations  and  repairs  of 
the  iron-clads  are  being  made. 

On  my  return  here  I found  officers  from  North  Carolina,  who  repre- 
sented urgently  and  earnestly  that  Major-General  Foster,  with  1,600 
men,  was  besieged  in  Washington,  N.  C.,  and  in  danger  of  being  cap- 
tured by  General  Hill,  of  the  rebel  service,  who  was  said  to  have  15,000 
men  between  Washington  and  New  Berne.  It  was  further  represented 
that  7,000  men  had  been  collected  by  General  Palmer  and  were  march- 
ing to  General  Foster’s  relief,  thus  reducing  the  garrisons  of  New  Berne 
and  Morehead  City  and  several  other  important  posts  to  an  aggregate 
of  less  than  3,000  men.  Under  these  circumstances,  having  no  imme- 
diate need  of  General  Heckman’s  brigade,  consisting  of  four  regiments, 
I assumed  the  responsibility  of  dispatching  that  brigade  to  New  Berne, 
with  orders  to  take  part  in  the  service  of  relieving  Major-General  Fos- 


442  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AftD  MtD.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVt  j 

ter  and  then  to  return  immediately  to  this  department.  I need  not  add 
that  in  this  order  I was  actuated  solely  by  sincere  anxiety  tor  the  pub-1 
lie  interests  in  North  Carolina. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  the  highest  esteem,  your  most 
obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


[In  closure.] 

Flag  ship  New  Ironsides, 

Inside  of  Charleston  Bar , April  8,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  South , U.  S.  S.  Ben  De  Ford , off  Charleston : 

General:  The  ironclads  weighed  anchor  at  noon  yesterday  to  go 
forward  to  attack  Fort  Sumter,  but  were  delayed  for  nearly  two  hours  i 
by  the  accident  which  fouled  the  anchor  and  raft  of  the  leading  vessel! 
(the  Weehawken). 

The  Ironsides  became  unmanageable  in  the  narrow  channel  and  occa-| 
sioned  further  delay  under  fire,  so  that  finding  that,  I should  not  reach  j 
the  obstructions  before  5 o’clock,  I ordered  the  vessels  withdrawn  from  I 
action,  with  the  intention  of  renewing  it  this  morning. 

During  the  night  I received  the  statements  of  the  commanding  offi- 
cers, and  find  the  ships  so  much  damaged  during  their  short  engagement 
as  to  force  me  to  the  conviction  that  they  could  not  endure  the  fire  to  1 
which  they  would  be  exposed  long  euough  to  destroy  Fort  Sumter  or 
reach  Charleston.  I am  now  satisfied  that  that  place  cannot  be  taken 
by  a purely  naval  attack,  and  I am  admonished  by  the  condition  of  the 
iron-clads  that  a persistence  in  our  efforts  would  end  in  disaster,  and 
might  cause  us  to  leave  some  of  our  iron-clads  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  I 
which  would  render  it  difficult  for  us  to  hold  those  parts  of  the  coast  I 
which  are  now  in  our  possession. 

1 have  therefore  determined  to  withdraw  my  vessels,  and  have  written  j 
to  the  Navy  Department  to  that  effect. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  F.  DuPONT, 

Bead- Admiral,  Comdg.  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  0.,  April  15,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Vogdes, 

Commanding  Folly  Island , &c. : 

General  : The  troops  under  your  command  will  be  embarked  with 
as  little  delay  as  possible  and  returned  to  this  place. 

Before  commencing  your  retrograde  movement  .you  will  see  that  every 
pound  of  public  property  is  perfectly  secure  on  shipboard.  The  gun- 
boats will  cover  your  embarkation,  and  with  proper  care  the  movement 
should  be  made  without  the  loss  of  a man  or  a pound  of  property.  The 
quartermaster’s  department  will  furnish  ample  transportation. 

Do  not  let  any  of  the  transports  leave  the  river  in  bad  weather. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major- General,  Commanding . 
(Same  to  Brigadier-General  Stevenson.) 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


443 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Eilton  Head , 8.  0.,  April  16,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army , Washington , E.  C. : 

General:  I have  tlie  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  this  morn- 
in^  of  your  special  telegraphic  instructions,  via  Fortress  Monroe,  dated 
3.50  p.  m.,  April  13,  1863,  informing  me  that  by  order  of  the  President 
orders  have  been  sent  to  Admiral  DuPont  to  continue  operations  against 
Charleston,  and  directing  me  to  co-operate  with  the  admiral  as  may  be 


agreed  upon  between  us. 

In  accordance  with  these  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you 
that  a portion  of  the  late  expeditionary  force  is  now  en  route  to  re-enforce 
the  brigades  of  General  Yogdes,  occupying  Folly  Island  and  the  Stono, 
and  General  Stevenson,  holding  Seabrook  Island  and  the  Edisto,  and 
that  the  balance  of  the  expeditionary  force  (less  the  brigade  of  General 
Heckman,  sent  to  relieve  Major-General  Foster  at  Washington,  N.  C., 
five  companies  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  returned  to  Fernandina,  and 
five  companies  of  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire  returned  to  Saint  Augus- 
tine) will  be  at  the  scene  of  operations  within  three  days  from  this  date. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  of  the  Troops  on  the  Stono,  S.  C., 

Folly  Island , April  16,  1863. 

Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  Orders, 
No.  — , from  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South,  I assumed  com- 
mand on  the  11th  of  April. 

During  the  night  of  the  10th  and  11th  an  attack  was  made  upon  a 
small  force  at  the  north  end  of  the  island,  in  which  we  had  one  man 
mortally  wounded  and  one  man  taken  prisoner. 

Colonel  Dandy,  of  the  One  hundredth  New  York,  was  stationed  at 
that  point,  acting  under  special  orders  from  General  Seymour.  As  the 
affair  occurred  previous  to  my  having  assumed  command  I inclose 
Colonel  Dandy’s  report.*  Since  that  time  the  enemy  has  been  extend- 
ing and  strengthening  his  pickets,  but  has  not  ventured  to  attack. 

The  line  required  to  be  defended  is  7 miles  in  length,  and,  with  the 
exception  of  the  east  beach  at  low  tide,  entirely  without  communication. 
I have  endeavored  to  make  the  best  disposition  of  the  limited  number 
of  troops  at  my  disposal  in  order  to  meet  any  attack  of  the  enemy.  I 
may  be  attacked  either  at  the  north  end  of  the  island  through  Light- 
House  Inlet,  or  by  troops  embarking  in  boats  of  light  draught  and  de- 
scending the  numerous  tributaries  of  the  Folly,  or  finally  by  a com- 
bined attack  of  the  enemy  descending  the  Stono  with  a naval  force,  and 
at  the  same  time  attacking  my  line  and  naval  force  when  of  necessity  it 
will  be  deprived  of  the  co-operation  of  that  important  auxiliary  to  its 
defense. 

The  great  difficulty  in  the  defense  is  the  great  length  of  the  line  in 
proportion  to  the  number  of  troops,  the  absence  of  any  practicable 


Sc©  p.  284. 


444 


COASTS  OF  S.  a,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  ANVt  1 

roads,  and  the  want  of  mobility  of  my  artillery.  I am  anxiously  await- 
ing the  arrival  of  the  horses  for  the  section  of  the  Wiard  battery  which  j 
will  add  greatly  to  the  strength  of  my  position. 

If  possible  I should  desire' to  have' both,  or  one  of  the  other  sections  ! 
of  the  battery,  mounted.  Finding  that  the  naval  forces  could  not 
render  me  the  desired  assistance  in  case  of  an  attack  and  at  the  same 
time  attend  to  Cole’s  Island,  I yesterday  withdrew  Colonel  Dandy’s 
regiment  to  this  island,  to  the  defense  of  which  I deem  it  necessary,  and 
in  the  mean  time  the  unval  forces  here  promise  to  prevent  the  island  [ 
from  being  occupied  by  the  enemy.  I shall  write  to  you  again,  explain-  ] 
ing  fully  my  views  as  to  the  best  means  of  defending  this  station.  My  I 
dispositions  have  necessarily  to  be  modified  from  day  to  day  until  I can  I 
open  communication  and  supply  my  troops. 

The  Sixty-second  Ohio,  Thirty-ninth  Illinois,  and  one-half  of  the  Sixty- 1 
seventh  Ohio,  Captain  Jenney’s  battery  Third  New  York  Artillery,  and 
Captain  Cruso’s  company  of  Volunteer  Engineers  are  stationed  at  the  ] 
north  end  of  the  island.  The  remainder  of  Colonel  Voris’  regiment  will  i 
join  them  to-day.  Colonel  Dandy’s  regiment  will  be  stationed  at  a point  I 
intermediate  as  soon  as  the  horses  are  landed  and  a road  can  be  opened.  I 
At  present  it  and  Colonel  Howell’s  regiment  (Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers)  are  encamped  near  Plantation  House.  Five  companies  1 
occupy  the  extreme  end  of  the  island,  under  the  command  of  Lieuten-  f 
ant-Colonel  Steele,  of  the  Thirty-ninth  Illinois  [Sixty-second  Ohio?].  I 
Colonel  Steele  reports  having  found  two  elastic  boats  connecting  with  ; 
the  other  shore,  which  tor  some  reason  were  destroyed  by  our  troops  1 
without  orders.  I have  not  yet  learned  the  particulars. 

I regret  to  have  to  report  the  death  of  Captain  Eodgers,  of  the  Sixty-  I 
second  Ohio  Regiment,  on  the  night  of  the  13th.  The  captain  was  un- 
fortunately shot  by  one  of  our  own  pickets.  I have  not  yet  received  I 
full  particulars  of  the  unfortunate  occurrence.  I hope  to  do  so  in  time  I 
for  my  next. 

I have  sent  Lieutenant  Vidal  to  headquarters  to  endeavor  to  make  , 
some  arrangements  for  telegraphing  along  my  present  line.  It  is  not  J 
necessary,  colonel,  for  me  to  state  how  important  it  is  that  I should  be  I 
able  to  promptly  communicate  with  any  point  of  my  line.  The  safety  1 
of  the  whole  command  may  depend  upon  it.  I hope  you  will  furnish  8 
Mr.  Vidal  the  means  for  so  doing. 

I he  number  and  variety  of  my  present  duties  must  be  mv  excuse  for  I 
not  making  a more  full  report  at  present. 

I.  VOGDES,  I 

Brigadier- General  Volunteers , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , 8.  (7.,  April  16,  1863. 

Brigadier  General  Vogdes, 

Commanding  Folly  Island , (fee.,  8.  C : 

General  : The  orders  for  your  withdrawal  are  hereby  countermanded, 
and  you  will  remain  where  you  are.  Should  re-enforcements  become 
necessary  to  secure  your  position  they  will  be  sent  immediately.  Send 
the  transportation  back  to  this  post  at  once. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


(Same  to  General  Stevenson.) 


Chai\  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


445 


Headquarters  Stono  Inlet,  S.  0., 

April  17,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

A.  A.  G .,  Tenth  A.  G .,  Dept,  of  the  South , Hilton  Read,  S.  G.: 

Colonel  : Since  ray  letter  of  yesterday  I have  nothing  particular  to 
report,  except  that  a short  artillery  practice  took  place  between  the 
gunboat  McDonough  and  some  batteries  of  the  enemy  placed  on  the 
right  of  the  branch  of  the  Folly,  which  joins  that  river  near  Plantation 
House.  The  enemy’s  guns  were  of  too  light  caliber  to  do  us  any  in- 
jury. All  of  the  shots  fell  short. 

1 will  again  urge  upon  the  general  commanding  the  absolute  neces- 
sity of  furnishing  me  with  horses  and  harness  tor  ray  artillery.  At 
present  it  is  entirely  wanting  in  mobility,  and  without  that  attribute  it 
is  exceedingly  doubtful  whether  it  is  an  element  of  strength  or  of  weak- 
ness. My  dispositions  have  necessarily  to  be  made  under  the  hypo 
thesis  of  my  batteries  being  fixed,  and  but  little  or  no  field  is  left  for 
maneuvering. 

I have  necessarily  to  anticipate  each  and  all  possible  means  of  attack 
and  as  far  as  possible  devise  means  to  repulse  them.  I must  also  urge 
upon  the  general  commanding  the  great  necessity  of  increasing  the 
naval  force  within  the  inlet.  Should  the  enemy  attack  the  present  weak 
naval  force  in  tire  Stono  all  of  it  will  necessarily  have  to  be  concen- 
trated at  the  mouth  of  the  Folly,  and  my  flank  for  the  extent  of  7 miles 
will  only  be  guarded  by  a thin  line  of  grand  guard. 

I hope  therefore  that  the  naval  force  may  be  increased ; also  that 
horses  and  harness  and  two  additional  regiments  of  infantry  may  be 
sent  me  at  as  early  a date  as  possible. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  &c., 

I.  YOGDES, 

Brigadier-  General , Vo  lunteers. 


Headquarters  Stono  Inlet, 

Folly  Island , S.  G .,  April  20,  1863. 
Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

A.  A.  G.,  Tenth  Army  Corps,  Dept,  of  the  South , Hilton  Head,  S.  G.  : 

Colonel  : Since  mine  of  the  18tli  nothing  of  importance  has  occurred 
at  this  station.  The  enemy  has  been  unusually  quiet.  He  is  construct- 
ing works  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  and  has  a line  of  vedettes 
in  fhe  woods,  about  2,000  yards  on  our  left.  I am  inclined  to  the  opin- 
ion that  nothing  but  a thin  line  of  the  Mounted  Eangers  (militia)  are 
on  our  left.  Still,  we  are  so  near  to  Charleston  and  the  woods  so  com- 
pletely screen  his  movements,  that  he  can  throw  at  any  time  a very 
considerable  force  of  infantry  along  his  line  without  our  being  able  to 
discover  it. 

I venture  to  suggest  the  propriety  of  sending  one  of  the  iron-clads  or 
monitors  to  guard  the  Stono  and  collecting  the  other  ships  at  or  near 
the  mouth  of  the  Folly. 

A work,  it  we  had  any  heavy  Parrott  guns,  so  as  to  command  the 
mouth  of  the  Folly,  might  be  constructed,  thus  securing  the  vessels  in 

the  Folly. 

I renew  my  request  to  have  the  whole  of  the  TV iard  battery  mounted ; 
also  for  the  two  additional  regiments  of  infantry. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  truly, 

I.  YOGDES, 

Brigadier- General,  Volunteers , 


446 


COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

April  22,  18G3. 

Brig.  Gen.  Israel  Vogdes, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Forces , Stono  Fiver : 

General:  Your  letters  and  reports  up  to  and  inclusive  of  the  20th  i! 
instant  have  been  duly  received. 

With  respect  to  increasing  the  naval  force  in  the  Stono,  it  is  a point 
upon  which  Admiral  DuPont,  who  alone  can  direct  such  increase,  has 
not  yet  been  consulted.  But  it  is  not  probable  that  any  additional  ii 
vessels  will  be  sent,  in  view  of  movements  now  pending. 

No  iron-clad,  it  is  understood,  can  be  put  into  the  Stono,  and  it  is 
considered  a certainty  that  none  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  can  pass  | 
through  Wappoo  into  the  Stono  on  account  of  insufficient  water,  and 
as  equally  certain  that  no  other  naval  force  is  likely  to  molest  yQu  by  I 
that  route. 

A work  at  the  mouth  of  Folly  Fiver  seems  undesirable  just  now.  The 
object  is  simply  to  hold  Folly  Island,  without  attracting  too  much  at- 
tention to  it,  until  projected  operations  can  be  recommenced.  The 
initial  movements  in  these  operations  have  already  been  made,  and  you 
may  soon  expect  such  force  at  Stono  as  will  make  anything  beyond 
actual  possession  unnecessary. 

It  is  essential  that  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island  be  securely  held,  yet  j 
quietly. 

Bespectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  SEYMOUR, 

Brigadier-  General , Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Stono, 

Folly  Island , S.  C .,  April  24,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Truman  Seymour, 

Chief  of  Staff , Hilton  Head , S.  C. : 

General:  Your  communication  of  the  23d  instant  has  just  been  re- 
ceived. In  reply  I have  to  state  that  the  north  end  of  the  island  is 
held  by  five  companies. 

I have  not  erected  any  works  there,  as  they  might  attract  too  much 
attention,  and  if  unfortunately  lost  would  serve  to  strengthen  the 
enemy.  At  the  position  formerly  occupied  by  Colonel  Dandy’s  regi-  I 
ment  I have  thrown  up  slight  rifle  pits,  in  order  to  afford  a shelter  for 
the  supporting  force  of  the  troops  at  the  upper  end  of  the  island. 

I have  cut  a road  through  the  island  flanking  the  west  beach,  so  as  to 
afford  secure  and  concealed  communication  with  Plantation  House  and 
the  north  end  of  the  island.  This  road  will  be  in  complete  order  in  a 
few  days. 

I do  not  think  that  the  enemy  has  so  far  been  able  to  divine  either 
our  design  or  strength.  He  is  strengthening  his  position  at  the  south 
end  of  Morris  Island ; he  is  constructing  an  extensive  line  near  the 
lookout  at  Secession ville.  With  this  exception  he  appears  to  have 
abandoned  work,  and  to  have  only  a line  of  vedettes  extending  through 
the  woods  which  bound  our  horizon  on  the  west.  In  fact  some  move-  # 
ments  on  his  part  appear  to  me  to  indicate  a movement  toward  Edisto.  j 

Naval  men  entertain  the  opinion  that  by  lightening  the  iron  clads 
and  by  using  mechanical  means  they  can  be  forced  through  the  Wappoo 
Channel.  But  since  the  arrival  of  the  monitors  at  Edisto  I do  not  deem  it 


;iiap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


447 


probable  that  the  enemy  will  venture  to  withdraw  theirs  from  Charles- 
011.  They  were  seen  in  Charleston  Harbor  yesterday  morning. 

In  respect  to  the  work  at  the  mouth  of  the  Folly,  my  idea  was  simply  to 
irect  a battery  of  two  heavy  Parrott  rifle  guns,  to  afford  assistance  to  the 
naval  forces  against  any  unexpected  attack. 

Such  work  would  be  of  little  or  no  account  unless  guns  of  the  heaviest 
caliber  cau  be  spared  to  arm  it. 

I am  confident  of  holding  my  position  against  any  land  force  that  the 
nnemy  can  bring,  provided  I am  not  deprived  of  the  assistance  of  the 
McDonough  to  cover  my  left  flank. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  yours,  truly, 

I.  VOGDES, 

Brigadier -General , Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Department  oe  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S . G.,  April  25,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I break  a long  silence  to  thank  you  for  the  comfort 
and  hope  conveyed  in  the  speech  of  Adjutant-General  Thomas,  delivered 
in  Louisiana  on  the  arming  of  the  negroes,  and  in  the  order  (General 
Orders,  No.  89,  current  .series)  dismissing  dishonorably  Lieut.  J.  M. 
Garland,  of  the  Forty-second  New  York  State  Volunteers,  from  the 
service,  which  he  stood  ready  to  betray  whenever  opportunity  offered. 
Believe  me  that  I exaggerate  nothing  in  saying  that  these  indications 
of  a thoroughly  vigorous  war  policy,  with  all  its  necessary  consequences, 
are  more  than  sufficient  to  compensate  for  any  temporary  reverses  sus- 
tained in  the  field  or  on  the  water.  They  assure  me  that  you  have  at 
length  done  that  which  it  would  be  well  for  the  country  if  you  had  done 
much  earlier — taken  the  control  of  affairs  into  your  own  strong,  honest 
hands,  compelling  all  the  resources  of  the  country  to  move  together  to 
one  definite  and  glorious  object  under  the  guidance  of  a single  will. 

That  you  should  long  have  hesitated  before  assuming  the  responsi- 
bility of  this  step  I do  not  wonder.  Arrayed  against  you  were  all  the 
clique  prejudices  of  the  two  professions,  Army  and  Navy  ; and  in  mat- 
ters involving  to  so  great  an  extent  human  life  and  the  hopes  of  the 
country  it  was  but  natural  that  you  should  at  first  prefer  trusting  to 
those  who  claimed  to  be  oracles  in  the  science  of  making  war.  These 
oracles  failing,  however,  to  realize  their  predictions,  and  you  having 
now  two  years7  experience  to  guide  the  innate  sagacity  and  clear  pur- 
poses of  your  mind,  I believe  with  my  whole  heart  that  you  will  prove 
your  own  best  adviser ; and  I hail  the  emphatic  speech  of  General 
Thomas,  made  by  your  authority  and  in  your  name,  as  the  first  clear 
ray  from  a brighter  dawn  that  lies  before  us.  In  the  routine  and  details 
of  both  Army  and  Navy  technical  or  professional  knowledge  is  very 
desirable,  but  in  the  great  elements  of  combination  and  direction  com- 
mon sense,  fearlessly  applied  to  existing  facts,  will  afford  the  safest 
guidance. 

I have  now  to  beg  that  the  same  powers  given  to  General  Thomas 
may  be  conferred  upon  me,  and  that  I may  have  liberty  to  organize 
colored  regiments  and  commission  their  officers,  and  that  I may  have 
authority  to  deal  promptly  and  finally  with  all  officers  who  oppose  a 
vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war  or  any  of  its  necessary  measures.  You 


448 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


can  safely  trust  me  with  the  powers  given  to  General  Thomas,  and  ] 
respectfully  beg  your  early  attention  to  this  matter. 

With  kind  regards  to  Mrs.  Lincoln,  believe  me,  my  dear  sir,  with  th« 
highest  respect,  your  very  obedient  servant  and  friend, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  S.  G .,  April  25,  1863.  ! 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  you  a copy  of  a letter  to  Jefferson \ 
Davis. 

Hoping  it  will  meet  your  approval,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  re- ; 
spectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-General.  \ 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  (7.,  April.  23,  1863. 
Jefferson  Davis,  Richmond , Va. : 

The  United  States  flag  must  protect  all  its  defenders,  white,  black, 
or  yellow.  Several  negroes  in  the  employ  of  the  Government  in  the 
Western  Department  have  been  cruelly  murdered  by  your  authorities, 
and  others  sold  into  slavery.  Every  outrage  of  this  kind  against  the 
laws  of  war  and  humanity  which  may  take  place  in  this  department  1 
shall  be  followed  by  the  immediate  execution  of  the  rebel  of  highest 
rank  in  my  possession.  Man  for  man,  these  executions  will  certainly 
take  place  for  everyone  sold  into  a . slavery  worse  than  death.  On 
your  authorities  will  rest  the  responsibility  of  having  inaugurated  this 
barbarous  policy,  and  you  will  be  held  responsible  in  this  world  and  in 
the  world  to  come  for  all  the  blood  thus  shed. 

In  the  month  of  August  last  you  declared  all  those  engaged  in  arm- 
ing the  negroes  to  fight  for  their  country  to  be  felons,  and  directed 
the  immediate  execution  of  all  such  as  should  be  captured.  I have 
given  you  long  enough  to  reflect  on  your  folly.  I now  give  you  notice 
that  unless  this  order  is  immediately  revoked  I will  at  once  cause  the 
execution  of  every  rebel  officer  and  every  rebel  slaveholder  in  my  pos- 
session. This  sad  state  of  things  may  be  kindly  ordered  by  an  all-wise 
Providence  to  induce  the  good  people  of  the  North  to  act  earnestly 
and  to  realize  that  they  are  at  war.  Thousands  of  lives  may  thus  be 
saved. 

The  poor  negro  is  fighting  for  liberty  in  its  truest  sense,  and  Mr. 
Jefferson  has  beautifully  said,  “In  such  a war  there  is  no  attribute 
of  the  Almighty  which  will  induce  him  to  fight  on  the  side  of  the 
oppressor.” 

You  say  you  are  fighting  for  liberty.  Yes,  you  are  fighting  for  lib- 
erty— liberty  to  keep  4,000,000  of  your  fellow-beings  in  ignorance  and 
degradation ; liberty  to  separate  parents  and  children,  husband  and  wife, 
brother  and  sister;  liberty  to  steal  the  products  of  their  labor,  exacted 
with  many  a cruel  lash  and  bitter  tear;  liberty  to  seduce  their  wives  and 
daughters,  and  to  sell  your  own  children  into  bondage;  liberty  to  kill 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


449 


HAP.  XXVI.]  ~ — 7 

kese  children  with  impunity,  when  the  murder  cannot  be  proven  by 
>ne  of  pure  white  blood.  This  is  the  kind  of  liberty — the  liberty  to  do 

yrong which  Satan,  chief  of  the  fallen  angels,  was  contending  for  when 

le  was  cast  into  hell. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  34.  f Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  April  27,  1863. 


The  following  quarantine  regulations  for  the  port  of  Port  Royal,  S.  0., 
are  hereby  established,  to  be  put  in  operation  from  and  after  the  10th 
day  of  May,  1863 : 

I.  Hereafter  the  quarantine  ground  will  be  m Saint  Helena  Sound, 
at  the  place  designated  by  a white  buoy  and  flag. 

II  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  master  and  pilot  of  every  vessel  coming 
into  this  port  from  this  date  until  further  orders  (excepting  pilot-boats 
returning  from  their  ordinary  cruising  grounds)  to  hoist  a signal  for  the 
health  officer  and  to  anchor  off  the  inner  buoy,  there  to  remain  until 


visited  by  him. 

III.  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  health  officer,  without  unnecessary 
delay,  to  visit  every  vessel  made  liable  to  visitation,  and  ascertain  her 
sanitary  condition  and  the  port  from  which  she  sailed,  and  every  ves- 
sel having  on  board  any  case  of  yellow  fever,  small-pox,  cholera,  or 
other  infectious  or  contagious  disease,  and  also  every  vessel  coming 
from  Key  West,  Havana,  or  any  other  port  where  yellow  fever  may 
exist,  he  shall  order  to  the  quarantine  ground,  there  to  remain  as  long 
as  he  may  deem  proper. 

IV.  No  person  shall  be  allowed  to  leave  the  vessel  until  she  has  been 
examined  by  the  health  officer,  nor  will  any  communication  be  had  with 
the  vessel  until  she  has  been  so  examined. 

V.  The  fees  of  the  health  officer  for  visiting,  examining,  and  certify- 
ing vessels  arriving  at  this  port  shall  be  collected  from  all  vessels  except 
those  in  Government  employ  or  foreign  vessels  of  war,  at  the  following 
rates : 


For  each  vessel  from  a foreign  port $6  50 

For  all  other  vessels - z uu 

and  the  money  thus  collected  will  be  turned  over  to  the  medical  director 
for  the  use  of  the  general  hospitals  in  this  department. 

VI.  These  regulations  will  be  strictly  enforced  by  the  health  officer. 
Should  there  be  any  deviation  therefrom,  or  should  any  of  the  orders 
given  by  the  health  officer  to  such  vessels  not  be  strictly  carried  out, 
he  will  report  the  fact  immediately  to  the  medical  director  of  this  de- 
partment. 

VII.  Surg.  A.  Orispell,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  is  appointed  health  officer 
of  this  port. 

VIII.  Any  violation  of  the  above  regulations  will  cause  the  immediate 
arrest  and  imprisonment  of  the  offenders. 

By  command  of  Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

OHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  A.  A.  G.,  10th  A.  C.  and  Dept,  of  the  South. 


29  R R — YOL  XIV 


450 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap 


. XXYI.  I 


Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  April  28, 1863.  i 
Lieut.  Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Dept,  of  the  South: 

Colonel  : Since  my  letter  of  the  24th  instant  to  General  Seymour, 
late  chief  of  staff,  I have  not  had  anything  of  immediate  importance  /j 
to  report. 

My  general  ideas  of  the  defense  of  this  island  were  indicated  in  in> 
conversation  with  Captain  Hamilton  and  Major  Duane.  The  re-en- 
forcements then  asked  for  I have  ag^n  to  renew  the  request. 

The  enemy  has  lately  been  enlarging  his  works  on  the  south  end  of 
Morris  Island.  He  now  has  several  guns  in  position  and  an  intrenched 
rifle  pit;  all  evidently  intended  to  prevent  any  movement  from  this  1 
island  against  his  position. 

I should  desire  to  be  informed  with  what  view  this  island  is  to  he  < 
held  and  against  what  attack  we  should  make  preparations.  As  things! 
appear  at  present,  and  so  long  as  there  is  a threatened  movement » 
against  Charleston  on  the  part  of  the  naval  and  army  forces,  the  enemy d 
will  not  probably  withdraw  any  of  his  means  of  defense  from  about! 
Charleston  ; but  should  he  become  convinced  that  he  has  nothing  to  ap- 
prehend for  his  stronghold  he  will  probably  bring  his  means  to  bear  on 
the  small  force  now  on  this  island.  It  is  easy  for  him  to  transport  artil- 
lery to  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  to  which  we  could  oppose  but! 
inadequate  resistance.  Under  the  protection  of  this  artillery  he  could 
lay  a bridge  of  boats  and  land  an  overwhelming  force  on  this  island. 
Under  such  circumstances  it  would  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  embark 
unless  protected  by  powerful  naval  batteries. 

I have  directed  a careful  survey  to  be  made  of  the  north  end  of  this 
Island.  Should  it  be  the  intention  of  the  general  to  hold  this  island 
permanently  I thiuk  that  a strong  field  work  of  the  first  class  should 
be  erected  at  the  north  end  of  the  island.  It  should  be  armed  with 
heavy  rifled  guns  and  in  sufficient  number  to  overpower  any  that  the 
enemy  can  bring  to  bear  from  the  opposite  side.  Such  works,  with  the 
naval  assistance  in  the  Folly,  will  enable  us  to  hold  the  island  against  ' 
any  land  force  that  the  enemy  can  bring.  The  north  end  I think  can 
with  little  labor  be  put  in  a complete  state  of  defense.  I request  that 
the  chief  engineer  (should  the  general  commanding  approve  of  my  idea) 
may  be  sent  to  confer  with  me,  and  that  such  works  as  may  be  deemed 
important  may  be  erected  under  his  general  supervision. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  yours,  truly, 

I.  YOGDES, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


[First  indorsement.] 


April  30,  1863. 

0.  Duane  for  his  in- 


To  be  returned.  Respectfully  referred  to  Maj 
formation  and  such  action  as  he  may  see  fit. 

OHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Second  indorsement.] 

If  Folly  Island  is  to  be  permanently  occupied  I would  recommend 
that  the  three  schooners  loaded  with  the  two  82  pounders  and  eight 
32  pounders,  James  rifles,  and  six  30  pounder  Parrotts  should  be  or- 
dered up  there  at  once;  that  two  companies  of  artillery  accompany  and 
take  charge  of  the  artillery.  A work  to  be  constructed  across  the  island 


yllAP.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.—  UNION. 


451 


it  the  point  of  woods  about  If  miles  from  the  north  end  of  the  island. 
This,  together  with  a block-house  near  the  north  end,  I think  will  render 
he  island  secure  from  an  attack  in  the  direction  of  Morris  Island.  If 
be  island  is  to  be  abandoned  within  a few  weeks  the  less  material 
anded  there  the  better. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  0.  DUANE, 

Chief  Engineer , Department  of  the  South. 


Folly  Island,  April  29, 1863. 

Dol.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : Since  writing  my  letter  of  yesterday  most  of  my  questions 
tave  been  answered.  I have  been  reconnoitering  pretty  carefully,  and 
tutting  everything  together  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  most  of 
lie  enemy’s  forces  have  been  withdrawn  from  Charleston.  I have  come 
;o  this  conclusion  from  my  not  being  able  to  perceive  him  in  any  con- 
siderable force  on  my  flank  from  his,  defensive  operations  on  Morris 
island,  and  yesterday  two  papers  were  sent  over,  but  both  of  a date 
interior  to  the  one  I forwarded  to  you.  I deem  that  he  is  unwilling  to 
et  us  know  what  is  transpiring.  I have  endeavored  to  obtain  a late 
iaper,  and  shall  continue  to  reconnoiter.  Should  I obtain  a paper  I 
vill  forward  it  you. 

I still  am  of  the  opinion  that  if  we  remain  on  the  island  the  north  end 
should  be  strongly  fortified  and  armed.  If  we  act  on  the  defensive 
bis  is  indispensable  to  the  military  security  of  the  island.  Should  we 
ict  offensively  against  Morris  Island  it  is  only7  by  overwhelming  the 
nemy  with  our  artillery  fire  that  we  will  be  able  to  effect  a landing. 

Excuse  the  haste  in  which  this  is  written. 

I.  YOGDES, 

Brigadier- General  Volunteers , Commanding. 


[April  30,  1863. — For  Hunter  to  Stanton,  in  reference  to  negro 
roops,  see  Series  III.] 


Abstract  from  Tri-monthly  Report  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  April  30, 1863. 


Station. 

Commanding  officer. 

Enlisted  men 
for  duty. 

; ’oily  Island,  S.  C 

Brig.  Gen.  I.  Vogdes  

4,  204 
3, 286 
3,  428 
3,  598 
835 
403 
464 
581 
29 

eabrook  Island,  S.  C 

lilton  Head,  S.  C 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  G.  StevenBon 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry 

teaufort,  S.  C 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  Saxton 

I'ort  Pulaski,  Ga 

Col.  W.  B.  Barton 

>ssabaw  Island,  Ga 

Maj.  D.  A.  Allen 

'ernandinn,  Fla 

Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley 

aint  Augustine,  Fla 

Col.  H.  S.  Putnam 

department  Staff 

Total 

16,  828 



[Gn  April  23,  1863,  Brig.  Gen.  T.  Seymour  relieved  from  duty  as  chief 
1 si, iff  and  artillery,  and  ordered  to  assume  command  on  Folly  Island, 
hat  order  revoked  April  24,  and  Seymour  granted  leave  of  absence  on 
medical  certificate  for  thirty  days.] 


452  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI* 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  May  4,  1863.  * 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington , H.  G. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  orders  may  be  immediately 
issued  for  the  return  to  this  department  of  the  troops  sent  under  com  > 
mand  of  Brigadier-General  Heckman,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  to  the  relief  o: 
Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster  in  North  Carolina. 

These  troops  were  sent  under  circumstances  fully  set  forth  in  the  spe 
cial  order,  of  which  certified  copy  is  herewith  transmitted ; * and  cer 
tainly,  taking  all  the  surrounding  facts  into  view,  it  was  to  have  beer 
fairly  hoped  that  Major-General  Foster  would  not  require  any  order J 
from  the  War  Department  for  their  return. 

The  sending  of  these  troops,  from  the  apprehensions  it  created  in  the' 
minds  of  the  enemy,  has  been  of  the  utmost  service  to  the  Department 
of  North  Carolina,  and  I have  now  to  beg  your  interposition  that 
this  volunteered  act  of  assistance  upon  my  part  may  not  be  turned  tel 
the  detriment  of  the  public  service  in  this  department  by  the  failure! 
of  Major-General  Foster  to  appreciate  my  motives  and  reciprocal  ■ 
the  sentiment  of  public  duty  exhibited  in  sending  this  brigade  to  his 
relief. 

Under  orders  of  the  Government  to  renew  active  operations  against  r! 
Charleston,  and  only  waiting  from  day  to  day  the  readiness  of  the  ad- 
miral (only  delayed  for  the  necessary  repairs  of  the  irou-clads),  I cer- 
tainly cannot  afford  to  lose  permanently  from  my  small  command  the! 
services  of  General  Heckman’s  brigade,  more  than  2,500  strong.  In 
sending  them  I overlooked,  in  my  anxiety  for  the  public  interests,  the 
many  and  gross  discourtesies  received  from  Major-General  Foster  during  i 
his  brief  sojourn  in  this  department.  I have  now  to  ask  of  ydu,  confi- 
dent that  my  request  will  be  liberally  met,  that  General  Foster  may  be 
directed  to  do  justice  in  this  matter  and  return  my  brigade. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTEB, 

Major - General,  Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 


May  12,  1863. 

Referred  to  the  general-in-chief  to  make  such  answer  and  order  as  in 
his  opinion  the  service  may  require. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


[May  4,  1863. — For  Hunter  to  Governor  Andrew,  in  reference  to 
negro  troops,  &c.,  see  Series  III.] 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  35.  1 Hilton  Head , S.  G.,  May  5,  1863. 

I.  In  conformity  with  section  11  of  the  act  approved  July  17,  1862, 
entitled  “An  act  to  amend  the  act  calling  forth  the  militia  to  execute  the 

* See  Special  Orders,  No.  190,  p.  440. 


HAP.  XX VI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


453 


aws  of  the  Union,  suppress  insurrections,  and  repel  invasions,  approved 
February  28,  1795,  and  the  acts  amendatory  thereof,  and  for  other  pur- 
roses,”  Col.  Edwin  Metcalf,  Third  Bhode  Island  Artillery,  is  hereby  an- 
munced  as  chief  of  artillery  and  ordnance  of  the  Tenth  Army  Corps, 
md  will  be  respected  and  obeyed  accordingly. 

II.  Capt.  John  Hamilton,  Light  Company  E,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery,  is 
eannounced  as  chief  of  artillery  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  on 
he  staff  of  the  major-general  commanding  department ; and  Capt.  John 
IV.  Todd,  U.  S.  Ordnance  Corps,  is  reannounced  as  chief  of  ordnance 
»f  the  Department  of  the  South  on  the  staff  of  the  major-general 
ommanding;  and  both  Captain  Hamilton  and  Captain  Todd,  in  their 
espective  branches  of  the  service,  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accord- 

ag'y- 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  A.  A.  6r.,  Tenth  A.  C.  and  Dept,  of  the  South . 


Abitract  from,  Tri-monthly  Report  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  May  10, 1863. 


Station. 


Commanding  officer. 


Enlisted  men 
for  duty. 


oily  Island,  S.  C 

eabrook  Island,  S.  C 

[ilton  Head,  S.  C 

eanfort,  S.  C 

ort  Pulaski,  Ga 

ssabaw  Island,  Ga 

ernandina,  Ela 

aint  Augustine,  Ela 

department  staff 


Brigadier-General  I.  Vogdes 

Brigadier-General  T.  G.  Stevenson. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  Saxton 

Col.  W.  B.  Barton 

Maj.  D.  A.  Allen 

Col.  H.  S.  Putnam 

Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley 


3,  852 
3,  071 
3,  526 
3,  523 
810 
403 
581 
464 
29 


Total 


16, 259 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  C.,  May  11,  1863. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halle ck, 

General-in-Chief  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  for  your  informa- 
ion  certified  copies  of  a communication  addressed  by  me  to  Bear-Ad- 
liral  S.  F.  DuPont,  proposing  a joint  demonstration  against  Savannah 
rhile  awaiting  the  repair  of  the  iron-clads  for  a renewal  of  the  attack 
pon  Charleston,  together  with  Admiral  DuPont’s  reply.  I learn  un- 
fficially  that  the  last  of  the  iron-clads  undergoing  repairs  will  soon  be 
eady  to  resume  her  place  in  the  squadron. 

So  far  as  the  laud  forces  are  concerned,  having  suffered  no  loss  in 
he  late  expedition,  we  have  been  continuously  ready  to  renew  the 
ttack  whenever  notified  by  the  admiral  that  his  repairs  had  been  com- 
peted, and  I am  of  opinion  that  if  the  Navy  will  open  ou  the  enemy’s 
catteries  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  (batteries  constructed  for 
he  most  part  since  the  last  attack),  thus  covering  our  crossing  of  Light- 
louse  Inlet,  Fort  Sumter  can  be  reduced  from  Cummings  Point  just 
s Port  Pulaski  was  reduced  from  Goat’s  Point  on  Tybee  Island $ the 
proposition  being  simplified  and  made  more  certain  in  this  instance  by 


454  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV 

the  heavier  rifled  ordnance  (100  and  200  pounders,  rifled)  now  at  ou 
command. 

I have  the  honor  to  he,  general,  with  the  highest  esteem,  your  ver 
obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major- General , Commanding . 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  0.,  April  29,  1863. 

Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont, 

Comdg.  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron , Flagship  Wabash : 

Admiral  : In  our  last  interview  I had  the  honor  of  submitting  t< 
you  a suggestion  that  a joint  demonstration  on  the  Savannah  River 
even  though  merely  a demonstration,  would  have  the  good  effect  o 
keeping  the  enemy’s  coast  in  alarm  and  tending  to  prevent  any  largt 
withdrawal  of  his  forces  to  re-enforce  his  other  armies  iu  Virginia  o 
the  West. 

The  proposition  was  that  two  of  the  iron  clads  should  run  up  tin 
Savannah  River,  halting  below  the  obstructions  at  a distance  tha 
would  permit  them  to  shell  the  enemy’s  floating  battery  Georgia,  nov 
penned  in  and  believed  to  be  ashore  just  above  the  obstructions,  wkil< 
a large  number  of  transports,  with  sufficient  men  shown  on  them  t( 
create  the  impression  that  a joint  attack  was  about  being  made,  shouk 
be  held  in  rear  of  your  iron  clads. 

This  proposition  I have  now  to  renew,  believing  that  it  will  materially 
help  the  country’s  arms  in  other  directions  by  keeping  many  thou 
sands  of  the  enemy  on  the  alert  at  Savannah  and  its  surrounding  de 
fenses. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  admiral,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obe 
dient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


|ln closure  No.  2.] 

Wabash,  April  29, 1863. 

Major-General  Hunter,  Hilton  Head: 

General:  I will  be  better  able  to  reply  to  your  official  letter  to 
morrow  when  I hear  from  Edisto.  # J 

It  strikes  me  favorably  with  one  exception,  that  we  can  do  nothing 
with  the  Georgia,  I fear,  and  thus  reduce  further  the  moral  effect  of  tin 
monitors — I mean  on  account  of  the  distance  she  will  have  to  be  en 
gaged  at. 

I will  hurry  still  more  the  repairs  on  the  Weehawken,  the  onlj 
iron-clad  here,  and  can  send  to  Edisto  for  another.  The  Passaic  goes 
North  from  there  to-day  under  a peremptory  order  from  the  Navy  De 
partment. 

Captain  Rodgers  has  gone  to  Edisto  and  off  Charleston  to  see  hov 
things  are  at  Morris  Island,  and  I will  let  you  know  the  result  of  his 
visit  to-morrow. 

I am,  general,  yours,  most  truly,  _ 

’ 8 ’ ’ S.  F.  DuPONT. 


-hap.  XXVI  * CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  455 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

r . Flag-ship  Wabash, 

Port  Royal  Harbor , <SY.  0.,  May  4,  1863. 

Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , Headquarters  Hilton  Head: 

General  : I have  delayed  several  days  in  replying  to  your  com- 
munication of  the  29th  ultimo  for  reasons  set  forth  in  my  private  note 
of  that  date. 

In  the  mean  time  I have  given  the  subject-matter  of  your  letter  mature 
consideration,  for  I am  anxious  to  join  you  in  anything  that  will  pro- 
mote the  ends  in  view.  Yet,  general,  for  the  present  and  until  I can 
gain  some  more  definite  information  as  to  the  position  of  the  enemy’s 
floating  battery  Georgia  and  the  probability  of  our  being  able  to  do  it 
the  slightest  injury,  it  might  not  be  advisable  to  proceed,  and  for  the 
following  reasons: 

1st.  That  nothing  but  a feint  or  demonstration  can  be  made  against 
Savannah. 

2d.  That  which  you  and  I iutend  merely  as  a demonstration  with  a 
definite  object  to  accomplish  thereby  will  be  considered  another  repulse 
or  failure  by  the  rebels. 

3d.  That  if  troops  follow  our  iron -clads  and  do  not  land  it  will  be 
looked  upon  in  the  same  light  at  the  North.  * 

Should  you  see  things  in  the  same  light  I would  prefer  deferring  for 
the  present  operations  in  that  quarter. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

’ & ’ S.  F.  DuPONT. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  (7.,  May  22,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln,  • 

President  of  the  United  States : 

Dear  Sir  : It  is  more  than  six  weeks  since  the  attack  by  the  iron- 
clads upon  Charleston  ; an  attack  in  which  from  the  nature  of  the  plans 
of  Admiral  DuPont  the  Army  had  no  active  part. 

On  the  day  of  that  attack  the  troops  under  my  command  held  Folly 
Island  up  to  Light-House  Inlet.  On  the  morning  after  the  attack  we 
were  in  complete  readiness  to  cross  Light-House  Inlet  to  Morris  Island, 
where  once  established  the  fall  of  Sumter  would  have  been  as  certain 
as  the  demonstration  of  a problem  in  mathematics.  Aided  by  a cross- 
fire from  the  Navy  the  enemy  would  soon  have  been  ‘driven  from  Cum- 
mings Point,  and  with  powerful  batteries  of  100  and  200  pounder  rifle 
guns  placed  there  Fort  Sumter  would  have  been  rendered  untenable  in 
two  days’  fire.  Fort  Pulaski  was  breached  and  taken  from  Goat’s  Point, 
on  Ty  bee  Island  (a  precisely  similar  proposition),  with  32- pounder  Parrot  t 
guns,  42-pounder  James  guns,  and  a few  10-inch  columbiads,  the  13- 
inch  mortars  used  in  that  bombardment  having  proved  utterly  valueless. 

1 mention  these  things  to  show  how  certain  would  have  been  the  fall 
of  Fort  Sumter  under  the  fire  of  the  100  and  -00  pounders  rifled  now 
at  my  command. 

On  the  afternoon  after  the  iron-clad  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  the  troops 
on  Folly  Island  were  not  only  ready  to  cross  Light-House  Inlet,  but 
were  almost  in  the  act,  the  final  reconnaissance  having  been  made,  the 


456  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MlD.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVt  1 

boats  ready,  and  the  men  under  arms  for  crossing,  when  they  were  re-  fl 
called  (as  I hoped  only  temporarily)  by  the  announcement  of  Admiral 
DuPont  that  he  bad  resolved  to  retire,  and  that  consequently  we  could  ! 
expect  no  assistance  from  the  Navy.  Immediately  the  admiral  was  waited  j 
upon  by  an  officer  of  my  staff,  who  represented  the  forwardness  of  our  I 
preparations  for  crossing,  the  evidently  unprepared  condition  of  the  l| 
enemy  to  receive  us  or  drive  us  back  if  once  our  crossing  was  effected, 
while  any  delay,  now  that  our  intentions  were  remarked,  would  give  the 
enemy  time  to  erect  upon  the  southern  end  of  Morris  Island,  command-  : 
ing  Light-House  Inlet,  those  works  and  batteries  which  he  had  hereto- 1 
fore  neglected.  To  these  considerations,  earnestly  and  elaborately 
urged,  the  admiral’s  answer  was  that  u he  would  not  fire  anothre  shot.”  A 

A lodgment  on  Morris  Island  was  thus  made  impossible  for  us,  the  | 
enemy  having  powerful  works  on  the  island,  more  especially  at  the 
northern  end,  out  of  which  we  could  not  hope  to  drive  him  unless  aided  I 
by  a cross-fire  from  the  Navy.  I therefore  determined  to  hold  what  we  <| 
had  got  until  the  admiral  should  have  had  time  to  repair  his  vessels,  j 
and  to  this  hour  we  hold  every  inch  of  ground  on  Folly  and  Cole’s  and  i 
Seabrook  Islands  that  we-  held  on  the  day  of  the  expected  crossing.  J 
Since  then  I have  exercised  patience  with  the  admiral  and  have  pushed 
forward  my  works  and  batteries  on  Folly  Island  with  unremitting  i 
diligence  ; the  enemy  meanwhile,  now  thoroughly  aroused  to  their  dan-  I 
ger,  throwing  up  works  that  completely  command  Light-House  Inlet, 
on  the  southern  end  of  Morris  Island  ; so  that  the  crossing  which  could  j 
have  been  effected  in  a couple  of  hours  and  with  but  little  sacrifice  six  I 
weeks  ago  will  now  involve,  whenever  attempted,  protracted  opera-  I 
tions  and  a very  serious  loss  of  life.  And  to  what  end  should  this  sac-  I 
rifice  be  made  without  the  co-operation  of  the  Navy  ? Even  when  es-  I 
tablished  on  the  southern  end  of  Morris  Island,  the  northern  end,  with 
its  powerful  works  and  commanded  by  the  fire  of  Forts  Sumter  and 
Johnson,  would  still  remain  to  be  possessed.  The  sacrifice  would  be  of  i 
no  avail  without  the  aid  of  the  Navy,  and  I have  been  painfully  but  :j 
finally  convinced  that  from  the  Navy  no  such  aid  is  to  be  expected. 

I fear  Admiral  DuPont  distrusts  the  iron -cl ads  so  much  that  he  has  i 
resolved  to  do  nothing  with  them  this  summer,  and  1 therefore  most 
earnestly  beg  you  to  liberate  me  from  those  orders  to  u co-operate  with 
the  Navy”  which  now  tie  me  down  to  share  the  admiral’s  inactivity.  \ 
.Remaining  in  our  present  situation  we  do  not  even  detain  one  soldier  1 
of  the  enemy  from  service  elsewhere.  I am  well  satisfied  that  they  have  I 
already  sent  away  from  Charleston  and  Savannah  all  the  troops  not  j 
absolutely  needed  to  garrison  the  defenses,  and  these  will  have  to  re-  I 
main  in  the  works  whether  an  enemy  be  in  sight  or  not.  Liberate  me  i 
from  this  order  to  u co  operate  with  the  Navy  in  an  attack  on  Charles- 
ton”  and  I will  immediately  place  a column  of  10,000  of  the  best  drilled 
soldiers  in  the  country  (as  unquestionably  are  the  troops  of  this  depart 
ment)  in  the  heart  of  Georgia,  our  landing  and  march  being  made- 
through  counties  in  which,  as  shown  by  the  census,  the  slave  popula- 
tion  is  75  per  cent,  of  the  inhabitants.  Nothing  is  truer,  sir,  than  that  j 
this  rebellion  has  left  the  Southern  States  a mere  hollow  shell.  If  we 
avoid  their  few  strongholds,  where  they  have  juepared  for  and  invited  i 
us  to  battle,  we  shall  meet  no  opposition  in  a total  devastation  of  their 
resources,  thus  compelling  them  to  break  up  their  large  armies  and 
garrisons  at  a few  points  into  scores  of  small  fractions  of  armies  for  the  I 
protection  of  every  threatened  or  assailable  point.  I will  guarantee, 
with  the  troops  now  fruitlessly  though  laboriously  occupying  Folly 
and  Seabrook  Islands  and  such  other  troops  as  can  be  spared  Irorn  the 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


457 


remaining  posts  of  this  department,  to  penetrate  into  Georgia,  produce 
a practical  dissolution  of  the  slave  system  there,  destroy  all  railroad 
communication  along  the  eastern  portion  of  the  State,  and  lay  waste  all 
stores  which  can  possibly  be  used  for  .1  he  sustenance  of  the  rebellion. 

My  troops  are  in  splendid  health  and  discipline,  and  in  my  judgment 
are  more  thoroughly  in  sympathy  with  the  policy  of  the  Government 
than  any  other  equal  body  of  men  in  the  service  of  the  United  States 
to-day.  With  the  exception  of  one  brigadier-general  and  one  colonel 
commanding  a brigade  there  is  not  an  officer  of  any  consequence  in  the 
command  who  is  not  heart  and  soul  in  favor  of  prosecuting  this  war 
by  any  and  every  means  likely  to  insure  success. 

Only  once  liberate  me  from  enforced  waiting  on  the  action  of  those 
who,  I fear,  are  not  likely  to  do  anything,  and  I promise  you  that  I will 
give  full  employment  to  twice  or  thrice  my  number  of  the  enemy,  and 
that  while  Eosecrans  threatens  Bragg  in  front  I will  interrupt  his  com- 
munications, threaten  his  rear,  and  spread  a panic  through  the  country. 

In  this  connection  I would  ask,  if  possible,  for  a regiment  of  cavalry, 
and  that  the  brigade  sent  by  me  to  the  relief  of  Major-General  Foster 
may  be  ordered  back  from  North  Carolina.  If  no  cavalry  can  be  spared 
me,  that  500  horses  and  1,000  saddles  and  equipments  may  be  sent  to 
me  immediately.  Also  that  the  pikes  drawn  for  by  my  chief  of  ordnance 
may  be  supplied  immediately;  the  weapons  being  the  simplest  and 
most  effective  that  can  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  slaves  who  are 
liberated  in  our  march  into  the  interior. 

In  conclusion,  I would  again  call  attention  to  my  request  to  be  en- 
dowed with  the  same  powers  intrusted  to  Adjutant-General  Thomas 
for  raising  colored  regiments  and  giving  commissions  to  their  officers. 
I think  this  of  the  utmost  importance,  as  each  commission  promptly 
given  to  a deserving  non-commissioned  officer  or  private  has  the  effect 
of  conciliating  the  sentiment  of  the  regiment  from  which  the  appointee 
is  taken,  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  experiment  of 
colored  soldiers  should  have  the  hearty  acquiescence  of  the  troops  with 
whom  they  are  to  serve. 

I deem  this  matter  of  so  much  importance  and  am  so  weary  of  inac- 
tivity that  I send  this  letter  by  special  steamer  to  Fortress  Monroe, 
and  have  instructed  the  captain  of  the  vessel  to  wait  for  your  reply. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 

servant, 

D.  HUNTEB, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

I send  this  letter  by  Gapt.  Arthur  M.  Kinzie,  one  of  my  aides-de-camp, 
who  will  await  your  answer  and  return  immediately  by  the  steamer 
which  bears  this  to  Fortress  Monroe. 

D.  HUNTEB, 

Major- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  40.  f Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  (7.,  May  22,  1863. 

I.  The  major-general  commanding  desires  to  call  the  attention  of  all 
officers  and  men  in  this  department  to  the  paramount  necessity  of  ob- 
serving rules  for  the  preservation  of  health  during  the  warm  months, 
upon  which  we  have  now  entered.  There  is  less  to  be  apprehended 
from  battle  than  disease;  the  records  of  all  campaigns  in  climates  such 


458  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI.  jfl 

as  this  showing  many  more  victims  to  the  neglect  of  sanitary  precau- 
tions  than  to  the  skill,  endurance,  or  courage  of  the  enemy. 

The  following  rules  for  the  sanitary  government  of  all  the  troops  at 
present  serving  in  this  department  are  hereby  repromulgated,  and  all 
officers  having  the  charge  of  camps  or  posts  will  be  held  to  a strict 
responsibility  for  their  enforcement. 

II.  Care  will  be  taken  in  the  selection  of  camping  grounds  to  avoid 
as  much  as  possible  the  vicinity  of  malarious  morasses  or  swamps,  and 
the  tents,  in  so  far  as  practicable,  are  to  be  faced  to  the  south.  Each  J 
camp  will  be  thoroughly  policed  twice  each  day,  morning  and  evening, 
and  all  garbage  or  refuse  matter  will  be  collected  and  buried  in  the  sinks.  4 
Post  and  regimental  commanders  will  be  held  directly  responsible  for 
any  neglect  of  police  duty. 

III.  Each  tent  will  be  screened  or  covered  at  the  top  and  half  way 
down  the  sides  with  an  arbor  of  brush-wood  or  palm  leaves,  and  shall 
be  floored  at  an  elevation  of  not  less  than  3 inches  from  the  ground. 
Where  lumber  cannot  be  procured  each  soldier  will  have  a bunk  raised  1 
18  inches  from  the  ground  on  side  poles,  supported  by  forked  sticks. 
All  quartermasters,  to  the  extent  of.  their  ability,  will  furnish  barrel 
staves  to  be  placed  across  these  side  poles,  and  will  issue  the  necessary 
lumber  on  receipt  of  proper  requisitions. 

IV.  Tents  will  be  struck  at  least  three  times  each  week  and  every 
article  of  bedding  and  clothing  taken  out  and  aired,  the  flooring  and 
bunks  to  be  thoroughly  cleansed  before  the  tents  are  re- erected.  On 
the  days  in  which  the  tents  are  not  struck  the  sides  will  be  raised  and 
kept  raised  for  the  purpose  of  ventilatipn,  and  during  the  nights  free 
ventilation  will  be  secured  by  having*  the  center  seam  in  rear  of  the 
tent  opened  for  the  space  of  2 feet  and  kept  opened  by  the  insertion  of  | 
a forked  stick.  An  officer  of  each  company  will  inspect  the  tents  of 
his  men  nightly,  except  during  stormy  weather,  to  see  that  this  provision 
is  carried  out. 

Y.  Sinks  of  the  proper  size,  screened  with  pine  or  palmetto  branches, 
shall  be  sunk  at  suitable  distances  on  different  sides  of  each  camp,  and 
the  bottoms  of  these  will  be  covered  each  morning  with  a layer  of  sand 
or  clay.  It  will  be  the  duty  of  the  camp  police  to  see  that  only  the 
sinks  on  the  lee  side  of  the  camp  are  used. 

YI.  Fresh  meat  is  to  be  issued  as  often  as  practicable,  and  command- 
ing officers,  while  near  the  sea-coast, ^will  encourage  such  of  their  men 
as  are  off  duty  or  not  otherwise  employed  to  fish  during  the  cool  hours  : 
of  the  morning  and  evening,  not  later  than  9 in  the  morning  and  not  ? 
earlier  than  6 in  the  evening.  In  a scarcity  of  fresh  meat  those  troops 
in  the  most  exposed  and  unhealthy  situations  are  to  be  first  served. 

YII.  Breakfast  will  be  ready  for  the  men  as  soon  as  they  leave  their 
tents,  which  must  not  be  until  after  sunrise.  Except  when  immediately 
in  face  of  the  enemy,  or  when  specially  ordered  by  the  commanding 
officer,  reveille  will  not  be  sounded  until  half  an  hour  after  sunrise,  j 
by  which  time  the  sun’s  heat  will  have  absorbed  the  miasma  of  the 
night  dews.  All  the  men  will  be  furnished  with  straw  hats,  and  will  be 
required  to  bathe  or  wash  themselves  thoroughly  at  least  twice  each 
week  and  change  their  under- clothing  once  a week,  or  oftener  if  prac- 
ticable. Sentry-boxes  of  lumber,  or  small  shade  arbors  of  brush -wood,  I 
will  be  erected  in  the  vicinity  of  all  points  where  sentries  are  stationed,  j 
and  all  soldiers  on  night  picket  or  sentry  duty  will  be  provided  with 
India  rubber  ponchos. 

VIII.  The  proper  cooking  of  provisions  is  a matter  of  great  impor- 
tance, more  especially  in  this  climate,  but  has  not  yet  received  from  a 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC— UNION 


459 


majority  of  the  officers  in  our  volunteer  service  that  attention  which  is 
paid  to  it  in  the  Regular  Army  of  the  United  States  and  by  the  armies 
of  Europe.  Hereafter  an  officer  of  each  company  will  he  detailed  to  su- 
perintend the  cooking  of  provisions,  taking  care  that  all  food  prepared 
for  the  soldiers  is  sufficiently  cooked,  and  that  the  meats  are  boiled  or 
roasted,  not  fried.  With  a little  care  bestowed  on  this  point,  and  the 
advantage  both  to  health  and  comfort  of  good  cooking  explained  to  the 
men,  much  good  may  be  effected. 

Post  and  regimental  commanders,  post  provost marshals,  post  inspect- 
ors, and  the  officers  of  the  medical  staff  will  see  that  the  provisions  of 
this  order  are  complied  with,  and  will  promptly  report  any  failure  or 
neglect  to  the  senior  officers  of  the  commands  they  are  serving  with 
and  to  the  medical  director  of  this  department. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter: 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  A.  A.  G .,  Tenth  Army  Corps  and  Dept,  of  the  South. 


• New  York,  May  23,  1863. 

General  G.  W.  Cullum, 

Chief  of  Staff  to  the  General-in-Chief  Washington , D.  C. : 

General:  It  has  come  to  my  knowledge  that  my  name  has  been 
mentioned  to  the  Secretary  of  War  in  connection  with  the  reduction  of 
the  forts  in  Charleston  Harbor,  and  it  has  been  urgently  suggested  to 
place  me  in  a position  where  1 could  direct  and  control  the  operations 
of  the  land  forces  against  that  place.^  Two  or  three  communications 
from  prominent  men  here  have  been  sent  to  the  Secretary. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  inform  you,  who  are  so  well  acquainted  with 
me,  that  I am  not  in  the  habit  of  pushing  myself  forward  or  thrusting 
my  professional  opinion  unasked  upon  the  notice  of  those  in  authority. 
In  my  daily  intercourse  with  gentlemen  of  my  acquaintance  I am,  how- 
ever, always  free  to  answer  questions,  and  I have  at  sundry  times  and 
in  sundry  places  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  forts  in  Charleston' 
Harbor  could  be  reduced  by  the  means  (naval  and  military  combined) 
now  available  in  the  Department  of  the  South,  increased  by  a suitable 
number  of  the  best  heavy  rifled  guns,  provided  these  have  not  been 
sent  there  since  I left  that  department  one  year  ago. 

I have  also  said  that  I am  willing  to  risk  my  own  reputation  upon  the 
attempt,  as  I did  at  Pulaski,  provided  I could  be  allowed  the  untram- 
meled execution  of  my  own  plans  (as  at  Pulaski),  except  so  far  as  they 
involved  co-operation  from  the  Navy. 

You  are  at  liberty  to  show  this  letter  to  the  general-in-chief  or  any 
one  else. 

I expect  to  remain  here  until  the  evening  of  the  27th  instant,  and  then 
go  directly  to  Cincinnati. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMOEE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  oe  the  South, 

No.  41.  | Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  (7.,  May  26,  1863. 

I.  Numerous  persons  having  recently  been  brought  in  United  States 
transports  to  this  department,  without  any  apparent  or  legitimate  busi- 


460 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


ness  or  claim  to  be  furnished  with  public  transportation,  and  amongst 
those  thus  sent  there  having  been  found  one  known  rebel  spy,  several  pro- 
fessional gamblers  with  the  cheating  implements  of  their  trade,  and  others 
equally  objectionable,  it  is  ^ordered  that  hereafter  no  persons  will  be 
allowed  to  land  in  this  department  from  any  United  States  transport  or 
other  vessel  having  come  from  a port  not  within  the  limits  of  this  depart- 
ment, except  persons  belonging  to  the  Army  or  Navy  of  the  United  States, 
or  such  other  persons  as  may  have  with  them  at  the  time  they  attempt 
to  land  the  permit  or  pass  of  His  Excellency  the  President,  the  hon- 
orable the  Secretary  of  War,  the  general-in-chief  of  the  U.  S.  Army,  or 
the  major-general  commanding  this  department,  or  certified  copies  of 
the  same  duly  attested. 

II.  Many  hundreds  of  able-bodied  men  liable  to  the  draft  and  not  in 
the  employ  of  the  Government  being  now  within  the  limits  of  this  de- 
partment, pursuing  schemes  of  private  profit  and  speculations  based 
on  the  necessities  of  the  service,  it  is  hereby  ordered  that  all  such  per- 
sons who  may  be  found  within  the  limits  of  this  department  within 
twenty  days  from  the  date  of  this  general  order  shall  be  drafted  to  fill 
up  the  weakened  regiments  from  the  respective  States  to  which  they 
belong  now  serving  in  this  department,  and  all  such  persons  belong- 
ing to  States  not  represented  here  by  regiments  will  be  drafted  to 
serve  in  the  regiment  numerically  the  weakest.  From  this  draft  no 
exemptions  will  be  allowed  except  by  special  orders  from  the  provost- 
marshal-general,  approved  by  these  headquarters ; such  special  orders 
to  be  based  on  evidence  that  the  part* -seeking  to  be  exempted  is  one. 
whose  services  or  usefulness  in  his  civil  capacity  .are  such  as  to  justify 
his  claim. 

III.  The  provost-marshal-general  of  the  department  will  see  that  the 
provisions  of  this  order  are  rigidly  enforced. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter  : 

OHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  A.  A.  G.,  Tenth  A.  C.  and  Dept,  of  the  South . 


General  Orders,  l Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  42.  S Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  0.,  May  28,  1863. 

I.  Capt.  F.  C.  Ford,  commissary  of  subsistence,  is  hereby  announced 
as  acting  chief  commissary  of  the  department  during  the  temporary 
absence  of  Lieut.  Col.  M.  B.  Morgan,  commissary  of  subsistence  Tenth 
Army  Corps,  chief  commissary  Department  of  the  South. 

First  Lieut.  Franklin  F.  Town,  Forty-second  New  York  Volunteers, 
acting  signal  officer,  is  hereby  announced  as  chief  signal  officer  ot  the 
department  on  the  staff  of  the  major-general  commanding. 

Captain  Ford  and  Lieutenant  Town,  in  their  respective  branches  of 
the  service,  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accordingly. 

II.  Paragraph  III,  General  Orders,  No.  36,  current  series,  from  these 
headquarters,  is  hereby  countermanded.  Hereafter  all  enlisted  men  j 
appointed  and  commissioned  in  the  colored  regiments  will  be  mustered 
out  as  enlisted  men  when  mustered  into  service  as  officers. 

By  command  of  Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Lieut.  Col . and  A.  A.  G.,  Tenth  A.  C.  and  Dept,  of  the  South. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


461 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter  command- 
ing, for  the  month  of  May , 1863 ; headquarters  Hilton  Head,  S.  G. 


Command. 

Present  for 

duty.  . 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

Aggregate  present 

| and  absent  last 

monthly  return. 

t 

O 

sa 

o 

§ 

a 

>> 

ri 

© 

M 

2 

R 

Department  staff 

16 

198 

127 

12G 

174 

30 

16 

20 

30 

48 
3,  834 
2,  968 
2,  849 
3,122 
768 
405 
499 
515 

65 
4,  692 
3,652 
3,  890 
3,  942 
948 
488 
624 
696 

67 
5,720 
4, 771 

4,  501 

5,  218 
1,028 

558 

886 

755 

49 
5,  647 

4,  844 
5,613 

5,  430 
1,027 

571 

887 

759 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  Israel  Vogdes 

Seabrook  Island,  S.  C.,  Btig.  Gen.  0.  S.  Ferry 

Hi  ton  Head  Island,  S.  C.,  Col.  J.  L.  Chatfield 

Port  Royal  Island,  S.  C..  Brig.  Gen.  B.  Saxton. . . 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  Col.  W.  B7  Barton  

Ossabaw  Island,  Ga.,  Maj.  D.  A.  Allen 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  Col.  J.  E.  Hawley 

Fernandina,  Fla.,  Col.  H.  S.  Putnam 

Grand  total 

16 

16 

9 

6 

10 

18 

737  1 15,008  | 18,997  23,504 

I i ! 

32 

43 

24,  827 

Organization  of  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  South , Maj.  Gen.  David 
Hunter  commanding , May  31,  1863. 

FOLLY  ISLAND. 


Brig.  Gen.  Israel  Vogdes. 


6th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  John  Spei- 
del. 

39th  Illinois,  Col.  Thomas  O.  Osborn. 

4th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Louis  Bell. 
100th  New  York,  Col.  George  B.  Dandy. 
62d  Ohio,  Lieut.  Col.  Clemens  F.  Steele. 
67th  Ohio,  Col.  Alvin  C.  Voris. 

85th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Joshua  B.  How- 
ell. 


i 1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (detachment). 

I 3d  New  York  Light  Artillery  (one  com- 
pany), Capt.  Edwin  S.  Jenney. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery  (two  compa- 
nies). 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C,  Lieut.  Cor- 
nelius Hook. 

1st  New  York  Engineers  (three  compa- 
nies), Maj.  James  E.  Place. 


SEABROOK  ISLAND. 
Brig.  Gen.  Orris  S.  Ferry. 


Stevenson’s  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thos.*G.  Stevenson. 

10th  Connecticut,  Col.  John  L.  Otis. 

‘24th  Mass.,  Col.  Francis  A.  Osborn. 

56th  New  York,  Col.  Charles  H.  Van 
Wyck. 

97th  Pennsylvania,  Maj.  Galusha  Penny- 
packer. 


Guss’  Brigade. 

Col.  Henry  R.  Guss. 

3d  N.  H.,  Col.  John  H.  Jackson. 

76th  Pa.,  Lieut.  Col.  John  C.  Campbell. 

3d  New  York  Artillery,  Company  B, 
Lieut.  Samuel  C.  Day. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  I, 
Lieut.  James  H.  Harold. 


HILTON  HEAD  ISLAND. 


Col.  John  L.  Chatfield. 


8th  Maine,  Col.  John  D.  Rust. 

9th  Maine,  Lieut.  Col.  Sabine  Emery. 
115th  New  York,  Col.  Simeon  Sammon. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Companies 
I and  M. 


3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery  (eight  compa- 
nies), Col.  Edwin  Metcalf. 

1st  U.  S.  Art.,  Bat.  B,  Lieut. Guy  Y.  Henry. 
3d  U.  S.  Art. , Bat.  E,  Capt.  Jno.  Hamilton. 
1st  New  York  Engineers  (three  compa-* 
nies),  Col.  Edward  W.  Serrell, 


462 


COASTS  OF  S.  e , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXVL 


PORT  ROYAL  ISLAND. 


Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton. 


11th  Maine,  Col.  Harris  M.  Plaistecl. 
Enfans  Perdus,  New  York  (eight  cos.), 
Capt.  M.  Schmitt. 

52d  Pennsylvania, Col.  J ohn  C .Dodge,  jr. 
55th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Richard  White. 
104th  Pa.,  Lieut.  Col.  Thompson  D.  Hart. 
174th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  John  Nyce. 
176th  Pa.,  Col.  Ambrose  A.  Lechler. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (three  com- 
panies). 


1st  Connecticut  Battalion,  Capt.  Alfred 
P.  Rockwell. 

3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Cos.  A and  C, 
Lieut.  Edward  F.  Curtis,  Qapt. 
Charles  R.  Brayton. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battalions  D and  M, 
Lieut.  Joseph  P.  Sanger,  Capt. 
Loomis  L.  Langdon. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  K, 
Capt.  Henry  L.  Southard. 


FORT  PULASKI,  GA. 
Col.  William  B.  Barton. 


48th  New  York,  Col.  William  B.  Barton. 

1st  New  York  Engineers,  Company  F,  Capt.  Samuel  C.  Eaton. 
3d  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Company  G,  Capt.  John  H.  Gould. 


OSS AB AW  ISLAND,  GA. 


47th  New  York,  Maj.  David  A.  Allen. 

SAINT  AUGUSTINE,  FLA. 

7th  Connecticut,  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley. 

1 

FERNANDINA,  FLA. 


7th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Haldimand  S.  Putnam. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  C.,  June  3,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Andrew,  Massachusetts : 

Governor  : I have  the  honor  to  announce  that  the  fifty- fourth  Massa- 
chusetts (colored  troops),  Colonel  Shaw  commanding,  arrived  safely  in  I 
this  harbor  this  afternoon  and  have  been  sent  to  Port  Royal  Island. 
The  regiment  had  an  excellent  passage,  and  from  the  appearance  of  the 
men  I doubt  not  that  this  command  will  yet  win  a reputation  and  place  \ 
in  history  deserving  the  patronage  you  have  given  them.  Just  as  they 
were  steaming  up  the  bay  I received  from  Col.  James  Montgomery,  com- 
manding Second  South  Carolina  Kegiment,  a telegraphic  dispatch,  of 
which  certified  copy  is  inclosed.*  Colonel  Montgomery’s  is  but  the  initial  ! 
step  of  a system  of  operations  which  will  rapidly  compel  the  rebels-either 
to  lay  down  their  arms  and  sue  for  restoration  to  the  Union  or  to  with- 
draw their  slaves  into  ihe  interior,  thus  leaving  desolate  the  most  fertile  j 
and  productive  of  their  counties  along  the  Atlantic  sea-board. 

The  Fifty-fourth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  shall  soon  be  j 
profitably  and  honorably  employed,  and  I beg  that  you  will  send  for 
service  in  this  department  the  other  colored  regiments  which  Colonel 


Not  found. 


463 


OiTAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Shaw  tells  me  you  are  now  organizing  aud  have  in  forward  prepara- 
tion. 

Thanking  you  heartily  for  the  kindness  and  promptness  with  which 
you  have  met  my  views  in  this  matter,  and  referring  you  to  my  letter 
to  Mr.  Jefferson  Davis  as  a guarantee  that  all  soldiers  fighting  for  the 
flag  of  their  country  in  this  department  will  be  protected  irrespective 
of  any  accident  of  color  or  birth,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  Governor,  with 
the  highest  esteem,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , 8.  0.,  June  3,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , J).  C.: 

Sir:  I have  much  pleasure  in  transmitting  to  you  herewith  certified 
copy  of  a telegraphic  report  * just  received  from  Gol.  James  Montgomery, 
commanding  Second  South  Carolina  Regiment,  of  the  result  of  the  first 
of  a series  of  raids  upon  the.  main-land,  now  organized  and  in  process 
of  being  carried  out. 

From  the  report  you  will  see  that  Colonel  Montgomery,  with  300  men 
of  his  regiment  and  a section  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Battery,  com- 
manded by  Captain  Brayton,  penetrated  the  country  of  the  enemy  25 
miles,  destroyed  a pontoon  bridge  across  the  Combahee  River,  together 
with  a vast  amount  of  cotton,  rice,  and  other  property,  and  brought 
away  with  him  725  slaves  and  some  5 horses. 

This  expedition  is  but  the  initial  experiment  of  a system  of  incur- 
sions which  will  penetrate  up  all  the  inlets,  creeks,  and  rivers  of  this 
department,  and  to  be  used  in  which  I am  now  having  several  of  our 
light-draught  transport  steamers  supplied  with  bulwarks  of  boiler-iron 
to  protect  the  troops  on  board  from  musketry  and  rifles ; such  steamers 
carrying  10  and  20-pounder  howitzers  in  their  bows. 

I have  also  to  report  that  Colonel  Hawley,  Seventh  Regiment  Con- 
necticut Volunteers,  commanding  Saint  Augustine,  recently  made  a 
raid  into  the  interior,  in  which  he  captured  118  head  of  cattle  and  many 
mules  and  horses,  the  cattle  belonging  to  one  Feitch,  who  was  a con- 
tractor for  supplying  beef  to  the  rebel  army. 

Colonel  Montgomery  with  his  forces  will  repeat  his  incursions  as 
rapidly  as  possible  in  different  directions,  injuring  the  enemy  all  he  can 
and  carrying  away  their  slaves,  thus  rapidly  filling  up  the  South  Caro- 
lina regiments  in  the  department,  of  which  there  are  now  four. 

The  Fifty-fourth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  (colored),  Colo- 
nel Shaw  commanding,  arrived  to-day  in  good  condition,  aud  appear  an 
excellent  regiment,  over  900  strong.  They  will  soon  have  abundant  and 
very  important  employment,  as  will  all  other  regiments,  white  or  col- 
ored, that  may  be  sent  to  re-enforce  this  department. 

Congratulating  you  and  the  country  on  the  favorable  aspect  of  affairs 
in  the  Southwest,  and  hoping  soon  to  be  in  a position  to  send  you  good 
news  from  this  department,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  with  the  highest 
esteem,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Not  found, 


464 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  (7.,  June  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces , Hilton  Head,  8.  C.: 

General:  In  the  absence  from  these  immediate  headquarters  of 
General  Beauregard  it  is  my  place  to  ask  your  attention  to  the  fol- 
lowing : _ . 

Brigadier-General  Walker,  commanding  0.  S.  forces  Poco  tali  go,  rep- 
resents that  it  has  become  the  practice,  whenever  he  has  occasion  to 
communicate  with  the  military  authorities  of  the  United  States  in  his 
quarter  by  flag  of  truce,  to  receive  the  flag  by  a detachment  of  negroes, 
commanded  by  officers  belonging  to  regiments  of  negroes,  which  off 
course  debars  us  from  farther  communication.  On  the  other  hand,  when 
the  flag  originates  with  the  United  States  authorities  it  is  borne  and 
escorted  by  detachments  of  white  soldiers  and  officers  of  white  regi- 
ments. The  virtual  effect  of  which  is  apparent  to  exclude  us  from  all 
communication  by  flags  of  truce,  while  our  enemy  retains  that  privilege 
by  compliance  in  "the  composition  of  the  escort  of  his  flag  with  our  regu- 
lations. I cannot  believe  that  this  is  your  actual  intention,  that  is,  that 
you  have  determined  by  the  obnoxious  complexion  of  the  detachment 
sent  to  receive  our  flags  to  reject  all  flag^  of  truce  from  our  side,  while 
exercising  the  privilege  of  the  flag  of  truce  to  its  fullest  extent  on  your 
own  side.  Therefore  am  I induced  to  present  the  matter  frankly  and 
plainly  for  your  consideration,  and  to  ask  to  be  made  acquainted  with 
your  future  "intentions  in  the  premises. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J F ■ THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Brigadier- General,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 
No.  249.  ] Washington , June  3,  1863. 


V.  By  direction  of  the  President  Major-General  Hunter  is  tempo- 
rarily relieved  from  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  and  will  j 
report  to  the  Adjutant-General  for  special  duty  in  Washington.  Brig,  i 
Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore  is  assigned  by  the  President  to  the  temporary  com- 
mand of  the  Department  of  the  South.* 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck:  ^ ^ K ELTON 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


New  York,  June  4, 1863. 

Capt.  G.  Y.  Fox, 

Assistant  Secretary  oj  the  Navy , Washington , B.  G.  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  I learn  by  conference  with  Admiral  Foote  that 
fifteen  or  twenty  days  may  possibly  elapse  before  lie  can  start  South. 
As  I expect  to  start  by  Monday  next  at  furthest,  and  as  it  may  be  ol 
vital  importance  for  us  to  secure  a lodgment  on  Morris  Island  before  its 
defenses,  now  rapidly  progressing,  are  complete,  I respectfully  request 


* Under  tliis  order  Hunter  was  relieved  by  Gillmore  June  12,  1863. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


465 


hap.  XXVI.] 


hat  Admiral  DuPont  be  advised  to  co-operate  in  such  preliminary 
>perations  as  it  may  be  necessary  to  inaugurate  in  order  to  secure  that 

*nd. 

Admirals  Foote  and  Dahlgren  coincide  with  me  in  this  view  of  the 


natter. 

Very  respectfully,  your 


obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier-  General . 


New  York,  June  5,  1863. 

Vlaj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington,  D.  C.  : 

Sir  : I arrived  here  yesterday  morning,  and  learned  during  the  day 
rom  the  quartermaster  that  the  Arago  would  sail  to-day.  As  I had  to 
ook  after  some  important  matters,  I arranged  to  have  another  steamer 
lelonging  to  Port  Royal  (the  Ben  De  Ford)  start  on  Monday  morning, 
md  my  present  plan  is  to  go  in  that  way. 

I ask  authority  to  purchase  2 scows,  5 or  6 telescopic  rifles,  and  4 
of  David  Smith’s  batteries  of  small  rifles,  comprising  25  rifle  barrels, 
irranged  to  be  fired  simultaneously.  I am  acquainted  with  this  piece, 
and  it  is  now  in  service  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf.  It  is  strongly 
recommended  by  Colonel  Delafield  and  other  good  judges.  Orders  to 
the  proper  departments  to  pay  for  these  articles  should  be  given.  I 
saw  Admiral  Foote  yesterday.  He  does  not  expect  to  start  South  for 
fifteen  or  twenty  days.  Instructions  should  be  obtained  from  the  Navy 
Department  to  Admiral  DuPont  to  co-operate  zealously  in  any  initiatory 
steps  which  may  be  advisedly  taken  to  obtain  a lodgment  on  Morris 
hsland  before  its  defenses  are  completed.  It  would  be  well  I think  that 
I should  be  the  bearer  of  these  instructions  myself. 

Admirals  Foote  and  Dahlgren  coincide  With  my  views  on  this  point. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier - General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head,  Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  June  8,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff , tfcc.,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

General  : In  reply  to  your  communication  dated  June  3, 1863,  sent 
through  the  senior  naval  officer  U.  S.  forces  oft  Charleston  and  signed 
by  you  in  the  temporary  absence  of  General  Beauregard,  I have  the 
honor  to  state — 

That  no  invidious  distinction,  as  you  seem  to  suppose,  was  intended 
to  be  made  between  the  class  of  officers  instructed  to  receive  flags  of 
truce  from  you  and  those  sent  by  me  with  flags  of  truce  to  your  lines. 

The  Government  of  the  United  States  recognizes  no  difference  be- 
tween officers  mustered  into  her  service  and  fighting  under  her  flag. 
All  are  equally  competent  to  be  intrusted  with  the  duties  of  their  re- 
spective positions,  and  all  are  accorded  equal  protection  and  rights. 

It  is  the  invariable  practice  of  all  armies  for  the  senior  officer  on  out- 
post duty  to  receive  flags  of  truce  sent  to  that  portion  of  the  lines 

30  R R— VOL  XIV 


466 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

under  his  charge,  and  it  happened  on  the  occasion  of  your  sending 
a flag  to  which  you  refer  that  the  regiment  on  duty  was  the  First 
South  Carolina  Eegiment  of  loyal  volunteers.  No  change  of  the  regular 
practice  was  thought  necessary  in  the  case,  nor  can  any  change  of  the 
practice,  invidious  to  any  portion  of  the  soldiers  of  the  United  States, 
be  allowed.  The  flag  of  the  United  States  covers  all  its  defenders  with 
equal  honor  and  protection,  irrespective  of  any  accidents  of  color.  This 
is  now  the  avowed  and  settled  policy  of  my  Government  and  of  all 
other  governments  under  whose  flags  colored  soldiers,  whether  African 
or  East  Indian,  have  been  or  are  employed.  No  principle  of  interna- 
tional military  usage  is  better  settled  or  more  universally  recognized 
amongst  civilized  nations.  The  flag  ol  truce  sent  to  you  by  my  order 
was,  as  is  also  usual,  intrusted  to  a staft  officer  of  the  post  through 
which  it  was  sent,  and  in  so  sending  it  no  regard  was  had  to  the  fact 
whether  he  was  or  was  not  commissioned  to  serve  with  colored  troops. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

. D.  HUNTEE, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  C.,  June  9,  1863. 

Col.  James  Montgomery, 

Comdg.  Second  S.  C.  Eegiment , Saint  Simon’s  Island  : 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  of  transmitting  herewith  a copy  of  Gen- 
eral Orders,  No.  100,  of  the  War  Department,  current  series,  promulgat- 
ing a system  of  “ Instructions  for  the  government  of  armies  of  the  United 
States  in  the  field,”  prepared  by  an  eminent  international  and  military 
jurist,  Dr.  Francis  Lieber,  revised  by  a board  of  high  officers,  and  ap- 
proved and  established  by  the  President  of  the  United  States.* 

To  sections  I,  II,  III  of  these  instructions  I beg  to  call  your  particular 
attention  5 not  that  in  any  manner  I doubt  the  justice  or  generosity  of 
your  judgment,  but  for  the  reason  that  it  is  peculiarly  important,  in 
view  of  the  questions  which  have  heretofore  surrounded  the  employ- 
ment of  colored  troops  in  the  armies  of  the  United  States,  to  give  our 
enemies  (foreign  and  domestic)  as  little  ground  as  possible  for  alleging 
any  violation  of  the  laws  and  usages  of  civilized  warfare  as  a palliation 
for  these  atrocities  which  are  threatened  against  the  men  and  officers 
of  commands  similar  to  your  own.  If,  as  is  threatened  by  the  rebel 
Congress,  this  war  has  eventually  to  degenerate 4nto  a barbarous  and 
savage  conflict,  softened  by  none  of  the  amenities  and  rights  established 
by  the  wisdom  and  civilization  of  the  world  through  successive  cen- 
turies of  struggle,  it  is  of  the  first  moment  that  the  infamy  of  this  de- 
terioration should  rest  exclusively  and  without  excuse  upon  the  rebel 
Government.  It  will  therefore  be  necessary  for  you  to  exercise  the 
utmost  strictness  in  insisting  upon  compliance  with  the  instructions 
herewith  sent,  and  you  will  avoid  any  devastation  which  does  not  strike 
immediately  at  the  resources  or  material  of  the  armed  insurrection  which  ! 
we  are  now  engaged  in  the  task  of  suppressing. 

All  fugitives  who  come  within  our  lines  you  will  receive,  welcome, 
and  protect.  Such  of  them  as  are  able-bodied  men  you  will  at  once 
enroll  and  arm  as  soldiers.  You  will  take  all  horses  and  mules  avail- 
able for  transportation  to  the  enemy  j also  all  cattle  and  other  food 


To  appear  in  Series  III. 


HAP.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


467 


riiich  can  be  of  service  to  our  forces.  As  the  rebel  Government  has  laid 
,11  grain  and  produce  under  conscription,  to  be  taken  at  will  for  the  use 
if  its  armed  adherents,  you  will  be  justified  in  destroying  all  stores  of 
his  kind  which  you  shall  not  be  able  to  remove 5 but  the  destruction 
>f  crops  in  the  ground,  which  may  not  be  fit  for  use  until  the  rebellion 
3 over,  or  which  may  when  ripe  be  of  service  to  the  forces  of  our  Gov- 
rnment  occupying  the  enemy’s  country,  you  will  not  engage  in  with- 
>ut  mature  consideration.  This  right  of  war,  though  unquestionable 
q certain  extreme  cases,  is  not  to  be  lightly  used,  and  if  wantonly  used 
(light  fall  under  that  part  of  the  instructions  which  prohibits  devasta- 
ion.  All  household  furniture,  libraries,  churches,  and  hospitals  you 
rill  of  course  spare. 

That  the  wickedness  and  folly  of  the  enemy  may  soon  place  us  in  a 
losition  where  the  immutable  laws  of  self-defense  and  the  stern  necess- 
ity of  retaliation  will  not  only  justify  but  enjoin  every  conceivable 
pecies  of  injury  is  only  to  be  too  clearly  apprehended;  but  until  such 
une  shall  have  arrived,  and  until  the  proof,  not  merely  of  declarations 
r resolves  but  of  acts,  is  unmistakable,  it  will  be  both  right  and  wise 
0 hold  the  troops  under  your  command  to  the  very  strictest  interpreta- 
ion  of  the  laws  and  usages  of  civilized  warfare. 

Expressing  the  highest  confidence  in  your  courage,  skill,  humanity, 
,nd  discretion,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

D.  HUNTER, 

Major - General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , Port  Royal,  8.  C.,  June  10,  1863. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Cliief  TJ.  8.  Army,  Washington  City,  D.  C. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  tele- 
ram directing  that  all  exchanges  shall  cease,  and  that  all  rebel  pris- 
ners  shall  be  held  in  close  custody  under  guard  until  further  orders. 

I take  this  occasion  to  renew  most  respectfully  my  request  for  a regi- 
ieni  of  cavalry,  or  that  the  two  battalions  First  Massachusetts  Cav- 
Iry,  now  at  the  North,  may  be  remanded  to  service  in  this  department, 
riiich  one  battalion  of  the  regiment  (our  entire  cavalry  force)  has  never 
3ft.  A statement  of  the  circumstances  under  which  these  two  battal- 
)ns  were  sent  North  will,  I believe,  justify  my  urgent  request  for  their 
jeturn.  — 

The  whole  regiment  was  ordered  North  last  August,  partly  no  doubt 
mm  a pressing  need  for  re-enforcements  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
ut  still  more  perhaps  in  answer  to  the  unofficial  personal  appeals  of 
laj.  Robert  Williams,  assistant  adjutant-general,  then  its  colonel.  Im- 
lediately  on  receiving  the  order  to  send  the  regiment  North  I at  once 
astened  to  comply  therewith,  at  the  same  time  forwarding  a respectful 
emonstrance  against  stripping  this  department  of  its  cavalry;  a depart- 
ment from  the  extent  of  its  exposed  fronts  particularly  needing  cavalry 
)r  picket  and  patrol  duty. 

The  justice  of  the  remonstrance  was  promptly  acknowledged  by  an 
rder  for  the  retention  of  the  First  Massachusetts  Cavalry  in  the  de- 
artment,  but  before  this  revocation  was  received  my  promptness  in 
xecuting  the  first  order  had  left  only  one  battalion  to  be  retained. 


468 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Crap.  XXVL 

I very  urgently  request,  therefore,  that  the  portion  of  this  regiment 
now  North  may  be  sent  to  me  without  delay,  or  that  another  cavalry 
regiment  be  ordered  to  duty  in  this  department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General. 


Abstract  from,  Tri-monthly  Consolidated  Report  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  Maj.  Gen. 
David  Hunter  commanding,  for  June  10,  1863;  headquarters  Hilton  Head , Port  Royal, 
S.  C. 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  and 

absent. 

Aggregate  present  and 

absent  last  return. 

i it 

1 

! s- 

! 1 
© 

i * 

Officers. 

Men. 

Department  staff 

16 

48 

65 

67 

67 

i 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  Israel  Vogdes 

197 

3, 757 

4,711 

5,701 

5,  723 

16 

Seabrook  Island,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  T.  G.  Stevenson 

91 

1,  981 

2,  657 

3,213 

4,  769 

16 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  R.  Saxton 

184 

3,326 

4.  280 

5, 728 

6,  641 

10 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  Col.  J.  L.  Cbatfield 

121 

2,  728 

3,  859 

4,480 

4, 496 

10 

Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C.,  Col.  Henry  R.  Guss 

35 

844 

984 

1,470 

1,024 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  Col.  W.  B.  Barton 

! 30 

751 

945 

1,  024 

Ossabaw  Island,  Ga.,  Maj.  D.  A.  Allen j 

j 16 

393 

468 

540 

559 

Fernandina,  Fla.,  Col.  H.  M.  Plaisted 

24 

337 

433 

566 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley 

! 19 

466 

626 

704 

703 

. 1 

En  route  for  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  Col.  H.  S.  Putnam 

32 

529 

672 

727 

755 

Grand  total 

765 

15,160 

19, 700 

24,250 

24,  737  j 

M 

Command. 


Department  staff 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  Frig.  Gen.  Israel  Vogdes 

Seabrook  Island,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  T.  G.  Stevenson. . . 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  R.  Saxton 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  Col.  J.  L.  Chatfield 

Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C.,  Col.  Henry  R.  Guss 

Fort  Pulaski,  Ga.,  Col.  W.  B.  Barton 

Ossabaw  Island,  Ga.,  Maj.  D.  A.  Allen 

Fernandina,  Fla.,  Col.  H.  M.  Plaisted  

Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  Col.  Joseph  R.  Hawley 

En  route  for  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  Col.  H.  S.  Putnam. 

Grand  total 


Present  for  duty  equipped. 

• 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

j Men. 

189 

91 

164 

76 

34 

28 

16 

24 

19 

32 

3, 688 
1,  996 
3,  077 
| 1,773 
844 
771 
393 
361 
466 
529 

1 

24 

9 

2 

9 

35 

22* 

94 

401 

694 

CO  ^ 

101 

87 

2 

67 

673 

13,  898 

8 

212 

57 

1,4*1 

Chap,  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


469 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  South,- Maj.  Gen.  David 
Hunter  commanding , June  10,  18G3. 


FOLLY  ISLAND. 

Brig.  Gen.  Israel  Vogdes. 

| 6th  Connecticut. 

39th  Illinois. 

4th  New  Hampshire. 

100th  New  York. 

| 62d  Ohio. 

67th  Ohio. 

85th  Pennsylvania. 

HILTON  HEAD. 

Col.  John  L.  Chatfield. 

8th  Maine. 

115th  New  York. 

3d  Rhode  Island. 

1st  New  York  Engineers. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  B. 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E. 

1st  Massachusetts  Cav.,  Cos.  I and  M. 

SEABBOOK  ISLAND. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  G.  Stevenson. 

10th  Connecticut, 
i 24th  Massachusetts. 

56th  New  York. 

97th  Pennsylvania. 


SAINT  HELENA  ISLAND. 

Col.  Henry  R.  Guss. 

9th  Maine. 

7th  New  Hampshire. 

76th  Pennsylvania. 

97th  Pennsylvania. 

BE  A UFOBT. 

Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton. 

52d  Pennsylvania. 

55th  Pennsylvania. 

104th  Pennsylvania. 

174th  Pennsylvania. 

176th  Pennsylvania. 

Independent  New  York  Battalion. 

1st  Connecticut  Battery. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  C,D,  and  M„ 
1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Third  Bat- 
talion. 

UNATTACHED. 

7th  Connecticut  (Saint  Augustine,  Fla.)* 
11th  Maine  (Fernandina,  Fla). 

| 47th  New  York  (Ossabaw  Island). 

48th  New  York  (Fort  Pulaski). 


Princeton,  NT.  J.,  June  25,  1803. 

His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States  : 

Sir  : You  cannot  fail  to  be  aware  that  my  removal  from  the  command 
of  the  Department  of  the  South  has  been  all  but  universally  regarded 
as  a censure  on  my  conduct  while  in  that  command. 

Satisfied  and  well  knowing  that  I acted  throughout  in  strict  obe- 
dience to  orders,  and  that  my  record  when  published  will  prove  an 
ample  vindication  of  my  course,  I now  respectfully  request  of  you  lib- 
erty to  make  such  publication  of  official  documents  and  records  as  may 
be  necessary  to  set  me  right  in  the  eyes  of  my  friends  and  in  the  justice 
of  history.  The  time  has  now  passed  when  any  injurious  effect  to  the 
public  service  could  possibly  arise  from  such  publication. 

Knowing  how  greatly  your  time  is  occupied,  I shall  regard  your  silence 
in  reply  to  this  note  as  giving  me  the  liberty  I ask  and  will  act  accord- 
ingly . Should  you  deem  such  publications  as  I propose  unadvisable, 
will  you  be  kind  enough  to  notify  me  of  your  opinion  without  delay  'f 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General. 


470  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL  j 

Executive  Mansion, 

Washington , June  30, 1S63. 

Major-General  Hunter  : 

My  Dear  General  : I have  just  received  your  letter  of  the  25th  of 
June. 

I assure  you,  and  you  may  feel  authorized  in  stating,  that  the  recent  1 
change  of  commanders  in  the  Department  of  the  South  was  made  for  I 
no  reasons  which  convey  any  imputation  upon  your  known  energy,  I 
efficiency,  and  patriotism  ; but  for  causes  which  seemed  sufficient,  while  l 
they  were  in  no  degree  incompatible  with  the  respect  and  esteem  in 
which  I have  always  held  you  as  a man  and  an  officer, 

I cannot,  by  giving  my  consent  to  a publication  of  whose  details  I 
know  nothing,  assume  the  responsibility  of  whatever  you  may  write.  I 
In  this  matter  your  own  sense  of  military  propriety  must  be  your  guide  \ 
and  the  regulations  of  the  service  your  rule  of  conduct. 

I am,  very  truly,  your  friend, 

A.  LINCOLN. 


confederate  coRRESiPOiN’iDEisrc e , etc. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo , April  11, 1862. 

General  N.  G.  Evans, 

Commanding  Third  Military  District : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say 
to  you  that  he  desires  you  to  look  rather  to  the  approach  of  the  enemy 
by  the  Willstown  road  than  to  the  holdiug  of  the  point  of  .your  line. 
You  will  therefore  make  such  disposition  of  the  troops  of  your  district 
as  will  enable  you  to  concentrate  toward  Eantowles  Bridge  to  resist 
the  enemy  should  he  approach  in  that  direction.  The  general  also 
suggests  the  immediate  withdrawal  of  all  batteries  not  absolutely  nec- 
essary to  the  protection  of  Charleston. 

We  need  all  the  guns  we  can  obtain  for  the  defense  of  our  extensive 
interior  lines  of  intrenchments. 

Two' regiments  have  been  ordered  to  Tennessee  from  General  Kipley’s 
command  and  two  from  the  Fifth  Military  District.  It  becomes  there- 
fore more  necessary  for  you  to  have  your  forces  in  hand  and  aid  General 


Bipley  if  called  upon. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Run , 8.  C.,  April  12,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  8.  (7.,  Ga .,  and  Fla.,  Pocotaligo , 8.  C.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  offi- 
cial letter  of  the  11th  instant  relative  to  the  concentration  of  the  forces 
of  this  military  district,  removal  of  batteries,  &c.  I have  contemplated 
for  some  weeks  to  concentrate  all  my  forces  on  the  main  land  near  this 
place,  leaving  the  forces  now  on  the  Wadmalaw  Eiver  in  their  present 
position,  but  on  account  of  the  demonstration  on  Edisto  Island  I have 
expected  an  attack  on  Slann’s  Island. 


Ihap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  471 

The  enemy  has  largely  increased  his  force  on  Edisto  Island,  and  has 
•eoccupied  Little  Edisto  and  Whooping  Islands,  directly  opposite  Pine- 
)erry,  on  the  Edisto  Ferry,  at  either  of  which  localities  he  can  land  any 
force  within  5 miles  of  these  headquarters,  where  all  our  stores  and  sick 
ire.  Hence  I have  deemed  it  essential  to  have  a force  near  my  intrench- 
nents  on  Slann’s  Island  Creek,  as  well  as  to  contest  his  gaining  a posi- 
ion  on  the  main  land  at  Pineberry.  Should  the  enemy  land  at  White 
?oint,  which  he  can  do  at  his  option,  he  could  easily  take  this  place, 
lad  I no  force  convenient  to  meet  him.  Eantowles  Bridge  is  24  miles 
rom  White  Point,  and  of  course  the  railroad,  only  12  miles,  could  be 
easily  seized  if  the  march  of  the  foe  is  not  checked.  The  force  on  John’s 
ind  Wadmalaw  Islands  1 consider  essentially  necessary  to  the  safety  of 
he  troops  on  the  main  land.  To  prevent  any  movement  of  the  enemy  to 
put  off  my  main  land  force  I have  made  preparations  to  check  his  land- 
ing at  Simmons’  Bluff  and  also  at  Togodo  Creek.  But  I am  of  the  opinion 
hat,  should  he  land  between  this  point  and  Church  Flats,  he  could  be 
easily  attacked  in  front  by  General  Ripley  (and  the  forces  I have  already 
n position  within  striking  distance  of  Eantowles),  and  I could  with  my 
force  from  other  positions  attack  his  rear  and  left  flank,  which  move- 
ments, if  done  in  concert,  will  certainly  retard  his  march  on  the  city  of 
Jharleston,  if  not  successful  in  cutting  off  his  entire  army  from  their 
| e-enforcements.  I have  ordered  the  guns  at  Willstown  to  be  removed 
mmediately,  and,  should  I not  receive  further  instructions,  will  send 
hem  to  Eantowles.  The  Pineberry  Battery  of  two  guns  will  also  be 
moved  in  a few  days.  The  Willstown  road  has  always  been  my  base 
line  of  operations,  and  I have  now  a regiment  of  infantry,  two  batteries, 
nd  a cavalry  force  between  the  road  and  Wadmalaw  River,  with  in- 
tructions  to  contest  the  landing  of  the  enemy.  It  is  impossible  for  me 
o vacate  this  place  and  protect  the  railroad,  and  to  defend  it  will  re- 
[uire  the  force  I have  now  in  advance.  General  Ripley  and  myself  have 
pad  an  understanding  for  mutual  support  of  each  other.  I have  deter- 
mined to  check  the  enemy  as  much  as  possible,  falling  back  to  Ran- 
lowles,  where  our  commands  would  be  united.  I would  respectfully 
uggest  the  necessity  of  a platform  train,  to  be  kept  either  at  Jackson- 
>orough  or  Adams  Run  Depot,  in  order  to  more  speedily  effect  the 
initiug  of  our  troops  in  case  I should  be  compelled  to  retire  to  Jack- 
ionborough. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1ST.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond,  Va.,  April  14,  1862. 

Jaj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Department , Pocotaligo , S.  C.  : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  9th  instant,*  to  the  Adjutant  and  In- 
pector  General,  concerning  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  re  enlistments 
n the  State  troops  and  the  connection  of  railroads  in  Augusta,  has 
>een  referred  to  General  Lee,  who  directs  me  to  say  that  it  is  of  the  ut- 
most importance  that  the  State  troops  now  around  Savannah  continue 
n service,  either  that  of  the  State  or  the  Confederacy.  He  had  previ- 
>usly  written  to  General  Lawton  to  this  effect,  and  hopes  no  efforts  will 

* See  Series  I,  Vol.  VI,  p.  430. 


472 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


be  spared  to  secure  them.  The  bill  now  before  Congress,  and  which  it 
is  hoped  will  pass,  requiring  that  all  the  male  pppulation  between  the 
ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five  be  made  subject  to  military  duty,  by 
draft  or  conscription,  will  have  a very  material  effect  in  promoting 
re-enlistments,  and  will  prevent  the  disorganization  of  the  troops  in 
your  department  whose  terms  are  about  to  expire.  As  regards  the  rail- 
road connection  in  Augusta,  he  was  in  hopes  that  the  matter  had  been 
arranged  before  this  between  the  railroad  officials  and  the  civil  authori- 
ties. He  agrees  with  you  as  to  its  importance,  and  before  leaving  Savan- 
nah had  corresponded  both  with  Governor  Brown  and  Mr.  Willis,  the 
superintendent  of  the  Augusta  and  Savannah  Railroad,  and  at  that 
time  there  seemed  to  be  no  impediment  to  the  immediate  prosecution  of 
the  work. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah , April  14,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  R.  Lawton, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia : 

General:  The  more  consideration  I give  to  the  subject  the  morel 
dissatisfied  I am  with  the  present  condition  of  the  mud  batteries  nearj 
Fort  Jackson.  I think  it  most  important  that  additional  strength  be  I 
given  them  at  once.  I have  already  mentioned  sand  as  one  means  ; ill 
it  cannot  be  had  in  quantities  sufficient,  bales  of  cotton  very  closely] 
pressed,  or  rice  straw  made  as  compact  as  possible,  and  in  either  easel 
bound  with  iron  hoops,  might  perhaps  serve  a good  purpose.  Straw! 
and  cotton  bales  thus  arranged  on  the  exterior  of  the  present  parapets! 
and  covered  with  the  same  earth  of  which  the  present  parapets  are  com- 
posed would  certainly  give  strength,  the  principal  objection  being  that] 
either  of  these  substances  might  be  set  on  fire  by  the  enemy’s  shells] 
and  our  view  of  the  attacking  vessels  be  obscured,  whilst  it  would  not] 
interfere  with  their  aim.  I desire  you  to  consult  with  persons  practi-j 
caliy  acquainted  with  the  relative  advantages  of  the  straw  and  cotton] 
as  resisting  mediums,  and  if  necessary  to  test  it  with  shell,  which  may; 
be  done  with  small  charges  and  short  ranges. 

Let  me  hear  from  you  on  this  subject  as  soon  as  possible. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  District  of  'East  and  Middle  Florida, 
Tallahassee , Fla.,  April  15,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  the  general  commanding  the 
department  that  the  First  Regiment  Florida  Volunteer  Cavalry  has  not< 
yet  started  for  Tennessee,  and  inclose  herewith  report  of  Colonel  Davis  j 
as  to  condition  of  horses,  <£c. 

I also  inclose  the  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  delaying  the  re*  < 
moval  of  this  regiment  for  reasons  specified  in  the  order.* 

I respectfully  ask  for  instructions  on  the  subject  of  the  removal  of] 
this  regiment  to  Tennessee.  I was  ordered  to  take  command  of  this 

* Not  found. 


473 


©hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


district  on  the  1st  instant,  and  am  not  responsible  for  the  non-removal 
of  Colonel  Davis7  regiment  of  cavalry.  Will  the  general  commanding 
be  pleased  to  instruct  me  on  this  subject  at  his  earliest  convenience  ? 

I have  the  honor  to  subscribe  myself,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  DILWORTH, 

Colonel , Commanding . 

Capt.  T.  A.  Washington, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Pocotaligo , 8.  C. 


[Inclosure.] 

Camp  Langford,  Fla.,  April  8, 1862. 

Captain  : Soon  after  my  arrival  at  this  post  I caused  an  examination 
to  be  made  of  the  condition  of  the  horses  of  the  First  Kegiment  Florida 
Cavalry,  with  a view  to  ascertain  their  fitness  to  be  marched  to  Tennes- 
see. I regret  to  say  that  owing  to  hard  service,  want  of  all  food  for 
days  at  a time,  and  an  entire  absence  of  long  forage  for  nearly  two 
months,  all  the  horses,  with  few  exceptions,  are  so  much  reduced  as  to 
be  entirely  unfit  for  any  service  which  would  require  that  they  should 
be  used  continually  for  three  days.  I can  use  them  for  scouting  within 
a distance  of  40  or  50  miles  when  they  are  not  ridden  more  than  20  or 
30  miles  in  a day  and  often  rested.  Many  of  them  could  not  do  any 
duty,  they  are  so  much  reduced.  There  are  at  least  200  that  ought  to 
be  condemned  or  put  in  some  wild  pasture.  I think  if  two-thirds  were 
sent  to  Paine’s  Prairie  and  put  to  pasture  the  other  third  would  be  fit 
for  such  service  as  would  be  required  of  them  here.  The  placing  of  the 
broken-down  horses  in  pasture  would  in  six  weeks  put  them  all  in  good 
condition  that  are  capable  of  being  made  serviceable.  A number  of  the 
horses  have  died ; some  have  been  abandoned  on  the  various  marches. 

From  this  statement  the  colonel  will  perceive  that  the  regiment  is 
entirely  unfit  to  proceed  to  Tennessee  as  a cavalry  corps.  If  the  Gov- 
ernment will  mount  it  in  Tennessee  the  men  are  well  instructed  and 
could  render  service.  The  horses  as  they  are  would  not  be  worth  what 
it  would  cost  the  Government  to  feed  them  on  the  road  and  the  pay 
allowed  for  their  use. 

As  we  have  a complete  new  cavalry  equipment,  and  have  good  meu, 
who  have  learned  the  drill,  it  would  be  a matter  of  regret  that  the  regi- 
ment should  not  be  employed  as  cavalry.  I am  using  about  250  men 
as  scouts,  who  are  mounted  on  the  best  horses.  You  are  aware  that 
there  are  250  horses  at  Camp  Mary  Davis,  belonging  to  three  companies 
now  on  duty  here,  dismounted.  These  horses  are  all  in  good  order  and 
capable  of  any  service.  Two  hundred  of  the  horses  here  could  be  put 
in  good  condition  if  not  used  for  one  month,  and  would  be  fit  for  serv- 
ice in  Tennessee.  If  we  condemned  all  the  rest  we  should  lack  to  mount 
the  command  about  400  horses.  The  dismissal  of  the  horses  would  be 
a great  hardship  upon  the  men,  unless  compensation  was  made  by  the 
Government.  They  have  been  rendered  unserviceable  by  reason  of  the 
inability  of  the  Government  to  furnish  forage  and  by  exposure  to  the 
weather.  The  officers  have  become  security  for  the  men  who  bought 
the  horses  on  credit,  and  pay  now  due  would  not  indemnify  them.  I 
do  not  therefore  recommend  the  condemnation  of  the  horses  unless 
some  compensation  is  made  the  men. 

I have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  colonel  commanding  will  make 
such  communication  on  the  subject  to  the  Department  as  he  may  deem 
proper,  that  I may  receive  instructions. 

I have  the  honor,  &c.,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  G.  M.  DAVIS. 


474 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo , April  15,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  K.  G.  Eyans, 

Commanding  Third  Military  District : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  offi- 
cial communication  in  relation  to  the  concentration  of  the  troops  of 
your  command,  and  in  answer  am  instructed  to  inform  you  that  you 
will  make  such  a disposition  of  your  force  as  to  enable  you  to  concen- 
trate as  suggested  in  my  last  letter  to  you,  dated  April  11,  1862. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


State  of  Florida,  Executive  Department, 

• Tallahassee , April  15,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  Yours  of  the instant  relative  to  the  removal  of  the  iron 

from  the  Florida  Eailroad,  leading  from  Fernandina  to  Cedar  Keys,  was 
duly  received,  and  on  the  13th  I inclosed  to  you  copies  of  all  the  cor-  j 
respondence  in  this  Department  on  the  subject. 

When  the  order  given  by  General  Trapier  was  resisted,  the  order,  a 
copy  of  which  you  have,  was  issued  to  General  Floyd,  besides  which  he 
had  a letter  of  instruction. 

Much  was  left  to  the  discretion  of  General  Floyd,  because  I know  him 
to  be  an  officer  of  good  judgment,  having  no  connection  with  any  of  the 
various  party  cliques  in  the  State,  and  a brave  and  honorable  man,  who 
commanded  the  confidence  of  soldiers  and  citizens. 

In  East  Florida  the  citizens  have  been  much  divided  by  local  inter- 
ests, which  has  produced  evil  results,  and  General  Floyd  is  the  only 
gentleman  residing  in  that  part  of  the  State  known  to  me  to  command 
the  respect  of  all  parties. 

The  enemy  have  evacuated  Jacksonville,  but  command  the  river  with 
their  gunboats  j Jacksonville  being  liable  to  attack,  and  without  any 
guns  in  battery  for  its  defense.  From  the  information  received  I have 
no  doubt  they  retired  from  apprehension  of  reports  of  a large  guerrilla 
force  being  near  them. 

I received  a letter  from  General  Lee,  dated  Eichmond,  13th  of  March, 
in  which  he  remarked:  aI  would  suggest  to  Your  Excellency  the  impor- 
tance of  calling  every  available  man  in  Florida  into  the  field.”  The  sug-  I 
gestion  was  highly  appreciated,  but  I knew  it  to  be  with  much  difficulty 
and  at  great  expense  the  forces  already  in  Confederate  service  in  the 
State  and  those  who  were  at  camps  of  instruction  mustered  in  for  the  i 
war  were  being  subsisted,  and  complaint  is  made  to  me  frequently  that  ] 
the  soldiers  suffer  from  hunger,  and  under  such  circumstances  I thought 
it  advisable,  with  all  due  respect  to  General  Lee’s  suggestion,  simply  to 
issue  an  order  to  the  militia  of  the  State  to  be  held  in  readiness  to  be  j 
assembled  upon  a day’s  notice  to  take  up  the  line  of  march  wherever  j 
and  whenever  their  services  might  be  necessary,  and  to  organize  a few 
companies  of  rangers  or  guerrillas  to  confine  the  enemy  to  their  boats. 
Will  the  Government  authorize  defense  of  the  State  by  companies  so  I 
organized,  subject  to  special  orders  and  to  the  command  of  competent  j 
officers  ? 

From  various  causes  beyond  control,  some  of  which  had  been  made  : 


✓hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  475 

inown  to  you,  the  organization  of  companies  into  regiments  for  the  war 
las  been  delayed.  But  in  a few  days  three  full  infantry  regiments  for 
;he  war  will  be  complete,  independent  of  the  four  cavalry  companies 
jailed  for  by  General  Lee,  and  two  artillery  companies  mustered  in  for 
;he  war,  the  one  at  the  arsenal  near  Chattahoochee,  commanded  by  Cap- 
tain Dunham,  150  men,  six  guns,  and  the  other  by  Capt.  R.  H.  Gamble, 
lear  this  place,  about  90  men  and  four  guns.  The  Third  Regiment,  com- 
nanded  by  Col.  W.  S.  Dil worth,  an  intelligent  and  efficient  officer  (the 
)fficer  under  whose  directions  the  batteries  which  commanded  the 
>raise  of  Commodore  DuPont  at  Fernandina),  is  an  efficient  regiment 
ind  well  armed,  and,  together  with  Captain  Dunham’s  artillery,  can  ren- 
ier  efficient  service,  and  will  promptly  obey  orders  to  report  to  General 
Beauregard  or  to  any  other  officer  in  command  at  any  place  where  you 
nay  desire  them  to  be  ordered.  Would  they  not  be  valuable  at  Pen- 
iacola  ? 

If  the  cavalry  regiment  commanded  by  Colonel  Davis  has  been  mus- 
ered  into  service  only  for  twelve  months,  and  I am  informed  such  is 
he  fact,  since  the  abandonment  of  the  coast  defense,  the  regiment  can 
ender  very  efficient  service  in  the  State,  and  I think  it  may  be  best  to 
emain  in  the  State,  as  nearly  half  the  time  for  which  they  were  mus- 
ered  in  has  elapsed;  but  upon  this  subject  I have  no  choice.  One  or 
wo  infantry  regiments  from  the  State  would  perhaps  render  more  effi- 
ient  service  at  less  expense  and  could  be  more  promptly  transported 
mder  active  service,  if  necessary.  But  I confess  the  suggestions  which 
have  heretofore  made  have  claimed  such  slight  consideration  with  the 
Var  Department  that  it  is  with  diffidence  I express  an  opinion,  although 
vents  have  proved  the  correctness  of  opinions  expressed  and  disre- 
garded. A month  ago  I endeavored  to  impress  the  mind  of  the  President 
nd  the  General  Assembly  of  the  State  with  the  fact  that  in  portions  of 
he  State  there  were  traitors  at  heart  who  only  waited  the  opportunity 

0 rally  under  the  protection  of  the  United  States  flag.  It  brought 
own  upon  me  a torrent  of  abuse  from  the  press  of  the  State  from  those 
’ho  sympathized  with  traitors.  But  my  judgment  has  proved  to  have 
>een  correct,  and  I presume  there  are  but  few  reliable  men  of  intelli- 
ence  in  the  State  who  do  not  accord  to  me  some  little  foresight  and 
ow  cordially  support  my  administration,  unless  restrained  by  a species 
f self-esteem  that  I cannot  appreciate.  I have  just  been  informed  by 
udge  Walker  that  Davis’  regiment  has  been  registered  in  the  War 
Apartment  as  having  been  mustered  in  for  the  war  instead  of  twelve 
lonths.  Be  pleased  to  inform  me  if  such  is  the  fact. 

The  Third  Regiment,  commanded  by  Col.  W.  S.  Dilworth,  has  been 
All  drilled,  and  I have  requested  him  to  correspond  with  you  as  to  a 
roper  field  for  its  action  and  that  of  other  infantry  regiments  in  the 
jtate. 

I have  the  honor,  sir,  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

' JOELN  MILTONT. 

1 P*  S. — Colonel  Dilworth  and  several  officers  of  his  regiment  have  re- 
flected me  to  ask  of  you  and  General  Lee  to  have  them  ordered  to  report 
!>  General  Beauregard  or  some  other  officer,  where  they  can  engage  the 
aemy.  I will  write  to  General  Lee  by  to-morrow’s  mail.  The  case 
f arms,  &c.,  which  was  landed  at  Smyrna,  will  appear  by  the  report 
f Colonel  Simpkins  to  be  less  than  it  has  been  represented,  and  in  his 
pinion  efficient  measures  have  been  adopted  to  reclaim  the  property. 

am  informed  there  are  50,000  bales  of  cotton  at  Columbus,  Ga. ; 
),000  at  Eufuala ; 10,000  on  the  bank  of  the  river  below  there. 


476  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XXVL 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  23.  j Pocotaligo , April  15,  1802. 

# * # * * * * 

VI.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist  will  be  assigned  to  duty  in  the  Second 
Military  District,  and  will  report  to  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  command 
ing. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah , April  18,  1862. 


Hon.  James  Chesnut,  Jr., 

Chief  Military  Department,  Columbia , S.  C.: 

Sir:  On  tbe  morning  of  the  16th  instant,  when  on  the  point  of  start 
ing  for  Morris  Island,  Charleston  Harbor,  I had  the  honor  to  receive 
your  communication,  requesting,  in  the  name  of  the  Governor  and  Ex 
ecutive  Council,  that  I would  permit  the  cavalry  force,  Ward’s  fielc 
battery,  and  Graham’s  battalion  of  infantry  to  remain  for  the  present  ir 
the  vicinity  of  Georgetown.  Brigadier-General  Gist  did  me  the  kind 
ness  to  reply  in  part  to  your  inquiries  at  my  request.  For  the  presen- 
I propose  to  bring  in  for  the  protection  of  Charleston  only  Lieutenant 
Colonel  Nesbit’s  battalion.  How  long  I may  be  able  to  continue  Ward’s 
battery  and  Graham’s  battalion  on  their  present  service  it  is  impossibl< 
for  me  now  to  say.  I will  do  so,  however,  until  in  my  judgment  tb< 
exigencies  of  the  service  require  their  removal.  The  cavalry  corps, 
hope  to  be  able  to  leave  where  it  is  • at  all  events,  I do  not  design  am 
change.  It  is  not  in  my  power,  and  I regret  that  it  is  not,  to  placi 
these  troops  under  the  direct  command  of  any  but  Confederate  officers' 
I have  no  doubt,  however,  that  Colonel  Graham,  so  long  as  he  skal 
remain  in  the  neighborhood  of  Georgetown,  will  be  pleased  to  act  ii 
concert  with  General  Harllee. 


I am,  &c., 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah , April  18,  1862. 


Maj.  A.  L.  Long, 

Chief  of  Ordnance  and  Artillery  : 

Major  : I wish  a battery  for  not  less  than  four  guns  constructej 
immediately  on  the  bluff  near  the  city  gas-works.  I place  the  wor. 
under  your  charge.  You  will  call  upon  Brigadier-General  Lawton  fo 
a detaii  of  not  less  than  250  men  from  the  troops  of  his  command  an* 
the  necessary  tools.  I desire  that  no  time  be  lost,  and  that  for  tb 
present  you  give  all  your  attention  to  this  work. 

1 am’  &C’’  J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


477 


General  Orders,  i Hdqrs.  Proy.  Forces,  Dept.  E.  and  M.  Fla., 

> Tallahassee , April  18,  1862. 

No.  17.  ) (Received  at  Richmond,  Va.,  May  1,  1862.) 

The  undersigned  having  been  appointed  brigadier-general  in  the 
Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  and  assigned  by  Special 
Order,  No.  81,  from  the  Secretary  of  War,  to  the  Department  of  East 
and  Middle  Florida,  hereby  assumes  command  of  the  same. 

The  undersigned  calls  upon  officers  of  all  grades  to  aid  him  in  sup- 
pressing the  vice  of  intemperance  in  the  army.  Duty  to  the  soldier  and 
the  service  requires  that  this  should  be  done  at  once. 

The  medical  director  and  the  officers  of  the  medical  department  are 
hereby  required  to  institute  inquiries  in  reference  to  the  cause  of  the  large 
percentage  of  sickness  among  the  troops  at  present,  and  these  officers 
are  earnestly  required  to  adopt  the  most  efficient  measures  for  the  com- 
fort and  convenience  of  the  sick  soldiers  under  their  charge. 

Capt.  J.  L.  Cross,  C.  S.  Army,  is  hereby  temporarily  placed  on  duty 
as  assistant  adjutant  general. 

Maj.  H.  R.  Teasdale,  brigade  quartermaster. 

Maj.  A.  A.  Canova,  brigade  commissary. 

Capt.  T.  E.  Buckman,  temporarily  as  chief  of  ordnance. 

Lieut.  J.  O.  A.  Gerry,  temporarily  as  mustering  officer. 

These  officers  will  be  respected  and  obeyed  accordingly  in  their  re- 
spective departments. 

By  order  of — 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  April  19,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

.Commanding  Department  of  Florida , Tallahassee , Fla. : 

General  : By  direction  of  the  general  commanding  I have  the  honor 
to  say  that  it  is  not  in  his  power,  not  knowing  the  strength  of  your 
command  or  the  particular  necessities  of  your  department  at  this  time, 
to  give  definite  instructions  for  your  government.  The  defense  of  the 
interior  of  the  State  and  the  lines  of  interior  communication  should  be 
the  subject  of  your  particular  attention.  The  rivers  Apalachicola  and 
Saint  John’s  are  of  primary  imjmrtance,  and  the  most  eligible  points 
tor  their  defense  should  be  at  once  taken,  if  not  already  selected,  and 
fortified.  It  is  not  presumed,  from  present  appearances  or  from  any 
object  likely  to  be  attained,  that  the  enemy  will  occupy  Florida  in  force. 

You  should,  however,  preserve  a sufficient  body  of  troops  for  the  pur- 
poses above  mentioned,  and  also  to  give  protection  to  any  arms,  muni- 
tions, &c.,  that  may  be  run  into  any  port  or  that  may  be  necessary  to 
transport  by  land.  Except  to  give  protection  to  the  arms,  &c.,  it  will 
not  be  prudent  to  expose  a force  on  the  sea-board.  Having  these  objects 
in  view,  the  general  commanding  desires  you  to  inform  him  whether  you 
will  be  able  to  spare  any  troops  from  your  command  for  service  in  other 
parts  of  the  Confederacy. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


478 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Augusta,  Ga.,  April  19, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton: 

Sir  : I take  the  liberty  to  inclose  an  application  from  several  of  our 
prominent  citizens  on  which  we  desire  immediate  action.  It  has  not 
been  deemed  expedient  to  seek  more  signatures,  though  we  have  no 
doubt  that  the  great  body  of  our  people  would  join  in  it. 

It  is  addressed  directly  to  the  head  of  the  Government,  but  we  place 
it  in  your  hands  as  the  chief  military  commander  in  this  quarter  for  your 
approval,  with  a request  that  you  forward  it,  indorsed  by  yourself, 
forthwith  to  Richmond,  and  should  you  deem  it  proper  to  make  the 
desired  detail  on  your  own  authority  we  would  suggest  the  sooner  it  is 
done  the  better. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

THOMAS  S.  METCALF* 


P.  S. — I also  inclose  the  official  action  of  our  city  authorities. 

, [Indorsements.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo , April  24,  1862. 

This  letter,  addressed  to  myself  by  a prominent  citizen  of  Augustar  1 
Ga.,  together  with  a copy  of  a resolution  of  the  city  council  requesting  I 
the  mayor  to  apply  to  the  proper  authorities  to  have  martial  law  pro-  I 
claimed  in  said  city,  accompanied  the  inclosed  letter  from  the  mayor  to  I 
His  Excellency  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States. 

In  transmitting  these  papers  I beg  leave  to  add  that  in  a telegraphic  I 
dispatch  of  the  12th  instant  I had  the  honor  to  suggest  to  General  R.  I 
E.  Lee,  commanding,  the  propriety  of  declaring  martial  law  in  the  cities  I 
of  Savannah  and  Augusta. 

In  the  present  disorganized  condition  of  the  State  troops  in  Savannah  ] 
it  is  almost  a necessity,  and  I have  no  doubt  would  be  of  great  benefit  | 
to  Augusta  also. 

General  Gardner,  though  still  suffering  from  the  effect  of  his  wound,  J 
would  probably  be  able  to  attend  to  such  duties  as  might  devolve  upon  i 
him. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

' Major-  General , Commanding . \ 

April  28,  1862. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  Secretary  of  War. 

Brig.  Gen.  [W.]  Montgomery  Gardner,  who  is  still  suffering  from  j 
wounds  received  at  battle  of  Manassas,  is  in  Augusta,  and  would  doubt-  J 
less  be  competent  to  the  discharge  of  the  duties  herein  referred  to. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

[Inclosures.] 

Augusta,  Ga.,  April  19, 1862. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

Respected  Sir  : We  beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  needs-  j 
sity  of  having  a military  commandant  at  this  point,  with  such  power  as 
will  enable  him  to  require  all  able-bodied  men  to  enroll  in  such  organi- 
zation as  will  make  them  efficient  for  the  defense  of  our  country  j to 


Jhap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  47$ 

suppress  the  sale  of  liquor,  and  to  do  all  other  things  necessary  for  the 
jood  order  and  welfare  of  our  community  and  country.  This  matter 
ve  most  earnestly  urge  upon  your  early  attention,  and  if  allowable  we 
vould  suggest  the  name  of  General  W.  Montgomery  Gardner  as  an  ac- 
jeptable  commander  for  this  post. 

Respectfully, 

ROBT.  H.  MAY, 

Mayor  City  of  Augusta  [and  others]. 

At  a meeting  of  the  city  council  of  Augusta,  held  April  15,  Mr.  Plumb 
iffered  the  following  resolution  : 

Resolved , That  his  honor  the  mayor  be  requested  to  apply  to  the 
►roper  authorities  to  have  the  city  of  Augusta  placed  under  martial 

iw. 

The  above  is  a true  extract  of  the  minutes  of  council. 

A.  B.  CRUMP, 
Deputy  Cleric  Council, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  April  19, 1862—8.40  p.  m. 
>rig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley  : 

Is  General  Evans  attacked  or  attacking  ? If  attacked,  let  what  re- 
inforcements you  can  send  be  ready  to  support  him  toward  Rantowles. 
will  direct  two  regiments  to  be  ready  to  assist  him  from  General 
rregg’s  command.  Answer.  Keep  your  telegraph  office  open. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTOK. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Pocotaligo , S.  (7.,  April  19, 1862. 

rig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  and  Fifth  Military  Districts  : 

General  : In  consequence  of  recent  demonstrations  on  the  part  of 
te  enemy  in  the  Third  Military  District  I am  instructed  by  the  major- 
meral  commanding  to  say  that  you  will  hold  at  least  two  regiments 
■infantry  in  hand  to  moveto  the  support  of  Brigadier-General  Evans 
; the  shortest  notice  if  required.  The  train  will  be  at  Pocotaligo  Sta- 
on  to  furnish  the  necessary  transportation  if  required. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Savannah,  April  20, 1862—8.40  p.  m. 

rig.  Gen.  A.  R.  Lawton, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia : 

General  : The  Governor  of  the  State  of  Georgia  having  authorized 
e use  of  the  State  arms  turned  in  and  about  to  be  turned  in  by  the 
ate  troops  going  out  of  the  service  to  be  issued  to  Confederate  troops 
i the  coast  of  Georgia  on  condition  that  they  will  not  be  taken  out 


480 


COA.STS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

of  the  State,  you  will  take  possession  of  these  arms  at  once  and  have 
them  issued  on  the  terms  named  by  the  Government,  and  not  permit 
them  to  leave  the  city  of  Savannah. 

I am,  &c.,  _ . 

’ J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va.7  April  20,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Department , Pocotaligo , 8.  C. : 

General:  I regret  very  much  to  be  obliged  to  reduce  the  force  iu 
your  department,  and  would  rather  increase  it  if  possible.  But  fronn 
present  appearances  it  will  be  necessary  to  collect  additional  troops  to] 
oppose  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  who  has  now  reached  the  Rappahanl 
nock,  and  may  move  upon  Richmond  from  that  direction  as  well  as  from! 
the  coast,  where  he  is  assembling  large  bodies  of  troops,  and  I fear  there! 
fore  to  be  obliged  to  draw  further  detachmeuts  from  your  department! 
and  desire  you  to  consider  where  they  can  best  be  spared,  and  to  make! 
every  exertion  to  arm  the  new  regiments  still  remaining  in  Georgia  and] 
South  Carolina.  I have  no  arms  to  send  from  here  but  pikes,  which] 
you  might  place  in  the  hands  of  the  men  at  the  batteries,  and  give  theiij 
guns  to  the  troops  in  the  field.  By  a proper  distribution  of  guns  and  I 
pikes  in  this  way  the  troops  that  are  now  unarmed  might  become  I 
effective.  Can  you  not  send  on  a good  brigade  for  operations  on  the] 
Rappahannock  ? 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General,  I 


Richmond,  Ya.,  April  21,  1862. 

Governor  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Columbia , 8.  C. : 


The  rapid  accumulation  of  enemy’s  forces  on  the  northeast  of  Rich  I 


AJLIC  JL  (ip  IU  aoo  ULU  Uictnvil  Vi  VAJ vaaij  kj  ~ 

mond  requires  the  transfer  of  troops  from  places  of  greater  strength  oi  i 
of  less  immediate  danger.  If  General  Lee  draws  on  General  Pemberc 
ton  for  a brigade  to  defend  Richmond  can  you  send  fresh  troops  tel 

your  coast  to  replace  it?  4 ___ 

^ JEFFERSON  DAVIS.  I 


Richmond,  Ya.,  April  21,  1862.  1 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

A good  brigade  necessary  for  the  defense  of  Richmond.  Send  one  an 
soon  as  possible.  Enemy  preparing  to  advance  from  Fredericksburg] 

Very  respectfully,  _ 

1 ’ R.  E.  LEE.  I 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Pocotaligo , April  21,  1862.  I 

Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg, 

Commanding  Fourth  and  Fifth  Military  Districts: 

General:  I see  no  probability  of  obtaining  Enfield  rifles  to  arm  tin 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  481 

flank  companies  of  other  regiments,  unless  they  are  taken  from  the  cen- 
ter companies  of  the  three  Georgia  regiments  now  stationed  within  the 
Fourth  and  Fifth  Military  Districts  South  Carolina.  You  are  desired, 
therefore,  to  take  measures  to  replace,  by  good,  serviceable,  smooth- 
bored  muskets  from  the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Regiments  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers  the  number  of  Enfield  rifles  now  in  the  hands  of  the  two 
center  companies  of  Colonels  Colquitt  and  Gibson  respectively,  and  to 
transfer  them  (the  rifles)  to  the  flank  companies  of  the  Twelfth  and 
Thirteenth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  accouterments  of  the  respective 
arms  to  be  transferred  with  them.  Further  changes  of  the  same  kind 
will  probably  become  necessary. 

Colonel  Edwards  has  as  little  cause  of  complaint  as  any  regimental 
commander  I know  of.  Not  less  than  5,000  men  in  Confederate  service 
and  for  the  war  are  without  arms  within  the  limits  of  this  department. 
The  number  is  of  course  daily  increasing.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  the 
Government  to  supply  them  at  this  time. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  27.  1 Pocotaligoj  April  22,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg  will  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  move 
immediately,  with  Thirteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
Colonel  Edwards;  Twelfth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Dunovant,  and  the  Fifty-first  Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Slaughter,  to  Richmond,  Va. 

* ’ * * # # # # 

II.  That  portion  of  Special  Orders,  No.  27,  referring  to  moving  of 
Fifty-first  Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers,  Colonel  Slaughter,  is  counter- 
nanded;  in  place  of  which  regiment  Brigadier-General  Gregg  will 
nove  the  Fourteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel 
lones.  The  Thirteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Edwards,  will  take  the  cars  at  Green  Pond. 

III.  The  German  Light  Artillery,  now  with  the  Thirteenth  Regiment 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel  Edwards,  will  take  post  with  [Capt. 
V.  D.]  Leake’s  battery  near  Pocotaligo. 

I\ . Colonel  Colquitt,  Forty-sixth  Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers,  is 
issigned  to  the  command  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Military  Districts, 
South  Carolina.  • 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Richmond,  April  22,  1862. 

dajor-General  Pemberton: 

Governor  Pickens  recommends  Gregg’s  brigade  to  be  sent  here  under 
ay  call  of  yesterday. 

Very  respectfully, 

R.  E.  LEE. 

31  R R — VOL  XIV 


482 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVl 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , April  22, 1862; 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond: 

Brigadier-General  Gregg  and  three  regiments  were  ordered  to  Rich- 
mond, Va.,  before  the  receipt  of  your  last  telegram. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charlest07i , April  23,  1862. 

Maj.  T.  A.  Washington,  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  consequence  of  the  re- 
moval of  so  large  a part  of  the  infantry  force  from  this  department  to 
other  points  I have  deemed  it  necessary  to  withdraw  all  troops  except 
the  cavalry  between  the  Ashepoo  and  Oketie,  and  to  locate  them  solely 
with  reference  to  the  defense  of  the  cities  of  Charleston  and  Savannah. 
This  will  leave  the  line  of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  with 
no  other  protection  than  what  the  cavalry  companies  can  afford,  which 
is  altogether  insufficient.  Raids  of  the  enemy  may  consequently  be 
expected,  and  perhaps  the  direct  communication  between  the  two  cities 
be  cut  off.  The  railroad  connection  through  Augusta  is  delayed  only 
by  the  want  of  iron j if  it  cannot  be  procured  otherwise  I shall  have  to 
impress  it.  This  I have  made  arrangements  to  do,  if  necessary.  The 
removal  of  eight  regiments  from  the  department  leaves  a surplus  of 
transportation,  as  wagons  and  mules,  &c.;  if  needed,  some  of  them 
might  follow  the  regiments,  though  if  it  is  intended  to  re-enforce  this 
command  they  will  be  required  here. 

I inclose  a report  of  the  strength  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley’s  divis- 
ion on  April  12.  It  will  be  perceived  that  after  deducting  Colonel  Mar- 
shall’s regiment  the  whole  force  for  duty  is  considerably  less  than  5,000. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  for  the  present  I shall  establish  my 
headquarters  in  Charleston. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 

[Inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  Second  Mil.  Dist.  S.  C.,  Charleston , April  22,  1862. 

Abstract  of  the  forces  in  the  Second  Military  District , South  Carolina , 
commanded  by  Brig . Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley , April  12. 


Present  for  duty 5, 712 

Sick : 785 

Extra  duty 457 

In  confinement 398 


7,352 

Absen  t,  detached  service 327 

Absent,  sick 706 

Absent  without  leave 124 

1,157 


8,509 

Deduct  Marshall’s  regiment 1, 300 

Total  present  and  absent 7,209 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-General , Comdg.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 


CttAf.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


483 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fa.,  April  25,  1862. 

His  Excellency  John  Milton, 

Governor  of  Florida,  Tallahassee: 

Your  letter  of  the  17th  instant  is  received.*  I regret  that  you  should 
feel  any  disappointment  that  the  President  did  not  adopt  your  recom- 
mendation in  the  selection  of  a brigadier- general  to  command  in  Florida. 
You  will  perceive  from  my  former  letter  that  before  your  recommenda- 
tion was  received  the  subject  had  already  engaged  the  attention  of  the 
President  and  of  gentlemen  whose  deep  interest  in  the  cause  is  well 
known  and  whose  acquaintance  with  the  condition  of  affairs  in  Florida 
naturally  gave  great  weight  to  their  counsel.  I am  sure  Your  Excellency 
need  not  be  told  that  in  continuing  to  act  under  their  advice  the  Pres- 
ident did  not  forget  the  consideration  due  to  your  recommendation,  and 
while  he  was  guided  in  making  the  appointment  by  the  advice  of  those 
with  whom  he  was  already  consulting  he  did  not  doubt  nor  does  he 
now  question  that  the  interest  felt  by  all  concerned  in  the  subject  would 
secure  the  attainment  ot  the  great  object,  the  advancement  of  our  com- 
mon cause.  Your  Excellency?s  assurance  of  your  readiness  to  co-opera  te 
fully  with  General  Finegan  is  only  what  the  President  expected  from 
your  known  attachment  to  the  country  and  disinterested  devotion  to 
the  cause,  and  with  your  aid  the  President  sincerely  hopes  that  a result 
will  be  attained  which  will  satisfy  you  that  the  promotion  of  the  inter- 
ests of  the  country  was  the  controlling  motive  of  those  with  whom  he 
counselled,  as  he  is  persuaded  that  it  is  your  own.  With  reference  to 
the  proclamation  of  martial  law  in  the  counties  designated  by  General 
Floyd,  the  President  desires  me  to  say  that  he  does  not  think  the  facts 
stated  would  justify  him  in  exercising  the  power.  He  hopes  that  the 
civil  authorities,  aided  by  the  military,  which  can  always  be  used  for 
that  purpose,  will  prove  sufficient  for  the  emergency.  If  Your  Excel- 
lency possesses  the  power  under  the  laws  of  Florida  to  proclaim  martial 
law  you  will  of  course  judge  of  the  necessity  of  such  a measure  for  . 
yourself. 

I am,  Governor,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

~ ~ Charleston , April  27,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper,  ’ 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  established  the 
headquarters  of  this  department  for  the  present  at  Charleston,  S C 
v ery  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector 


of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , April  28,  1862. 


General : 


General  : I desire  to  bring  to  the  consideration  of  the  War  Depart- 


Not  found. 


484 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


ment  the  importance  of  connecting  through  Savannah  the  Albany, 
Gulf  and  Georgia  Central  Railroad. 

The  rolling  stock  of  the  Albany  and  Gulf  road  is  considerable,  includ- 
ing some  ten  locomotives.  Should  the  enemy  ever  succeed  agaiust 
Savannah  all  this  stock  must  be  lost  for  want  of  this  connection,  not  ex- 
ceeding three-fourths  of  a mile. 

I have  endeavored  to  impress  upon  the  officers  of  the  company  the 
risk  they  run  in  neglecting  to  have  this  work  done.  They  still  decline, 
however,  to  undertake  it  at  the  cost  of  the  company  entirely,  but  are 
willing  to  bear  one-half  the  expenses.  This  road  is  doing  very  little 
business,  and  might  readily  spare  some  of  its  rolling  stock  to  other  roads 
not  so  well  supplied.  If  the  war  continues  we  shall  need  every  locomo- 
tive in  the  Confederacy.  It  seems  to  me  therefore  good  policy  to  expend 
a sum  not  exceeding  $6,000  to  secure  so  important  an  object. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , April  28,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  General 
R.  E.  Lee’s  letter  of  the  25th  instant  in  relation  to  the  transfer  of  Brig. 
Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley  from  this  department  for  service  in  Virginia.  General 
Ripley  has  made  an  official  application  to  be  relieved  from  duty  here 
for  service  in  the  field.  The  application  was  forwarded  through  this 
office  some  days  since  with  my  indorsement.  I do  not  think  General 
JEiipley  can  be  spared  at  this  time.  His  knowledge  of  everything  con- 
nected with  Charleston  and  its  defenses  is  of  great  value.  I know  of 
no  one  now  within  the  department  who  can  replace  him.  This  com- 
mand has  been  so  much  reduced,  and  is  in  many  regiments  so  badly 
and  insufficiently  armed,  that  I trust  at  least  a portion  of  those  just  re- 
ceived by  the  Cecile  may  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  these  troops.  At 
least  5,000  stand  are  needed  to  completely  equip  the  different  regiments. 
In  addition  to  the  unarmed  troops  reported  by  telegraph  on  the  26th 
instant  there  is  a battalion  of  infantry  and  a company  of  artillery  at 
Griffiu  of  the  last  levies  of  Georgia  troops. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Pa.,  April  29,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Commanding  Department , Tallahassee , Fla. : 

General:  I am  directed  by  General  Lee  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  letter  of  the  19th  instant  ; * also  one  of  same  date  to  General 
Cooper,  which  has  beeu  referred  to  him,  and  to  say  in  reply  to  the 
former  that  the  arms  recently  lauded  at  Smyrna  have  already  been  dis- 


Not  found. 


485 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

tributed.  The  demand  for  small-arms  is  urgent  from  all  sides,  and  in 
their  distribution  it  is  endeavored  to  supply  those  points  most  seriously 
threatened.  The  general  hopes  that  you  will  spare  no  effbits  to  collect 
all  the  private  arms  possible  to  be  obtained,  and  endea  vor  in  this  way 
to  arm  the  new  troops  in  Florida.  By  telegram  of  19th  instant  you 
were  instructed  to  forward  Dilworth’s  regiment  at  once  to  Corinth, 
which  it  is  hoped  is  by  this  time  with  General  Beauregard,  where  it  is 
much  needed.  As  regards  the  defenses  of  the  Apalachicola,  which  forms 
the  subject  of  your  letter  to  General  Cooper,  he  agrees  fully  with  you  in 
regarding  them  of  the  utmost  importance,  and  wishes  you  to  strengthen 
the  works  at  Ricco’s  Bluff,  or  such  other  points  as  you  may  select,  as 
much  as  your  means  will  admit.  General  Samuel  Jones,  commanding 
Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida,  has  been  directed  to  send  you 
any  guns  taken  from  Pensacola  which  he  can  spare  from  the  defenses 
of  Mobile,  for  the  purpose  of  defending  the  Apalachicola,  Saint  John’s, 
and  other  rivers.  You  will  make  such  distribution  of  the  number  he 
may  send  you  as  may  appear  most  judicious,  and  correspond  with  Gen- 
eral Jones  as  to  what  guns  he  can  spare  you  and  the  best  plan  of  trans- 
porting them  to  your  department. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ W.  n.  TAYLOE, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

April  29,  1862.  (Received  May  13,  1862.) 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  the  19th  instant,  and  in  conformity  thereto  have  respectfully  to  report, 
for  the  information  of  the  general  commanding,  that  after  the  removal 
of  the  First  Florida  Cavalry,  now  under  orders  for  the  West,  and  of  the 
Third  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers,  now  en  route  for  Corinth,  it  would 
not  be  prudent  to  send  more  armed  troops  out  of  the  State  at  present. 

Most  of  the  new  regiments  recently  organized  by  the  State  for  Con- 
federate service  are  without  arms  and  hence  not  available  for  service 
against  the  enemy.  The  enemy  have  been  in  full  possession  of  the  Saint 
John’s  River  since  they  first  entered  it,  and  frequently  go  up  as  far  as 
Palatka  with  their  gunboats.  There  are  two  8-inch  columbiads  at  Volu- 
sia, some  125  miles  above  Jacksonville.  If  I can  evade  the  vigilance  of 
the  enemy  I will  get  these  guns  down  the  river  and  place  them  in  bat- 
tery below  Jacksonville  at  a suitable  point  on  the  river  selected  for  that 
purpose. 

I leave  here  to-morrow  for  the  Apalachicola  River  to  select  a proper 
site  for  another  battery. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


IIdqes.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , April  29,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans, 

Commanding  Third  Military  District : 

General:  General  Ripley  will  send  you  at  once  a regiment  to  take 


486  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVt 

post  at  Rantowles ; also  a battery  of  field  artillery  to  replace  Preston’s, 
which  I wish  to  move  immediately  to  Jacksonborough.  Endeavor  to 
prevent  the  destruction  of  the  railroad  bridge  at  Jacksonborough  with 
your  field  artillery.  Let  me  hear  at  once  the  present  state  of  affairs. 
Sink  the  obstructions  at  Church  Flats  immediately. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON. 


Charleston,  April  29, 1862. 

General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond : 

Upon  the  application  of  the  local  commander,  Brigadier-General 
Ripley,  and  by  the  consent  of  the  Governor  and  Executive  Council,  I 
request  that  martial  law  may  be  proclaimed  from  the  Santee  River  to 
the  South  Edisto,  inclusive. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding . 


Richmond,  Va.,  April  30, 1862. 

Governor  Pickens, 

Of  South  Carolina , Columbia , S.  C. : 

I defer  to  your  opinion  of  the  necessity  of  martial  law,  as  proposed, 
and  will  act  in  conjunction  with  you.  In  anticipation  of  orders  by  mail, 
a telegram  will  be  sent  to  General  Pemberton  to  sustain  the  declaration 
if  made  by  you. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia , Maj.  Gen.  John 
C.  Pemberton  commanding , for  April,  1862. 


Command. 


First  Military  District,  S.  C 
Second  Military  District,  S.  C 
Third  Military  District,  S.  C . 
Fourth  Military  District,  S.  C 
Fifth  Military  District,  S.  C. . 
Sixth  Military  District,  S.  C.. 
Military  District  of  Georgia: 

1st  Brigade 

2d  Brigade 

Total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

77 

1,  050 

1,  254 

1,445 

398 

6,  834 

8,  672 

10,  596 

267 

3,  666 

5,  400 

5 929 

73 

1,087 

1.5S2 

1,8.54 

99 

1,611 

2.222 

2,  439 

174 

2,  597 

3, 145 

3,  397 

222 

3, 185 

4,251 

4,  940 

325 

4,  806 

6,157  | 

7,  883 

1,  635 

24,  836 

32,683 

38,493 

Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  487 

Military  organizations  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia , 
April  30, 1862;  Maj.  Gen.  John  C. Pemberton,  C.  S.Army , commanding* 

DISTRICT  OF  GEORGIA. 


Brig.  Gen.  Alexander 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith. 

31st  Georgia. 

38th  Georgia. 

39th  [30th]  Georgia. 

4th  Georgia  Battalion. 

7th  Georgia  Battalion. 

‘2d  Georgia  Cavalry  Battalion. 

Georgia  Hussars,  Company  B. 

4th  Louisiana  Battalion. 

Chatham  (Ga.)  Artillery. 

Terrell  (Ga.)  Artillery. 


;.  Lawton  commanding. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer. 

1st  Ga.(Vols.),  Lieut.Col.W.  S. Rockwell. 
13th  Georgia,  Col.  Marcellus  Douglass. 
25th  Georgia,  Col.  C.  C.  Wilson. 

26th  Georgia,  Col.  C.  W.  Styles. 

29th  Georgia,  Col.  William  J.  Young. 
50th  Georgia,  Col.  W.  R.  Manning. 

3d  Ga.  Cav.  Bat’n,  Maj.  D.  L.  Clinch. 
8th  Georgia  Battalion,  Capt.  Isaac  Davis. 
11th  Georgia  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  G.  W. 
M.  Williams. 

Savannah  Volunteer  Guards,  Capt.  W.  S. 
Basinger. 

Chatham  Light  Horse,  Capt.  R.  F.  Akin. 
Effingham  Hussars,  Capt.  Edward  Bird. 
Hardwick  Mounted  Rifles,  Capt.  J.  L. 
McAllister. 

Georgia  Lt.  Art.,  Co.  D,  Capt.  Jacob  Read. 
Staunton  Hill  (Va.)  Art.,  Capt.  C.  Bruce. 
Maj.  E.  C.  Anderson’s  command. 


SOUTH  CAROLINA  DISTRICTS.*! 


INFANTRY. 

Phillips’  (Georgia)  Legion,  Col.  William 
Phillips. 

1st  S.  C.,  Col.  Johnson  Hagood. 

11th  S.  C.,  Col.  William  C.  Heyward. 
15th  S.  C.,  Col.  W.  D.  De  Saussure. 

16th  S.  C.,  Col.  James  McCullough. 

17th  S.  C.,  Col.  J.  H.  Means. 

18th  S.  C.,  Col.  J.  M.  Gadberry. 

20th  S.  C.,  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt. 

22d  S.  C.,  Col.  Joseph  Abney. 

24th  S.  C.,  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens. 

3d  S.  C.,  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  G.  S. 
<JdilU6S 

5th  S.  C.,  Bat’n,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  V.  Moore. 
6th  S.  C.,  Bat’n,  Maj  E.  Manigault. 

7th  S.  C.,  Bat’n,  Maj.  P.  H.  Nelson. 

9th  S.  C.,  Bat’n,  Lieut.  Col.  A.  D.  Smith. 
11th  S.  C.,  Bat’n,  Maj.  Chas.  H.  Simonton. 
Charleston  Bat’n,  Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gail- 
lard. 

Coast  Rangers,  Col.  L.  M.  Hatch. 

Fort  Johnson,  Maj.  T.  G.  Lamar. 
Holcombe  Legion,  Col.  P.  F.  Stevens. 
Zouave  Company,  L.  C.  McCord. 

Gunboat  Rattlesnake. 


ARTILLERY. 

1st  South  Carolina  Regiment. 

Caroline  (Va.)  Art.,  Capt.  T.  R.  Thornton. 
Lafayette  (S.  C.)  Art.,  Capt.  J.  T.  Kana- 
paux. 

Macbeth  (S.  C.)  Art.,  Capt.  R.  Boyce. 
Marion  (S.  C.)  Art.  (one  section),  Capt. 
E.  L.  Parker. 

Siege  Train  (S.C.),  Lieut.  Col.  C.  K.  Huger. 
W ashington(  S . C. ) Art . , Capt.  G.  H.  W alter. 
White’s  (S.  C.)  Bat’n,  Maj.  E.  B.  White. 

CAVALRY. 

1st  S.  C.  Bat’n,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  L.  Black. 
4th  S.  C.  Bat’n,  Maj.  W.  K.  Easley. 
Ashley  Dragoons,  Capt.  C.  J.  Colcock. 
Barnwell  Dragoons,  Capt.  B.  W.  Lawton. 
German  Hussars,  Capt.  T.  Cordes. 
Jefford’s  Squadron. 

Mulligan’s  Co.,  Capt.  A.  B.  Mulligan. 
Rebel  Troop,  Capt.  John  Jenkins. 

St.  Peter’s  Guards,  Capt.  II.  C.  Smart. 
Savannah  River  Guards,  Capt.  T.  H.  John- 
son. 

Willington  Rangers,  Capt.  W.  L.  Disher. 
Calhoun  Mounted  Men,  Capt.  A.  M.  Martin. 


* Remarks  on  original  return  report  the  10th  and  19th  South  Carolina  and  the  8th 
and  16th  Tennessee  ordered  to  Army  of  the  West  (Beauregard’s),  and  the  12th,  13th, 
and  14th  South  Carolina  and  Orr’s  Rifles  ordered  to  Virginia. 

t Commanded  as  follows:  First,  Col.  Robert  F.  Graham;  Second,  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S. 
Ripley;  Thir<J,  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans;  Fourth  and  Fifth,  Col.  P.  H.  Colquitt;  Sixth, 
Brig.  Gen.  T.  F.  Drayton.  The  organizations  in  First,  Fourth,  and  Fifth  Military 
Districts  not  given  in  original  return. 


488  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai>.  XX  VL 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  troops  of  the  Department  of  East  and  Middle  Florida , 
commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  for  April , 1862. 


Troops. 


Present  for 
duty.  : 


r« 

tcra 


4th  Florida  Regiment 

5th  Florida  Regiment 

6th  Florida  Regiment 

1st  Florida  Special  Battalion. . . 

Smith’s  cavalry  troop 

Tallahassee  Guards  (cavalry) . . . 

Saint  John’s  Rangers  

Baya’s  light  artillery 

Gamble’s  light  artillery 

Marion  Light  Artillery 

Milton  Light  A rtillery 

Simmons’  coast  guard 

Hopkins’  independent  company 
Turner’s  independent  company. 
Captain  Chambers’  company  . . . 

Captain  Dudley’s  company 

Captain  Gettis’  company 

Captain  Owens’  company 

Captain  Parsons’  company 

Captain  Smith’s  company 

Grand  total 


35 

26 

31 

19 

4 
1 
2 
2 

5 
4 
2 
2 
2 
4 
4 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 


480 

440 

511 

152 

67 

82 

35 

50 

74 


57 

40 

76 

50 

57 
95 

58 
39 


592 

587 

665 


71 

84 

37 

59 

79 
113 
112 

37 

01 

51 

80 
54 
68 

115 

61 

45 


158 


2, 605 


3, 269  4, 


812 
856 
782  i 
492 
98 
94 
87 
71 
146 
113 
120 
55  I 
78: 
62 
80 
93 
84 
116 
71 : 

83 


393 


Tallahassee,  May  1, 1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose,  for  the  information  of  the 
general-in-chief,  an  appeal  to  the  people  of  Florida  to  destroy  their  cot- 
ton on  the  near  approach  of  the  enemy,  &c. 

With  great  respect, 

JOSEPH  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Provisional  Forces, 
Department  of  East  and  Middle  Florida, 

Tallahassee , May  1,  1862. 


To  the  People  of  Florida  : 


The  commanding  general  of  this  military  department  thinks  it  his 
duty  to  request  all  persons  owning  or  having  the  control  of  cotton 
within  this  department  to  have  it  so  placed  that  if  necessary  it  may 
be  burned  without  injury  to  other  property.  A confident  appeal  is  ! 
made  to  the  patriotic  citizens  of  the  State  to  destroy  their  cotton  on 
the  near  approach  of  the  enemy  rather  than  permit  it  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  invaders  of  our  country. 

The  commanding  general  will  endeavor  to  protect  every  portion  of 
his  department,  but  if  the  means  at  his  command  should  prove  inade- 
quate to  repel  a large  force  penetrating  the  country,  he  will  not  hesitate 
to  order  the  destruction  of  all  the  cotton  rather  than  suffer  it  to  pass 
into  the  possession  of  an  enemy  whose  purposes  are  those  of  plunder  , 
and  subjugation.  It  is  not  presumed  from  present  appearances  or  from 


489 


Chap.  XXTI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 

any  object  likely  to  be  attained  that  the  enemy  will  invade  Florida  in 
force,  but  it  is  thought  advisable  that  our  people  be  prepared  for  any 
emergency  that  may  occur. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Middle  and  Bast  Florida . 


General  Orders,  ) War  Dept.,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  33.  f Richmond , Va .,  May  1,  1862. 

I.  The  following  proclamation  is  published  for  the  information  of  all 
concerned : 

• PROCLAMATION. 

By  virtue  of  the  power  vested  in  me  by  law  to  declare  the  suspension  of  the  privi- 
lege of  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus : 

T,  Jefferson  Davis,  President  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America,  do  proclaim  that 
martial  law  is  hereby  extended  over  that  part  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina  from 
the  Santee  River  to  the  South  Edisto  River,  in  that  State,  under  the  command  of  Ma- 
jor-General Pemberton;  and  I do  proclaim  the  suspension  of  all  civil  jurisdiction  (with 
the  exception  of  that  enabling  the  courts  to  take  cognizance  of  the  probate  of  wills, 
the  administration  of  the  estates  of  deceased  persons,  the  qualification  of  guardians,  to 
enter  decrees  and  orders  for  the  partition  and  sale  of  property,  to  make  orders  con- 
cerning roads  and  bridges,  to  assess  county  levies,  and  to  order  the  payment  of  county 
dues),  and  the  suspension  of  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  in  the  country  aforesaid. 

In  faith  whereof  I have  hereunto  signed  my  name  and  set  my  seal  this  first  day  of 
May,  in  the  year  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-two. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 

II.  Maj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton,  commanding  the  Department  of  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia,  is  charged  with  the  due  execution  of  the  fore- 
going proclamation.  He  will  forthwith  establish  an  efficient  military 
police  and  will  enforce  the  following  orders : 

All  distillation  of  spirituous  liquors  is  positively  prohibited,  and  the 
distilleries  will  forthwith  be  closed.  The  sale  of  spirituous  liquors  of 
any  kind  is  also  prohibited  and  establishments  for  the  sale  thereof  will 
be  closed. 

III.  All  persons  infringing  the  above  prohibition  will  suffer  such  pun- 
ishment as  shall  be  ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a court-martial ; pro- 
vided that  no  sentence  to  hard  labor  for  more  than  one  month  shall  be 
indicted  by  the  sentence  of  a regimental  court-martial,  as  directed  by 
the  67th  article  of  war. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  2,  1862. 

General  Pemberton  : 

Dear  Sir  : As  it  is  reported  that  martial  law  will  likely  be  proclaimed 
over  the  city  I desire  most  respectfully  to  call  your  attention  to  an  im- 
portant matter  touching  the  quiet  and  loyalty  of  our  colored  population. 
There  are  of  this  class  in  the  city  about  20,000,  of  whom  10,000  are  mem- 
bers of  the  church,  6,000  being  in  communion  with  the  Methodist  de- 
nomination alone.  This  accounts  for  the  unprecedented  quiet,  good 
behavior,  and  loyalty  which  have  hitherto  characterized  this  numerous 
class  of  domestics.  From  a pastorate  of  more  than  six  years  in  this 


490 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV]| 

my  native  city  I am  convinced  that  religion  creates  the  strongest  ti  1 
between  servant  and  master,  and  that  1 he  ministry  thereby  constitut  e 
the  strongest  police  of  municipal  and  of  domestic  order.  8o  long  there! 
fore  as  the  subduing  restraints  of  Christianity  are  kept  vigorously  a 
play  among  the  colored  people  we  may  expect  to  check  insubordination 
that  must  ensue  should  they  bo  thrown  on  the  community  inflamed  witil 
false  hopes  of  liberation,  or  left  to  congregate  in  idleness,  or  to  seek  eml 
ployment  in  villainy.  My  mind  was  profoundly  called  to  this  subject! 
and  I have  made  extraordinary  exertions  to  keep  this  religious  element 
at  work  in  my  charge,  composed  of  about  2,000  colored  members,  wk<« 
worship  in  the  same  church  with  a very  large  white  communion.  A mos  1 
gracious  work  is  now  progressing  among  them;  many  have  been  coin 
verted  and  many  added  to  the  church.  The  sflme  work  is  goiug  on  in  twl 
other  large  Methodist  churches  in  the  city.  Our  meetings  begin  ai 
8 o’clock  p.  m.  and  continue  to  9.30  o’clock,  and  I suppose  2,000  or  3,00! , 
worship  every  night  in  our  churches  under  the  supervision  of  white  perl 
sons. 

Without  presuming  to  counsel  one  in  whom  the  custody  of  our  be 
loved  city  is  so  well  reposed,  permit  me  respectfully  to  suggest,  should 
martial  law  be  proclaimed,  no  action  be  taken  to  curtail  the  religious 
privileges  of  our  colored  population.  Allow  them  to  meet  as  usual,  ant ; 
I think  they  will  be  more  contented,  quiet,  and  loyal.  We  must  trus 
God,  who  can  overrule  the  storm  and  subdue  the  proud  waves  beneatli 
our  feet. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  humble  servant  ant , 
colaborer  in  the  cause  of  our  bleeding  country, 

JOHN  T.  WIGHTMAN, 

Pastor  of  Trinity  Church.  ' 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  2,  1862. 


Charles  Macbeth,  Esq., 

Mayor  of  Charleston : 


Dear  Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  let 
ter  of  yesterday’s  date,  in  which  you  say  that  you  “ deem  it  absolutely 
necessary  that  I (you)  should  be  informed  of  your  (my)  intended  courst 
of  action  in  the  event  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  passing  our  forts  andl 
presenting  themselves  in  front  of  the  city.”  You  then  add,  “Oblige  me] 
therefore  by  informing  me  whether  in  such  an  event  you  (I)  intend  t( 
make  any  resistance  in  the  city  itself,  or  whether  you  (I)  would  pursue] 
the  course  adopted  by  General  Lovell,  of  New  Orleans — that  is,  retire! 
with  your  (my)  troops  and  leave  the  city  in  the  hands  of  the  civil  author- 
ities,” &c. 

In  reply  to  these  inquiries  I can  at  present  only  say  that  in  all 
probability  martial  law  will  be  proclaimed  within  a day  or  two  in 
this  city  and  in  the  neighboring  country.  I shall  then  advise  the  with- 
drawal of  women  and  children,  as  it  may  become  necessary  to  defend 
the  city.  I cannot  at  this  time  express  my  intentions  as  to  the  course! 
to  be  pursued  in  the  event  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  passing  our  forts 
and  presenting  themselves  in  front  of  the  city.  This  calamity  may  not 
occur  at  all;  it  may  be  very  remote;  it  is  possibly  near  at  hand.  The! 
circumstances  of  to-day  may  be  materially  changed  before  the  enemy 
is  prepared  to  make  his  attack.  The  force  at  my  disposal  may  be  some- 


1XP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


491 


hat  increased  or  much  diminished.  You  will  readily  perceive  how 
uportant  a bearing  these  and  other  conditions  which  will  occur  to  you 
tust  have  upon  my  decision  when  the  time  arrives  to  declare  it.  I do 
ot,  however,  hesitate  to  say  that  in  my  opinion  it  is  advisable  that 
omen  and  children  should  leave  the  city  at  once. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding . 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va.,  May  3,  1862. 

Caj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton, 

Commanding , ffic.,  Charleston: 

General:  It  is  not  in  my  power  at  this  time  to  send  you  re  enforce- 
ents,  and  I wish  the  surplus  transportation  referred  to  in  your  letter 
? April  23  to  be  sent  to  this  place  as  soon  as  possible.  The  Quarter- 
laster-General  advises  that  your  surplus  wagons  be  sent  by  Northeast- 
?n  Railway  to  Cheraw,  under  direction  of  an  officer,  and  proceed  thence 
) Danville  by  the  ordinary  roads. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  5,  1862. 

eneral  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  : I learn  indirectly  from  Capt.  R.  M.  Cuyler,  ordnance  officer 
t Savannah,  Ga.,  that  there  are  in  Richmond,  Va.,  several  columbiads, 
inch  and  10-inch,  which  I might  possibly  obtain  on  immediate  applica- 
on  for  the  defense  of  Savannah.  I have  had  batteries  constructed  on 
le  bluff  at  the  lower  end  of  the  city,  for  which  guns  of  the  heaviest  cali- 
sr  are  desirable.  Should  the  enemy  succeed  in  passing  the  batteries 
i the  flats  below  the  city  with  these  guns  in  position  on  the  bluff  the 
ty  itself  might  perhaps  still  be  held. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding . 


eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  11.  f Charlesto7i,  S.  C.,  May  5,  1862. 

I.  Martial  law  having  been  proclaimed  by  His  Excellency  Francis  W. 
ickens,  Governor  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  and  the  Executive 
ouncil  thereof,  acting  together,  in  terms  and  figures  as  follows : 

PROCLAMATION  OF  MARTIAL  LAW. 

State  of  South  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Columbia , May  1,  1862. 

Whereas  by  virtue  of  an  ordnance  adopted  by  the  people  of  South  Carolina  in  Con- 
dition assembled  on  the  7th  day  of  January,  A.  D.  1862,  power  is  given  to  the  Gov- 
'nor  and  Executive  Council,  acting  together,  to  declare  martial  law  to  such  extent, 
i such  places,  and  at  such  times  as  shall  be  required  by  the  exigency  of  public  affairs : 


492  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XX^ 


Now  know  ye  that  I,  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Governor  and  comniauder-in-ckief  in  ai 
over  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  together  with  the  Executive  Council,  in  the  exerci 
of  the  joint  authority  thus  given,  do  hereby  proclaim  that  from  and  after  the  5th  d 
of  May  instant,  untii  further  orders,  martial  law  is  hereby  established  aud  proclaim 
in  and  over  the  city  of  Charleston,  and  10  miles  on  all  sides  beyond  the  corpora 
limits  thereof,  and  over  the  islands  adjacent  thereto,  and  full  power  and  authority  a 
vested  in  the  Confederate  general  commanding  in  South  Carolina  to  enforce  the  sam 
and  it  is  further  ordered  by  and  under  the  authority  vested  in  the  Governor  aud  Ext 
utive  Council,  and  I do  hereby  establish  and  proclaim  that  from  and  after  the : 
May  instant  the  Confederate  general  commanding  in  South  Carolina  shall  be,  a- 
he  is  hereby,  vested  with  power  and  authority  within  the  country  south  of  the  Sant 
River,  including  the  parishes  of  Saint  James  Santee,  Saint  Stephen’s,  Saint  Join 
Berkeley,  Saint  Thomas  and  Saint  Dennis,  Christ  Church,  Saint  Andrew’s,  Sai 
George’s  Dorchester,  Saint  James  Goose  Cieek,  Saint  Paul’s,  Saint  John’s  Colletol 
Saint  Bartholomew’s,  Priuce  William’s,  Saint  Luke’s,  aud  Saint  Peter’s  to  the  Sava  » 
nail  River,  to  impress  labor  of  all  kinds  for  public  works  and  defense  in  a manner  ij 
full  and  unlimi  ed  as  if  martial  law  were  therein  established  and  proclaimed. 

In  witness  whereof  I have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  affixed  the  great  seal  of  tk 
State  at  Columbia  this  the  first  day  of  May,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousail 
eight  hundred  and  sixty-two. 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Official  copy : 


F.  J.  MOSES,  Jr., 

Private  Secretary  A 


Now,  therefore,  I,  JohnC.  Pemberton,  major-general  commanding  tl: 
Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  and  the  forces  therein,  d| 
by  direction  of  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States,  sustain  the  sal 
proclamation,  and  announce  the  suspension  of  all  civil  jurisdiction  (wil 
the  exception  of  that  enabling  the  courts  to  take  cognizance  of  the  pr" 
bate  of  wills,  the  administration  of  the  estates  of  deceased  persons,  tl, 
qualification  of  guardians,  to  enter  decrees  and  orders  for  the  partiticl 
and  sale  of  property,  to  make  orders  concerning  roads  and  bridges,  i 
assess  county  levies,  to  order  the  payment  of  county  dues)  and  the  su 
pension  of  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  in  and  over  the  city  of  Charleston 
and  10  miles  on  all  sides  beyond  the  corporate  limits  thereof,  and  ov<] 
the  islands  adjacent  thereto. 

II.  Col.  Johnson  Hagood,  First  Kegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteer] 
is  appointed  provost-marshal,  and  is,  under  the  direction  of  Brig.  Ge. 
E.  S.  Eipley,  commanding  Second  Military  District,  charged  with  til 
due  execution  of  the  foregoing  proclamation  and  order.  He  will  forfcll 
with  establish  an  efficient  military  police,  and  will  enforce  the  folio  will 
orders : 

All  distillation  of  spirituous  liquors  is  positively  prohibited,  and  til 
distilleries  will  forthwith  be  closed.  The  sale  of  spirituous  liquors  J 
any  kind  is  also  prohibited  and  establishments  for  the  sale  thereof  wi 
be  closed. 

III.  All  persons  infringing  the  above  prohibition  will  suffer  sucj 
punishment  as  shall  be  ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a court  martial 
provided,  that  no  sentence  to  hard  labor  for  more  than  one  month  sha 
be  inflicted  by  the  sentence  of  a regimental  court-martial,  as  directed  bj 
the  67  th  article  of  war. 


J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Major - General , Commanding. 


Milledgeville,  Ga.,  May  6,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  Lee: 

If  the  authorities  of  Augusta  and  Savannah  desire  martial  law  an 
General  Pemberton  thinks  it  a military  necessity  I have  no  objection. 

JOS.  E.  BEOWN. 


u*.  XXVI. r CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


493 

>ecial  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  40.  J Charleston , May  6,  1862. 

I.  Col.  William  S.  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States, 
relieved  from  duty  as  acting  inspector  of  this  department,  and  is 
signed  to  the  command  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Military  Districts  of 
mth  Carolina,  embracing  all  that  country  between  the  Ashepoo  River 
the  one  side  amLOketie  Creek  on  the  other. 

*#####* 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton: 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


•ecial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  2d  Mil.  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

No.  324.  ) Charleston , May  6,  1862. 

As  soon  as  the  batteries  at  Cole’s  Island  can  be  dismantled  the  fol- 
ding disposition  will  be  made  of  the  guns:  One  10-inch  eolumbiad, 
e 8-inch  eolumbiad,  three  42s,  two  smooth-bore  32s,  and  one  rifled 
-pounder  will  be  sent  to  the  new  fortifications  at  Elliott’s  Cut,  ta  be 
der  charge  of  Major  Lucas;  one  10-inch  eolumbiad  and  two  navy  32s 
11  be  sent  to  Charleston  to  the  ordnance  officer  at  headquarters  Second 
ilitary  District;  the  remaining  guns,  including  all  on  siege  carriages, 
11  be  sent  to  Minott’s  Bluff,  to  be  located  on  the  lines  east  of  James 
land  Creek,  to  be  turned  over  to  Maj.  E.  B.  White. 

* * # # # # # 

III.  Maj.  E.  B.  White  will,  as  soon  as  the  works  are  in  readiness, 
ace  the  siege  guns  in  position  on  the  lines  west  of  James  Island 
eek.  He  will  consult  with  Captain  Gregorie,  engineer  in  charge. 

V.  Under  instructions  which  will  be  given  by  Brigadier-General 
st,  a detachment  from  Maj.  T.  G.  Lamar’s  battalion  will  move  and 
ke  charge  of  the  mounting  and  equipment  of  the  guns  on  the  lines 
st  of  James  Island  Creek,  consulting  Captain  Gregorie,  engineer  in 
arge,  as  to  the  readiness  of  the  fortifications  to  receive  them. 

VI.  The  guns  now  in  position  at  Battery  Island  will  as  soon  as 
acticable  be  transferred  to  the  lines  east  of  James  Island  Creek,  and 
aced  in  position  as  directed  in  paragraph  5. 

####*## 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  May  7,  1862. 

aj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina , Georgia , &$. : 

General:  I send  to  you,  by  the  Hon.  Alfred  Iverson,  acommunica- 
)n  addressed  by  the  mayor  of  Columbus,  Ga.,  in  reference  to  the 
flense  of  the  Chattahoochee  River,  and  commend  it  to  your  consider - 
ion.  Mr.  Iverson,  being  well  acquainted  with  the  locality,  may  be 
>le  to  render  you  some  assistance,  especialty  in  procuring  labor. 

You  will  have  a reconnaissance  of  the  river  made  by  a competent 


494  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV 

engineer,  and  cause  it  to  be  obstructed  at  the  most  suitable  point  fo 
locating  and  defending  the  obstruction. 

The  introduction  of  small  iron-clad  steamers  into  the  coast  opera1 
tions  of  the  enemy  renders  it  necessary  to  change  our  plans  of  rive 
defenses,  and  to  rely  upon  obstructions  more  than  we  have  heretofore 
Tor  the  reasons  assigned  in  the  letter  of  the  mayor  no  time  should 
be  lost  in  completing  the  necessary  obstructions  and  batteries. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War.  I 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

Tallahassee , May  7,  1862.  I 
General  S.  Cooper,  ’ 9 ’ ] 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General : 

Sir:  Under  authority  heretofore  issued  bv  the  Secretary  of  Wal 
for  raising  companies,  battalions,  and  regiments  for  the  war  several 
companies  of  cavalry  have  applied  to  be  mustered  into  service.  Whei 
these  additional  companies  are  mustered  I will  have  nine  companies  o] 
cavalry.  Two  or  three  of  the  nine  companies  are  unarmed,  and  aboul 
one  full  regiment  of  infantry  is  unarmed.  As  soon  as  the  monthly 
returns  are  received  from  the  distant  posts  I will  make  out  a return  o| 
the  strength  of  this  command. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  an  appeal  to  the  people  of  Florida  foi 
arms. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding.  \ 


[Inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Provisional  Forces, 
Department  of  East  and  Middle  Florida, 

Tallahassee , May  6,  1862. 

To  the  People  of  Florida : 


The  commanding  general  of  this  department  is  constrained  by  the! 
great  necessities  of  the  public  service  to  appeal  to  you  for  the  surrender 1 
of  a sufficient  number  ot  your  private  arms  to  furnish  one  or  two  of  your  ! 
own  regiments  now  organized  and  ready  for  service.  Shot-guns,  double! 
and  single  barreled,  rifles,  and  muskets  can  be  rendered  available,  and  i 
will  be  received,  appraised,  and  receipted  for  by  any  Confederate  officer] 
in  the  State,  and  paid  for  by  the  Government.  Citizens  having  in  their] 
possession  or  knowing  of  the  possession  by  others  of  any  of  the  arms,  i 
accouterments  or  Government  stores  landed  at  New  Smyrna  are  re- 
quested to  deliver  them  to  some  Confederate  officer  or  to  give  such  in- 1 
formation  as  will  secure  them  to  the  Government. 

The  preservation  of  all  which  is  valuable  to  you  now  demands  yourfl 
unwearied  devotion  to  the  public  interests.  The  battles  on  which  your  : 
rights  and  liberties  depend  are  to  be  fought  by  armed  men,  and  your  : 
Government  now  earnestly  exhorts  you  to  place  the  arms  which  you 
have  hitherto  kept  for  your  own  convenience  in  the  hands  of  our 
brave  soldiers  who  are  destined  to  meet  your  enemies  on  the  field  of  , 
battle. 


495 


JAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Unless  you  make  a generous  response  to  this  appeal  regiments  which 
light  otherwise  turn  defeat  into  victory  will  he  compelled  to  remain 
narmed  and  idle  spectators  of  bloody  fields,  where  your  sons  and 
rothers  may  be  perishing  for  need  of  their  assistance. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , Mag  8,  1862. 


;rig.  Gen.  B.  S.  Bipley, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District: 


General  : It  has  always  been  my  intention,  and  I have  so  informed 
ou  in  conversation,  to  occupy  Cole’s  Island,  after  the  removal  of  the 
uns  to  Elliott’s  Cut,  with  a regiment  of  infantry  or  with  as  many  com- 
anies  as  can  be  conveniently  located  in  the  quarters  now  standing, 
[y  reasons  for  so  determining  were  given  in  these  conversations,  and 
ere,  first,  the  healthfulness  of  the  position;  second,  the  facilities  af- 
>rded  by  a good  road  to  reach  the  line  of  intrenchments,  skirmishing 
necessary  while  falling  back  to  their  cover ; no  tents  for  any  purpose  nor 
n any  pretense  to  be  kept  on  the  island  ; the  troops  to  be  always  ready 
) move  at  a moment’s  notice ; fio  baggage  beyond  the  minimum  allow- 
nce  of  the  regulations  for  field  service  to  officers  or  men. 

Cole’s  Island  is  regarded  as  an  advanced  post,  and  being  without  artil- 
>ry,  the  officer  in  command  is  not  of  course  expected  to  defend  it  against 
unboats.  It  should,  however,  be  defended  against  parties  of  the  enemy 
i small  boats,  unless  the  proximity  of  his  gunboats  should  endanger  the 
ifety  of  the  troops,  in  which  event  (and  this  must  be  left  to  the  discretion 
f the  officer  in  command)  they  will  be  immediately  withdrawn  from 
ae  island.  With  proper  vigilance  on  the  part  of  officers  and  men  there 
i no  reason  to  apprehend  a surprise.  I repeat  that  it  is  not  expected 
lat  the  island  will  be  defended  against  gunboats.  The  troops  may  be 
ithdrawn,  and  all  baggage,  with  the  wagons,  sent  off  on  the  first  indi- 
ition  of  an  intention  of  the  enemy  to  approach. 

Not  more  than  three  days’  subsistence  should  be  kept  on  hand.  You 
an  of  course  retain  the  same  corps  permanently  on  the  island  or  relieve 
at  your  discretion  .by  another  at  such  intervals  as  you  may  deem 
roper. 

I have  been  thus  particular  in  my  instructions  because  you  have  sug- 
ested  that  they  be  given. 

Very  respectfully,  &o., 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major - General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  May  8,  1862. 

reneral  B.  E.  Lee,  Richmond , Va.  : 

The  mayor  and  aldermen  of  Savannah  do  not  wish  martial  law  pro- 
iaimed.  I think  it  should  be. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


% 


496  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  DA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI.  I 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  8,  1862. 

Governor  Brown,  Milled geville,  Ga. : 

I am  asked  from  Richmond  whether  the  authorities  wish  martial  law 
proclaimed  in  Savannah.  I desire  it.  Answer. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

May  8,  1862. 

W.  J.  Magrath, 

President  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad : 

Dear  Sir:  In  reply  to  your  communication  of  the  6th  instant*  I 
have  the  honor  to  stale  that  in  my  opinion  the  business  of  the  road  j 
should  as  far  as  practicable  be  not  interrupted  during  the  coming  sum- 
mer. It  is  true  there  will  be  comparatively  little  to  be  done  in  the  way  i 
of  transporting  troops  or  Government  supplies;  still  emergencies  may  I 
arise  which  would  make  it  necessary  to  forward  troops  from  either  city 
to  the  support  of  the  other  or  for  the  protection  of  intermediate  points  . 
on  the  road.  My  own  duties  will  frequently  require  my  presence  in  r 
Savannah,  and  perhaps  at  times  when  I may  not  be  able  to  avail  myself 
of  the  regular  trains  this  will  require  a special  train.  I think  therefore 
that  unless  the  road  or  this  city  is  immediately  threatened  it  would  be 
better  to  continue  its  business  as  heretofore. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General  Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) May  8, 1862. 

No.  335.  f ’ 

I.  The  channels  of  approach  to  the  city  of  Charleston  will  be  ob-  5 
structed  to  prevent  the  passage  of  vessels  of  the  enemy  as  speedily  and  I 
effectually  as  possible. 

II.  Capt.  Francis  D.  Lee,  engineer,  is  charged  with  a general  super-  « 
vision  ot  the  work,  and  especially  with  the  construction  and  location  of  \ 
piers  and  sunken  obstructions. 

III.  John  R.  Cheves,  esq.,  is  charged  with  supervision  of  the  chain 
and  boom  obstructions,  as  well  as  the  submarine  batteries  in  connection 
therewith. 

IV.  Francis  J.  Porcher,  esq.,  will  take  the  superintendence  of  pro- 
curing labor,  tools,  material,  and  arranging  matters,  in  connection  with  ' 
parties  employed  on  the  work  not  in  military  service,  and  to  forward 
the  operations  as  much  as  may  be  practicable. 

V.  Each  of  the  persons  named  above  have  authority  to  employ  such  ] 
assistants  as  may  be  necessary,  and  such  force,  either  by  hiring,  volun-  i 
tary  labor,  or  otherwise,  as  may  be  directed  from  these  headquarters  or 
as  may  be  required  for  the  prosecution  of  the  work,  and  to  obtain  by  J 
purchase  or  such  method  as  may  be  approved  such  materials  as  shall  I 
be  needed. 


*Not  found. 


I’HAI-.  XXVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  497 

VI.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  dispatch  and  diligence  are  especially 
required,  and  it  is  hoped  that  all  will  be  done  to  expedite  the  work 
which  lies  in  the  power  of  those  charged  with  its  execution. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley : 

LEO.  D.  WALKER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  May  9, 1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond: 

Governor  Brown  says: 

I have  no  objections  to  martial  law  in  Savannah  if  the  people  desire  it.  You  have, 
with  the  consent  of  the  President,  full  power  in  the  premises. 

I think  it  necessary  that  it  should  be. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fa.,  May  9,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Department  of  Charleston , S.  C. : 

General  : I have  received  your  telegram  of  this  date,  giving  Gover- 
nor Brown’s  assent  to  the  establishment  of  martial  law  in  Savannah,  if 
the  people  desire  it.  The  subject  has  before  been  under  consideration. 
The  President  is  unwilling  to  declare  martial  law  over  any  section 
unless  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  public  good  or 
desired  by  the  community.  As  it  appears  to  be  objected  to  by  the 
citizens  and  authorities  of  Savannah  he  does  not  feel  justified  in 
making  the  declaration  until  it  becomes  a positive  necessity,  and  it 
would  be  of  little  avail  to  proclaim  martial  law  in  Augusta  without 
doing  it  in  Savannah. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  15.  f Charleston , May  9,  1862. 

I.  The  President  of  the  Confederate  States  having  by  proclamation 
extended  martial  law  over  that  part  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina  from 
the  Santee  River  to  the  South  Edisto  River,  and  having  proclaimed  the 
suspension  of  all  civil  jurisdiction  (with  the  exception  of  that  enabling  the 
courts  to  take  cognizance  of  the  probate  of  wills,  the  administration  of 
the  estates  of  deceased  persons,  the  qualification  of  guardians,  to  enter 
decrees  and  orders  for  the  partition  and  sale  of  property,  to  make  or- 
ders concerning  roads  and  bridges,  to  assess  county  levies,  and  to  order 
the  payment  of  county  dues),  and  the  suspension  of  the  writ  of  habeas 
corpus  in  the  country  aforesaid;  therefore  the  operation  of  General  Or- 
ders, Nos.  12  and  13,  current  series,  from  these  headquarters,  has  be- 
come null  and  void,  and  said  orders  are  thereby  rescinded. 

II.  Paragraphs  II  and  III  of  General  Orders,  No.  14,  from  these  head- 

32  R r — VOL  xiv 


498 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XXVI 


quarters,  dated  May  5,  1802,  are  continued  in  force  in  aid  of  the  due 
execution  of  the  aforesaid  proclamation  of  the  President. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Effective  forces  in  the  First , Second,  and  Third  Military  Districts  of  South 
Carolina  and  the  District  of  Georgia  May  11,  18G2. 

First  Military  District. 


Infantry 6,462 

Cavalry 532 

Artillery 2,  756 


Total 


9,750 


Second  Military  District. 


Infantry 4,015 

Cavalry 001 

Artillery 267 


Total 


4,883 


Third  Military  District. 


* Total 


3, 881 


District  of  Georgia. 


Infantry 7,519 

Cavalry „ 1,020 

Artillery 634 

Total 9, 173 

Total  effective 27  687 


[May  12,  1863. — For  Lee  to  Pemberton,  in  reference  to  further  re-  J 
enforcements  for  army  about  Richmond,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  XI,  Part  III 
p.  511.] 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah , May  12,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a letter 
from  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War,t  through  Hon.  Alfred  Iverson, 
of  Georgia,  in  relation  to  the  defense  of  the  Chattahoochee  River  by  ob- 
structing the  channel,  &c.  T have  no  engineer  officer  under  my  com- 
mand so  well  fitted  for  this  duty  as  is  Colonel  Boggs,  State  Engineer  of 
Georgia.  At  my  request  Governor  Brown  has  consented  that  Colonel 
Boggs  shall  make  a military  reconnaissance  of  the  river,  and  I shall 


Not  classified. 


t Of  May  7.  See  p.  493. 


Qbat.  Iln,]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


499 


depute  him  to  select  the  position  and  to  superintend  the  work,  unless 
authority  be  granted  me  to  transfer  the  battery  now  located  at  Ricco’s 
Bluff,  on  the  Chattahoochee,  to  such  other  point  as  may  be  selected. 
The  obstruction,  wherever  located,  will  be  without  defense,  the  battery 
referred  to  lying  within  the  limits  of  the  Department  of  East  and  Mid- 
dle Florida  and  under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Trapier. 

If  possible  I shall  make  a personal  examination  of  the  river,  but  it  is 
very  doubtful  whether  I shall  be  able  to  do  so.  The  position  which 
seemed  to  me  to  combine  more  advantages  than  any  other  which  came 
under  my  observation  on  a recent  visit  to  Apalachicola  was  the  site  of 
old  Fort  Gadsden,  and  I so  advised  Brigadier-General  Trapier.  There 
may,  however,  be  others  still  better  higher  up  the  river,  more  particu- 
larly as  to  healthfulness.  The  only  other  point  I have  heard  proposed  is 
some  10  miles  above  the  town  of  Chattahoochee,  known  as  Rock  Island. 
It  has  the  disadvantage  of  leaving  unprotected  a considerable  district  of 
cotton-growing  country. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major - General , Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 

Adjutant- General  : 

Authorize  General  Pemberton  to  change  position  of  the  Ricco’s  Bluff 
Battery  if  found  necessary.  Inform  him  that  General  Joseph  Finegan 
commands  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida,  and  inform  Gen- 
eral Finegan  of  authority  to  General  Pemberton  to  change  position  of 
battery. 

G.  W.  R. 


Headquarters  James  Island  and  Dependencies, 

May  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  Charleston: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I will  remove  early  to- 
morrow the  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Stevens  commanding,  with  the  exception  of  two  rifle  companies,  to  a 
point  near  Secession ville. 

The  two  rifle  companies  under  charge  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Capers 
will  remain  at  Cole’s  Island.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Capers  is  instructed 
to  keep  a rigid  lookout,  and  in  case  of  gunboats  entering  the  inlet  to 
secure  his  command  in  the  bomb-proof,  and  if  the  enemy  lands  a small 
detachment  he  is  instructed  to  attack  them  ; if  he  lands  a large  one,  to 
retire  his  command,  consisting  of  about  160  men. 

By  this  evening  I will  have  removed  the  24-pouuders  from  Battery 
Island.  I have  not  directed  the  siege-train  guns  to  be  placed  in  position 
because  of  difficulty  in  removing  them  in  case  of  attack.  I have  given 
orders  to  the  garrison  to  be  in  readiness  to  fall  back  to  the  lines  with 
their  guns  at  a moment’s  warning.  I would  respectfully  suggest,  in 
consequence  of  the  difficulty  of  removing  them  in  case  of  attack,  that 
the  guns  be  placed  at  once  on  the  lines. 

I And  that  Colonel  Stevens  is  unable  to  place  the  obstruction  at  the 
point  indited  by  reason  of  the  want  of  steamers  to  transport  it  and 
ot  material  to  sink  it.  I have  directed  Colonel  Stevens  in  case  he  is 
unable  to  remove  the  32-pounder  rifle  gun  to  bury  it  on  the  island,  but 
1 hope  that  he  will  be  able  to  remove  it  this  afternoon.  The  obstacle 


500  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cuav.  XXVI. 

• ;i 

in  the  way  of  its  removal  is  the  want  of  a lighter.  I will  have  the  24- 
pounders  which  have  been  withdrawn  from  Battery  Island  placed  onl 
the  lines  to  the  eastof  James  Island  Creek  as  soon  as  possible.  1 havej 
directed  Major  Lucas  and  Captain  Ramsay  to  put  the  work  at  Elliott’s  I 
Cut  in  a proper  state  of  defense.  I have  extended  orders  to  Maj.  E.  B. 
White  to  place  his  light  guns  on  the  lines  west  of  James  Island  Creek,  < 
and  to  haul  up  and  mount  the  guns  deposited  at  Minott’s  Bluff  on  the 
same  lines.  1 have  detached  four  companies  from  Lamar’s  battalion  to® 
take  charge  of  and  man  the  lines  east  of  James  Island  Creek.  I have! 
placed  an  18-pounder  in  position  on  the  work  at  Secessionville ; it  is] 
that  which  I found  here.  There  is  also  a 32-pounder  here,  with  muni- 
tion, on  a siege  carriage,  the  limber  of  which  Colonel  Hatch  has  taken 
to  Morris  Island  to  make  a wood  truck  out  of.  I will  endeavor  to  have’! 
this  gun  placed  or  the  lines  at  an  early  day.  Send  Lieutenant-Colonel] 
Simoutou  to  his  command  with  arms  and  ammunition  for  his  unarmed] 
men. 

I anticipate  a reconnaissance  by  the  enemy  to-morrow  morning  at 
high  water  and  have  made  my  arrangements  accordingly.  Should  you 
wish  to  communicate  with  me  there  will  be  two  mounted  couriers  in 
readiness  at  Fort  Johnson. 

The  Planter  passed  Cole’s  Island  going  south  about  It  o’clock  this] 
morning.  I would  respectfully  ask  that  Captain  McCreery,  of  the: 
Ordnance  Department,  be  ordered  to  report  tome  for  the  purpose  of 
placing  the  guns  in  position  on  the  lines  east  and  west  of  James  Island. 
Cuek.  I have  the  honor  to  request  that  Capt.  J.  WTelsman  Brown,  re-1 
cently  promoted  to  the  majority  of  Lamar’s  regiment  artillery,  be  re- 
lieved from  duty  on  the  court-martial  now  sitting  in  Charleston^  and 
be  ordered  to  report  for  duty  with  his  command. 

Respectfully, 

S.  R.  GIST, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding,  j 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , May  14,  1862. 

Respectfully  forwarded. 

I have  approved  of  General  Gist’s  movements  and  allowed  him  dis-j 
cretion  in  moving  the  siege  guns  from  Battery  Island.  The  steamer] 
Marion  has  been  sent  for  the  rifled  32-pounders  and  to  get  the  obstruc- 
tions in  readiness  for  sinking. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah , May  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  R.  Lawton, 

Commanding  Military  District  of  Georgia  : 

I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  the  department  to] 
say  that  he  finds  upon  investigation  that  none  of  the  guns  have  been! 
mounted  on  the  batteries  at  the  Bay  Bluff*,  and  that  as  yet  there  are 
but  two  there.  The  general  directs  that  the  earth  in  rear  of  the  bat- 
teries be  cut  down  and  given  a gradual  slope  to  the  rear,  for  the  safety  I 
of  the  gunners.  The  general  has  been  informed  by  Colonel  Boggs  that' 
he* believes  there  are  four  8-inch  siege  howitzers  lying  at  the  Central 


3haf.  XXYI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — 'CONFEDERATE. 


501 


Depot  said  guns  Laving  been  forwarded  some  time  since,  for  which 
carriages  are  already  here.  If  such  is  the  case,  the  general  directs  that- 
they  be  placed  in  position  at  once  on  the  bluff.  The  general  again 
urges  the  necessity  for  the  completion  of  this  work,  as  he  has  been  in- 
formed by  the  person  in  charge  that  there  are  only  9 men  employed  at 
present.  * The  general  further  directs  that  the  mouth  of  Black  River  be 
obstructed  with  as  little  delay  as  possible.  If  necessary  employ  one- 
half  of  your  command  on  the  work,  and  call  on  the  mayor  and  city 
council  for  aid.  The  general  desires  further  that  you  report  without 
delay  whether  or  not  the  howitzers  have  arrived. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

J.  H.  MORRISON, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

a Savannah , May  13,  1862. 

To  the  Mayor  of  Savannah : 

Sir  : I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  the  department 
to  say  that,  should  it  become  necessary  and  in  his  opinion  practicable 
to  defend  the  city  of  Savannah  in  the  event  of  the  enemy’s  successfully 
passing  the  obstructions  and  batteries,  the  presence  ot  women  and 
children  will  not  prevent  it.  He  advises  therefore  that  they  be  grad- 
ually withdrawn  from  the  city,  without  however  creating  unnecessary 
alarm.  There  are  certain  houses  in  front  of  the  batteries  on  Bay  Bluff 
which  it  is  necessary  should  be  removed. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ . J.  H.  MORRISON, 

Aide-de-camp. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  14,  1862/ 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  Commanding , &e.  : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  inform 
you  that  he  expects  to  use  field  artillery  in  the  works  in  the  city  of 
Charleston,  and  such  heavy  guns  as  he  may  be  able  to  equip  with 
horses,  &c.,  which  will  be  movable. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  R.  WADDY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  14,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  Commanding , &e. : 

General:  I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  say  to 
you  that  he  wishes  you  to  carry  out  strictly  his  instructions  of  May  8, 
1862.  The  general  does  not  wish  any  heavy  guns  in  front  of  the  lines 
which  are  not  equipped  with  horses,  &c.,  and  which  cannot  be  moved  at 
any  time.  The  field  artillery  will  not  be  kept  on  the  lines,  but  will  be  kept 
in  park.  That  portion  of  Brigadier-General  Gist’s  letter  which  reads 
thus,  “ Send  Lieutenant  Colonel  Simouton  to  his  command  with  arms 
and  ammunition  for  his  unarmed  men”  is  not  understood  by  the  major- 
general  commanding.  The  limber  in  the  hands  of  Colonel  Hatch  must 


502 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


be  returned.  You  will  order  Captain  McCreery  to  report  to  General 
Gist  for  the  duty  specified  and  to  instruct  the  men  in  their  duties. 
Major  Brown,  of  Lamar’s  regiment,  cannot  be  relieved  at  this  time 
from  duty  on  the  general  court-martial.  The  court,  however,  will  ad- 
journ sine  die  in  a few  days. 

I am,  &c.. 

J.  B.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston,  May  14,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  instructions 
received  by  telegraph  last  night  from  the  general  commanding,  I shall 
to-morrow  morning  dispatch,  under  flag  of  truce,  a letter  addressed  to 
the  officer  commanding  United  States  forces  on  the  coast  of  South  Caro- 
lina and  Georgia,  in  which  I propose  a general  exchange  of  non-commis- 
sioned officers  and  privates,  prisoners  of  war,  also  an  exchange  of  lists  of 
commissioned  officers,  with  the  view  of  negotiations  for  future  release. 

I desire  to  call  the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  the  utter 
uselessness  of  the  two  navy  gunboats  (so  styled),  carrying  each  three 
valuable  guns,  which  might  be  made  so  available  in  the  works  I have 
had  constructed  under  the  superintendence  of  Maj.  A.  L.  Long  on  the 
Bay  Bluff,  at  the  lower  end  of  the  city.  I hope  that  the  city  of  Savan- 
nah will  be  defended  should  the  enemy’s  gunboats  unfortunately  suc- 
ceed in  passing  the  batteries  below.  I beg  that  an  effort  may  be  made 
to  place  these  guns  at  my  disposal.  Captain  Brent  objects  to  locating 
these  boats  at  the  only  point  where  I think  they  can  be  advantageously 
placed,  to  wit,  in  a canal  cut  into  Mackay’s  Point  near  the  head  of 
Elba  Island. 

The  obstructions  in  the  Savannah  Biver  get  on  too  slowly,  though  I 
think  they  will  be  effectual.  I very  much  wish  the  commanding  general 
of  this  district  had  more  pushing  energy.  I think  we  need  a man  of 
this  character  here  now. 

I have  this  evening,  I think,  satisfied  the  mayor  pro  tempore  (the 
mayor  being  ill)  of  the  necessity  of  martial  law  in  this  city.  I am  very 
sure  that  it  should  be  proclaimed. 

Four  companies  of  infantry  have  this  evening  been  sent  to  Atlanta. 

There  has  been  very  great  disorganization  produced  by  the  recent 
elections  of  company  and  field  officers.  As  a general  rule  the  new  officers 
are  far  inferior  to  their  predecessors. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


EIdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  May  14, 1862. 

Maj.  J.  B.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Major  : In  answer  to  your  indorsement  I have  the  honor  to  state 
that  the  guns  on  board  the  Planter  as  freight  were  some  that  were 


503 


OnAr.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

damaged  in  the  cannonade  and  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter  in  the 
month  of  April,  18G1.  They  had  been  condemned  and  laid  aside,  but 
in  the  scarcity  of  heavy  guns  I had  ordered  them  to  be  banded  and 
strengthened,  and  I believe  it  had  been  successfully  accomplished. 
They  were  on  board  the  Planter  to  go  to  the  Middle  Ground  Battery 
when  she  escaped  from  this  harbor  in  charge  of  her  colored  crew. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


‘Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  14,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District: 

General:  I am  instructed  by  the  major-general  commanding  De- 
partment of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  to  inform  you  that  you  will 
hold  yourself  in  readiness  to  move  with  two  regiments  of  infantry  of 
this  command  to  Virginia  should  the  requisition  be  made. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


General  Lawton,  Savannah: 

Hold  two  regiments  in  readiness 
be  required. 


Charleston,  May  14, 1862. 
to  move  to  this  point  should  they 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  15,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton, 

Commanding  Sixth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina  : 

General  : The  Secretary  of  War  authorizes  the  connection  of  the 
Albany  and  Gulf  Railroad  through  Savannah  with  the  Central  Georgia 
Railroad,  provided  the  cost  to  the  Confederate  Government  does  not 
exceed  the  sum  I named,  to  wit,  $6,000.  On  these  conditions  I desire 
yon  to  see  the  proper  authorities  on  the  subject  and  have  the  work  done 
at  once.  Should  the  expense  be  less  than  $12,000  in  all  the  Government 
will  defray  only  one-lialf. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fa.,  May  15,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  South  Carolina  : 

Governor  ; I have  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  12th  in- 


504 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVX 


stant,*  and  regret  exceedingly  the  state  of  affairs  at  Charleston  depicted 
by  you.  I would  be  glad  to  have  your  suggestions  as  to  the  most  advis- 
able mode  of  remedying  the  evil.  I see  no  way  of  adjusting  the  matters 
save  the  relieving  of  General  Ripley,  in  compliance  with  his  request.  I 
should  regret  to  take  this  step,  inasmuch  as  his  ability  and  knowledge 
of  affairs  in  Charleston  Harbor  would  be  very  essential  in  time  of  an  I 
attack.  As  he  seems  to  be  dissatisfied,  however,  and  not  in  harmony 
with  those  above  and  below  him,  it  maybe  the  best  thing  to  gratify  his  < 
wishes.  On  the  other  hand,  Hon.  Porcher  Miles,  W.  D.  Porter,  and; 
A.  G.  Magrath  deprecate  his  removal,  and  think  his  absence  at  this 
critical  period  would  be  disastrous.  They  recommend  giving  General^ 
Ripley  the  direct  control  and  responsibility  for  the  defense  of  Charleston 
District,  independent  of  General  Pemberton.  This  it  is  impossible  to  do  I 
while  General  Pemberton  is  in  command  of  the  department.  One  or  the 
other  must  be  removed.  At  the  time  that  I was  on  duty  in  that  depart- 
ment Commodore  Ingraham  was  the  ordnance  and  artillery  officer  of  the  I 
forts  and  batteries  in  Charleston  Harbor,  whose  province  it  is  to  inspect  I 
and  regulate  the  service  of  the  batteries  and  report  their  condition  to  n 
General  Pemberton,  and  who  I have  no  doubt  will  attend  faithfully  to  ! 
his  duty. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  May  15,  1862. 

Hons.  W.  P.  Miles,  W.  D.  Porter,  and  A.  G.  Magrath, 

Charleston , S.  C. : 

' m 

Gentlemen  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  telegram  of  the  8th  I 
instant.*  I regret  exceedingly  the  state  of  affairs  which  exists  at  Charles- 1 
ton.  Your  suggestion  to  relieve  General  Ripley  of  all  direct  control  by  j 
General  Pemberton  could  not  be  adopted  as  long  as  General  Pemberton 
retained  command  of  the  Department  of  South'  Carolina  and  Georgia,  j 
The  defense  of  the  two  cities,  Charleston  and  Savannah,  is  so  closely  i 
associated,  that  it  is  deemed  unadvisable  to  constitute  each  of  the  two 
States  a separate  department  under  a separate  commander.  General  j 
Ripley  appears  dissatisfied  and  anxious  to  change  his  field  of  operations,  I 
and  although  recognizing  the  importance  of  his  presence  at  Charleston,  1 
particularly  should  that  city  be  attacked,  yet  it  appears  best  to  comply 
with  his  repeated  requests  and  relieve  him  from  his  present  command,  i 
I see  no  way  of  overcoming  this  difficulty  except  by  relieving  one  of  the 
two  officers  in  question,  and  would  like  to  know  which  course  you  would 
recommend. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  17.  j Charleston , May  17,  1862. 

I.  The  President  of  the  Confederate  States  having  by  proclamatiou 
extended  martial  law  over  that  part  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina  from 
the  Santee  River  to  the  South  Edisto  River,  and  having  proclaimed  the  1 


* Not  found.* 


;iiAi\  XXVI.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


505 


suspension  of  all  civil  jurisdiction  (with  the  exception  of  that  enabling 
the  courts  to  take  cognizance  of  the  probate  of  wills,  the  administration 
){  the  estates  of  deceased  persons,  the  qualification  of  guardians,  to  enter 
decrees  and  orders  for  the  partition  and  sale  of  property,  to  make  orders 
concerning  roads  and  bridges,  to  assess  county  levies,  and  to  order  the 
payment  of  county  dues),  and  the  suspension  of  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus 
in  the  country  aforesaid: 

Therefore,  in  aid  of  the  due  execution  of  said  proclamation,  Lieut,  Col. 
George  S.  James,  Third  Battalion  Infantry  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
under  direction  of  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  commanding  Third  Military 
District,  is  appointed  provost-marshal  of  that  portion  of  country  in  the 
fhird  Military  District  of  South  Carolina  over  which  martial  law  is  ex- 
tended, and  he  is  charged  with  the  due  execution  of  the  said  procla- 
mation. He  will  forthwith  establish  an  efficient  military  police,  and 
will  enforce  the  following  orders : 

All  distillation  of  spirituous  liquors  is  positively  prohibited  and  the 
distilleries  will  forthwith  be  closed.  The  sale  of  spirituous  liquors  of 
any  kind  is  also  prohibited  and  establishments  for  the  sale  thereof  will 

be  closed.  __ 

II.  All  persons  infringing  the  above  prohibition  will  suffer  such  pun- 
ishment as  shall  be  ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a court-martial,  provided 
that  no  sentence  to  hard  labor  for  more  than  one  month  shall  be  inflicted 
by  the  sentence  of  a regimental  court-martial,  as  directed  by  the  67th 

article0fwar-  J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  18,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Blpley, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District : 

General:  I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  inform 
you  that  you  can  get  as  much  iron  as  you  require  for  the  defense  of 
Charleston  upon  requisition  on  Capt.  F.  L.  Childs,  commanding  arsenal. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  May  19,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Department , &c.,  Charleston : 

General:  Deducting  from  your  return  of  troops  for  the  month  of 
March  the  four  regiments  sent  West  and  Gregg’s  brigade  and  Orr’s 
regiment  sent  to  Virginia,  it  axipears  that  your  present  effective  strength 
is  about  25.000  or  26,000  men.  Starke’s  Virginia  and  the  two  North 
Carolina  regiments,  which  were  first  withdrawn,  are  not  deducted,  be- 
cause their  places  were  supplied  by  the  three  new  Georgia  regiments 
ordered  to  report  to  you.  Your  whole  effective  force,  as  far  as  my  in- 
formation tends,  must  be  about  double  the  available  force  of  the  enemy. 
Please  inform  me  whether  you  have  any  reliable  information  of  the 
strength  of  the  enemy,  and  whether  you  think  at  this  late  season  of  the 


506 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


year  he  would  undertake  any  operations  against  you.  1 presume  he 
will  not  venture  to  attack  either  Charleston  or  Savannah  uidess  pro- 
vided with  iron  boats,  and  I fear  we  are  losing  the  service  of  troops 
important  to  us  at  this  place  by  retaining  them  where  they  are  not  re- 
quired. If  you  can  concur  in  this  view  of  the  case  can  you  not  forward 
without  delay  a good  brigade  to  this  city  under  General  Ripley  if  he  can 
be  spared? 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond,  V a.,  May  20,  1862. 

General  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding , Charleston,  8.  C. : 

General:  I am  instructed  by  General  Lee  to  say  that  he  has  re- 
ceived the  papers  forwarded  by  you  relative  to  the  escape  of  the  steamer 
Planter  with  certain  guns  on  board  from  Charleston  Harbor.*  He  very 
much  regrets  the  circumstance,  and  hopes  that  necessary  measures  will 
be  taken  to  prevent  any  repetition  of  a like  misfortune  and  to  bring  to 
punishment  any  party  or  parties  that  may  be  proved  guilty  of  complicity 
in  the  affair  or  negligent  in  not  preventing  it. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chattahoochee,  Fla.,  May  20, 1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton, 

Commanding  C.  8.  Forces,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

General  : In  accordance  with  your  letter  to  His  Excellency  Gov- 
ernor Brown,  I have  made  a reconnaissance  of  the  Chattahoochee  and 
Apalachicola  Rivers  with  reference  to  obstructions  and  defenses.  The 
river  can  be  readily  and  effectually  obstructed  at  several  points  between 
Iola  and  the  mouth  of  the  Chipola  Rivers,  called  the  Narrows;  but 
these  obstructions  cannot  be  defended  by  land  batteries.  That  part  of 
the  river  known  as  Fort  Gadsden  Reach  can  be  as  readily  obstructed 
as  any  other,  and  the  site  of  the  fort  is  well  suited  for  military  works 
of  any  sort.  Moreover,  from  the  appearance  of  the  country,  I should 
infer  it  to  be  the  most  healthy  locality  upon  the  lower  river.  I went  as 
far  as  Apalachicola,  and  could  find  no  point  so  well  suited  as  Fort 
Gadsden  to  answer  all  euds.  In  additiou  to  the  defense,  &c.,  at  Fort 
Gadsden,  the  Saint  Mary’s  might  be  obstructed  and  Apalachicola  re- 
occupied. I go  to  Tallahassee  to  morrow  for  the  purpose  of  seeing 
General  Finegan,  and  if  he  makes  no  objection  to  my  views  I shall  pro- 
ceed at  once  to  obstruct  the  river  at  Fort  Gadsden.  1 shall  not  disturb 
the  guns  or  works  upon  the  river.  I consider  the  guns  too  light  for  use 
at  Fort  Gadsden,  and  they  might  answer  some  purpose  as  they  are  in 
compelling  the  enemy  to  runrthe  gauntlet. 

I would  request  that  two  8-inch  columbiads,  with  carriages,  platforms, 
implements,  &c.,  be  seut  to  me  as  soon  as  possible  at  Fort  Gadsden. 


Reference  is  probably  to  reports  on  pp.  13-15. 


507 


;hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 

'fit  is  impossible  to  furnish  the  means  of  defense,  it  would  be  better  to 
>bstruct  the  river  in  the  Narrows  and  leave  them  undefended. 

I consider  the  minimum  amount  of  cotton  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
it  and  below  Columbus  as  offering  a great,  if  not  the  only,  inducement 
or  the  enemy  to  ascend  it.  I would  therefore  suggest  the  propriety  of 
laving  it  removed  at  once  to  the  interior  or  burnt. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  E.  BOGGS, 

Chief  Engineer  State  of  Georgia . 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  27,  1862. 

The  within  report  of  Col.  W.  E.  Boggs,  State  Engineer  of  Georgia,  of 
i military  reconnaissance  of  the  Chattahoochee  Eiver,  with  a view  to 
distracting  the  most  advantageous  point  and  for  the  establishment  of 
i battery  for  its  defense,  is  respectfully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of 
iVar.  It  is  not  in  my  power  to  furnish  the  8-inch  guns  asked  for  by 
polonel  Boggs.  I have  myself,  however,  a higher  opinion  of  the  long- 
ange  32-pounder  than  Colonel  Boggs  entertains,  and  I am  clearly  of 
:he  opinion  that  Fort  Gadsden  is  the  best  site  on  the  river  to  combine 
;he  obstructions  and  defense. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Major - General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , 8.  G .,  May  20,  1862. 

Vlaj.  J.  E.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a dispatch  * from  the  acting  as- 
sistant adjutant  general  of  General  Gist,  as  also  a later  dispatch*  from 
:hat  general.  I beg  also  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  indorsement  on  the 
lispatch  sent  this  morning.  I will  endeavor  to  do  what  is  requisite  in 
;he  case,  but  I beg  leave  respectfully  to  suggest  that  as  the  evacuation 
}f  Cole’s  Island  was  not  in  accordance  with  views  which  1 have  enter- 
ained,  and  there  may  be  some  plan  which  the  major-general  has  had 
n view  for  the  defense  of  the  Stono  Eiver,  that  event  having  happened, 
which  I am  not  aware  of,  I should  be  happy  to  receive  instructions.  I 
shall  visit  James  Island  and  the  fort  at  the  mouth  of  Elliott’s  Cut  in  a 
rery  short  time. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


| «T  r 

Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston,  8.  C.,  May  20,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  E.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a dispatch  from  Lieutenant  Sim- 

* Reference  is  probably  to  the  reports  of  bombardment  of  Cole’s  Island.  See  pp.  16, 17. 


508 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

kins,  commanding  guard  on  steamer  Marion.  The  Marion  and  Clinch 
having  been  employed  endeavoring  to  move  the  obstruction  cribs  from 
near  Battery  Island  to  near  Elliott’s  Cut,  retired  when  the  gunboats 
crossed  the  bar.  I have  sent  a dispatch  to  General  Evans  suggesting 
that  he  send  his  steam  ferry-flat  at  John’s  Island  into  town  at  once; | 
also  telling  him  of  the  entrance  of  the  enemy  into  Stono,  and  I would 
respectfully  suggest  the  propriety  of  directions  being  given  to  that 
officer.  I am  endeavoring  to  bring  the  carriages  for  the  fort  at  the 
mouth  of  Elliott’s  Cut  to  their  position ; and  am,  very  respectfully,  your 
obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  May  20,  1802. 

Capt.  Leo.  D.  Walker: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  orders 
from  brigade  headquarters,  I proceeded  on  steamer  Marion,  with  a de- 
tachment of  20  men,  to  the  Stono  River  for  the  purpose  of  moving  the 
obstructions.  It  being  impracticable  to  move  them  before  high  water 
I had  to  wait  for  this  morning’s  tide.  The  enemy’s  gunboats,  taking 
advantage  of  the  same  tide,  came  into  the  river  and  compelled  me  to 
leave  the  obstructions.  I would  also  respectfully  report  that  while  re- 
turning I offered  to  remove  Mr.  Grimball  and  a portion  of  his  effects, 
but  he  preferred  seeking  protection  from  the  enemy  by  hoisting  a white 
flag,  which  compelled  me  to  leave  him  to  his  fate. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  SIMKINS, 

First  Lieutenant , Regiment  Artillery. 


Department  of  the  Military,  South  Carolina, 

Columbia , May  20,  18G2. 

General  J.  C.  Pemberton,  . 

Major  General , Commanding , South  Carolina : 

From  several  most  worthy  and  distinguished  citizens  of  the  State, 
residents  of  Charleston,  we  have  received  communications  of  such  a 
character  as  render  it  proper  that  the  substance  of  them  should  be  com- 
municated to  you.  The  information  convey  ed  is  such  that  I feel  assured 
would  be  most  likely  known  to  you  if  it  has  any  foundation,  but  still 
it  is  my  duty,  under  instructions  of  Governor  and  Council,  to  bring  it 
to  your  attention. 

We  are  told  disaffection  prevails  in  a large  portion  of  the  garrison  of 
Fort  Sumter,  extending  to  threats  of  mutiny  and  refusal  to  fire  against 
the  enemy  if  he  should  appear.  We  are  told  also  that  the  persons  who 
made  these  allegations  are  ready  to  substantiate  them. 

I request  therefore,  in  view  of  the  seriousness  of  the  charge,  that 
you  communicate  with  Mr.  William  Pringle  and  Judge  Edward  Frost 
on  the  subject. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  CHESNUT,  Jr., 

Chief  of  Department  of  Military , South  Carolina „ 


509 


Chap.  XXVI.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 

Charleston,  May  20, 1862. 

Brigadier-General  Evans,  Adams  Run: 

The  enemy’s  gunboats  within  the  Stono  ; keep  your  advanced  pickets 
within  sight  of  them.  Move  negroes  back. 

* J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-General.  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  May  21,  1862. 

Col.  A.  L.  Long, 

Military  Secretary , Headquarters  Commanding  General : 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  an  official 
letter  of  the  19th  instant  from  the  commanding  general.  In  reply  to 
his  inquiry  as  to  my  information  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy  I regret 
to  say  that  I have  none  which  I consider  reliable.  General  Evans  esti- 
mates about  10,000  in  front  of  his  line,  basing  his  opinion  on  the  number 
of  camps,  &c.  General  HunterhashisheadquartersonDaufuskie  Island. 
I have  no  means  of  approximating  the  number  of  his  troops  on  that 
Island,  Hilton  Head,  Saint  Helena,  or  Port  Royal.  Most  of  his  forces 
have  been  withdrawn  from  the  neighborhood  of  Port  Royal  Perry, 
though  small  incursions  for  negro  stealing  are  represented  to  have  been 
recently  made  from  that  direction.  I do  not  think  he  has  to  exceed  a 
regiment  at  Pulaski  and  the  immediate  neighborhood. 

As  the  result  of  the  inexcusable  and  gross  neglect  of  duty  on  the 
part  of  those  having  charge  of  the  steamer  Planter,  recently  abducted 
by  her  negro  crew,  the  enemy  yesterday  (doubtless  availing  of  the 
knowledge  of  said  crew)  entered  the  Stono  River  with  two  gunboats 
and  anchored  off  Battery  Island,  shelling  on  either  side  as  they 
passed.  All  our  guns  and  public  stores  of  every  description  had  been 
withdrawn  and  the  buildings  were  fired  as  the  infantry  withdrew.  I 
do  not  suppose  there  is  any  immediate  intention  of  a*  tacking  Charleston; 
this  movement,  however,  may  be  a commencement  with  that  object  in 
view.  Our  land  defenses  on  James  Island,  however,  are  very  strong. 
The  battery  constructed  at  Elliott’s  Cut,  on  the  Stono  River  (uot  yet 
entirely  completed),  mounts  only  eight  guns.  I desire  to  make  it  twenty, 
but  under  present  arrangements  cannot  effect  it.  I do  not  regard 
Charleston  as  strong.  What  under  the  old  system  of  warfare  was  our 
strength  is  now  our  great  weakness.  The  many  approaches  by  water 
and  the  recent  proof  of  the  practicability  of  their  gunboats  passing  our 
batteries  have  made  the  defense  of  this  city  a very  difficult  problem  to 
solve.  To  obstruct  2,000  yards  of  channel  (and  this  with  relation  to  the 
forts,  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  -is  decided  upon  as  the  most  feasible)  looks 
almost  like  an  impossibility.  Every  effort  is,  however,  being  made  to 
accomplish  it.  I am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  the  most  effectual 
defense  of  the  city  of  Charleston  can  and  should  be  made  from  and 
around  the  city  itself.  I believe  that  when  the  enemy  is  prepared  to 
assault  the  forts  at  the  entrance  to  the  harbor  he  will  do  so  in  such  force 
and  with  such  appliances  as  will  reduce  it  to  a question  of  time  only. 
One  great  reliance  being  on  these  works,  when  they  fall  our  means  of 
defense  will  be  inadequate  to  hold  the  city,  but  with  the  guns  now  within 
their  walls  I am  satisfied  that,  however  great  might  be  the  injury  to  the 
city  itself  from  bombardment,  his  feet  could  be  kept  from  polluting  its 
streets.  This  has  for  some  time  been  my  opinion,  and  I am  glad  to  find 


510 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chaf.  XXVL 


many  gentlemen  of  eminence  and  intelligence  who  entirely  concur  with 
me.  Among  others  I will  mention  the  If  on.  R.  W.  Barnwell,  Confeder- 
ate States  Senate,  who  called  this  morning  to  see  me  on  this  very  sub-  f 
ject.  The  forts  should  not  only  be  dismounted  but  destroyed.  They  t 
will  be  of  no  use  to  us  after  the  termination  of  this  war  in  their  present  ( 
condition,  for  I take  it  impregnable  iron-clad  batteries  must  take  the 
place  of  stone  and  mortar.  1 propose  this  subject  to  the  serious  con- 
sideration of  the  Department.  The  greatest  difficulty  in  the  way  of  this 
radical  change  would  be  the  removal  of  the  guns  from  the  forts  without 
the  knowledge  of  the  enemy.  It  might,  however,  be  done. 

Unless  positively  directed  to  send  another  brigade  from  this  depart-  i 
ment  I do  not  feel  authorized  to  do  so.  At  this  time  we  need  every  man  . 
we  have  for  the  defense  of  the  cities  of  Charleston  and  Savannah.  I 
do  not  imagine  that  the  season  will  prevent  the  enemy’s  attack  when 
he  is  otherwise  prepared  to  make  it. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding . 


Executive  Council  Chamber, 

Columbia , S.  C.,  May  21, 1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  certain  resolutions  adopted 
by  the  Governor  and  Council  of  this  State. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  F.  ARTHUR, 
Secretary  Executive  Council . 

[Inclosure.] 

State  of  S.  C.,  Executive  Council  Chamber, 
Columbia , S.  C .,  May  21,  1862. 

The  following  resolutions,  adopted  by  the  Governor  and  Council,  have 
been  ordered  to  be  published  : 

Resolved . That  the  Governor  and  Executive  Council  concur  in  opin- 
ion with  the  people  of  South  Carolina,  assembled  in  Convention,  that 
Charleston  should  be  defended  at  any  cost  of  life  or  property,  and  that 
in  their  deliberate  judgment  they  would  j) refer  a repulse  of  the  en- 
emy with  the  entire  city  in  ruins  to  an  evacuation  or  surrender  on  any 
terms  whatever. 

Resolved , That  while  they  urge  a defense  of  the  city  at  every  hazard, 
and  claim  no  forbearance  from  the  military  authorities  from  considera- 
tions of  life  or  property,  the  Governor  and  Council,  with  the  Convention, 
disapprove  a voluntary  burning  of  the  city  by  the  citizens  themselves 
irrespective  of  military  command. 

Resolved , That  while  they  have  communicated  to  the  Confederate 
commanding  generals  the  report  adopted  by  The  Convention  a as  the 
expressed  wish  of  the  people  of  the  State,”  have  freely  uttered  the  con- 
victions of  their  own  judgments,  and  have  repeatedly  proffered  all  the 
aid  and  co  operation  in  their  power  to  effect  the  proposed  result,  the 
Governor  and  Council,  like  the  Convention,  have  considered  that  the 
ultimate  decision  as  to  the  defense  of  Charleston  rests  necessarily  with 
the  Confederate  authorities,  who  control  the  only  military  forces  capa- 


511 


;aAr.  XXVI J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


t)le  of  making  effectual  resistance  and  who  alone  are  responsible  for 
eke  action  taken. 

Resolved , That  certified  copies  of  the  foregoing  resolutions  be  fur- 
nished to  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States,  to  the  Secretary  of 
War,  and  to  thp  Confederate  generals  commanding  in  South  Carolina, 
|ind  that  the  same  be  published  once  in  the  Charleston  papers. 


Official  copy. 


B.  F.  ARTHUR, 
Secretary  Executive  Council. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Run , S.  6\,  May  21,  18G2. 

|Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant*  General,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  official 
:elegram  of  the  major-general  commanding  in  reference  to  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  in  the  Stono,  and  beg  leave  to  report  that  I have 
evacuated  John’s  and  Wadmalaw  Islands,  with  the  exception  of  the 
cavalry  pickets.  This  movement  was  made  agreeably  to  verbal  instruc- 
:ions  received  from  the  major-general  commanding.  The  pickets  are 
iirected  to  watch  carefully  the  Stono  and  Wadmalaw  Rivers.  I would 
ilso  report  that  as  the  railroad  is  now  open  to  the  enemy  at  Rantowles 
md  John’s  Island  Ferry  my  supplies  will  be  cut  off  if  he  should  de- 
stroy the  bridge  and  take  the  railroad.  On  account  of  the  limited 
means  of  transportation  the  troops  of  this  command  will  evidently 
suffer  for  provisions  unless  a depot  of  stores  is  conveniently  located. 
To  prevent  this  I have  directed  my  commissary  to  store  a quantity  of 
provisions  at  Legareville  or  at  some  point  near  on  the  road  leading  to 
Summerville.  The  rice  now  in  store  at  this  place  is  awaiting  the 
iecessary  transportation. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  21,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  say  to 
/ou  that  if  necessary  you  will  suspend  all  other  . work  until  the  Stono  is 
horoughly  obstructed,  as  it  is  essential  that  the  work  should  be  done 
it  once,  and  it  will  be  prosecuted  day  and  night  until  finished. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Provisional  Forces, 
Department  of  East  and  Middle  Florida, 

Tallahassee , May  21,  1862. 

Gfeneral  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army , Richmond: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  an  approximate  estimate  of 


512  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  ICha^.  xNVl 

the  number  of  troops  in  this  department  (mustered  in  for  the  war 
after  the  Fourth  Begiment  Florida  Volunteers  leaves  for  Corinth  a: 
follows: 


Regiment. 


Fifth  Regiment  Florida  Vol- 
unteers. 

Sixth  Regiment  Florida  Vol- 
unteers. 

Seventh  Regiment  Florida 
Volunteers. 

First  Regiment  Rifles 


First  Special  Battalion 

Three  batteries  light  ar- 
tillery. 

Eight  companies  cavalry  .... 

Three  companies  six  months 
Missouri  Volunteer’s. 


Arras. 

Aggre- 

gate. 

Remarks. 

Two-tliirds  armed 

1, 150 

Stationed  at  Camp  Lee,  near  Tal 
labassee. 

Fully  aimed * 

1, 100 

Stationed  on  the  Chattahoochee 
River. 

Ordered  to  Jacksonville  to  reliev 
the  Four  th  Regiment,  under  or 
ders  for  Corinth. 

Four-fifths  armed 

1, 100 

No  arms 

1, 000 

Captain  Amaker,  under  authorit' 
from  the  War  Department,  ha; 
the  full  number  of  companie, 
for  the  war,  which  will  iuclnd< 
a tew  independent  companie; 

that  have  been  filled  np.  Fieh 
officers  will  be  elected  at  ar 

Fully  armed 

600 

eaily  day. 

Stationed  at  Ricco’s  Bluff. 

Six  field  pieces  to  each  com- 

450 

One  on  the  Chattahoochee ; on< 

pany. 

near  Tallahassee;  one  nea: 
Jacksonville. 

Partly  armed 

700 

Stationed  at  different  points  or 
the  coast. 

Partly  armed 

250 

6,  350 

Now  being  reorganized  for  th» 
war. 

As  the  summer  advances  there  is  less  probability  of  an  invasion  ol 
Florida  by  the  enemy,  and  I respectfully  submit  that  2,500  men  (i| 
armed)  will  be  sufficient  to  guard  the  coast  of  Florida  during  the  sum 
mer  and  tall  months.  This  would  leave  (when  the  conscripts  are  en 
rolled)  fully  4,000  men  available  for  service  outside  the  State.  If  the! 
services  of  these  troops  are  needed  at  other  points  (as  I presume  they; 
will  be),  I respectfully  ask  permission  to  accompany  them  in  command, 
One  good  battery  of  Hying  artillery  could  also  be  taken  from  Florida 
and  attached  to  the  brigade. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient 
servant, 


JOS.  FIKEGAN-, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Camp  Marion, 
Near  Georgetown , 8.  O.,  May  22,  1862. 

General  Pemberton, 

Commander-in- Chief  of  Coast  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia: 

Sir:  There  came  into  this  port  this  morning  at  sunrise  two  war 
steamers,  each  carrying  ten  guns.  They  remained  about  two  hours 
and  returned  down  the  bay,  and  are  now  up  Waccamaw  Biver.  I 
expect  them  to  go  up  all  of  our  rivers  that  empty  into  Winyaw  Bay.;i 
They  did  nothing  while  in  this  port,  except  to  take  a small  pilot-boat 
lrom  our  dock.  They  did  not  demand  a surrender  of  the  town.  They 
ordered  our  flag  to  be  hauled  down,  but  the  reply  was  if  they  wished 
it  down  they  would  have  to  haul  it  down.  I am  not  prepared  to  offer 
them  an  effectual  resistance  while  they  remain  on  their  boats,  but  if 
they  land  1 shall  give  them  the  best  fight  I can.  1 had  the  brig  Joseph 


Chap.  XXVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  513 

burned  and  other  naval  stores.  I also  had  two  cavalry  companies,  one 
on  Paulies  Island,  the  other  on  Waccamaw  Keck.  There  has  been 
heavy  firing  in  that  direction  since  about  8 a.  m.;  it  is  now  11  a.  m, 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  P.  EMANUEL, 

Major , Commanding  First  Military  District . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  22, 1862. 
Major-General  Pemberton,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Sir:  The  apprehension  of  unfortunate  consequences  which  may  arise 
from  any  doubt  or  misunderstanding  of  the  relation  between  you  and 
the  Governor  and  Council  of  this  State  is  the  occasion  and  our  apology 
for  now  addressing  you.  For  the  purpose  of  removing  that  doubt  or 
misapprehension,  if  it  should  exist,  and  of  placing  the  matter  in  a clear 
and  unmistakable  condition,  we  have  proposed  in  the  form  of  interroga- 
tions the  matter  we  desire  to  submit  to  you. 

Supposing  that  military  considerations  hereafter  to  arise  should  lead 
you  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  your  duty  to  retire  your  troops  from 
the  defense  of  the  city,  would  you  consider  it  an  interference  with  your 
authority  that  the  Governor  and  Council  should  commence  and  make 
such  preparations  at  once  for  the  defense  of  the  city,  additional  to  and 
exclusive  of  such  as  you  have  ordered  or  may  order,  as  may  be  proper 
for  those  who  prepare  to  defend  the  city  to  the  last  point? 
i Would  you  not  be  willing  to  order  or  advise  and  direct  in  the  prepa- 
ration of  such  defenses  ? 

Would  you  not  be  willing  by  your  counsel  and  aid  to  assist  the  Gov- 
ernor and  Council  in  whatever  was  necessary  to  be  done  under  sucb 
circumstances  as  much  so  as  if  you  were  at  liberty  now  to  decide  that 
to  such  last  point  you  would  yourself  hold  the  city  ? 
i You  will  perceive  in  these  questions  that  there  is  assumed  to  be  a 
political  obligation  upon  the  State  and  its  people  to  defend  the  city 
beyond  that  point  at  which  perchance  a single  regard  to  military  duty 
might  lead  to  the  withdrawal  of  your  force. 

For  the  full  import  of  the  questions  we  address  to  you  it  is  proper  to 
assume  that  such  may  be  the  case — we  hope  it  will  not — but  that  consid- 
eration, military  as  well  as  political,  may  unite  in  giving  us  the  benefit 
of  your  presence  to  the  extremest  point  of  defense.  Yet  it  may  not  be 
so,  and  for  that  contingency  we  wish  to  prepare $ and  in  so  doing  our 
questions  are  directed  to  you,  to  ascertain  whether  you  would  consider 
it  an  interference  with  you  to  make  those  preparations  (under  your 
order  or  with  your  advice  and  direction)  which  contemplate  the  possi- 
bility of  the  defense  of  the  city  remaining  with  those  whose  political 
obligations  bind  them  to  its  unconditional  defense. 

No  slight  evidence  of  our  appreciation  of  the  obligation  we  feel  is  in 
now  addressing  you  this  letter.  We  beg  to  assure  you  that  our  apology 
tor  it  is  in  the  circumstances  which  surround  us. 

We  shall  communicate  a copy  of  this  letter  and  your  reply  as  soon  as 
received  to  the  Governor  and  Council^ 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servants, 

W.  PORCHER  MILES. 

A.  G.  MAGRATH. 


33  R R — YOL  XIV 


514 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 


W 


Headquarters  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  22,  1862. 

Porcher  Miles  and  A.  G.  Magrath: 


Gentlemen  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 

letter  of  this  date.  . , ,,  , T 

In  reply  to  your  first  interrogation  I have  to  say  that  1 shall  not 
consider  it  an  interference  with  my  authority  should  the  Governor  and 
Council  make  preparations  for  the  defense  of  this  city,  provided  the 
plans  of  defense  are  submitted  to  me  and  meet  my  approval,  lo  the 
second  interrogation  I answer  in  the  affirmative  on  all  the  points  em- 
IjFticcd 

The  disposition  evinced  by  so  many  distinguished  citizens  of  the  State 
to  defend  Charleston  to  the  last  extreme  meets  with  my  entire  sympa- 
thy and  concurrence.  . , , „ 

It  is  possible  that  “ a single  regard  to  military  cluty”  may  require  the 
withdrawal  of  Confederate  troops,  but  this  I confidently  hope  will  not 
be  the  case. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  j Q>  PEMBERTON, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  23,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  NT.  G.  Evans,  . 

Commanding  Third  Military  District 


General  : It  is  probable  that  an  attempt  may  be  made  to-day  or 
to-morrow  by  land  and  water  against  the  gunboats  ot  the  enemy  lying 

“fdesb-e^ou'to  co-operate  with  General  Ripley’s  troops  so  far  as  jo 
have  a battery  of  field  artillery  in  readiness  to  open  upon  the  boats  should 
occasion  offer  without  too  great  risk  to  your  battery,  as  the  contem- 
plated  operations  will  depend  upon  the  movement  of  the  enemy  s boats. 
The  precise  point  where  your  batteries  might  be  most  serviceable  can- 
j,ot  of  course  be  indicated,  but  must  be  determined  by  circumstances. 
All  I at  present  desire  on  your  part  is  that  you  have  a battery 
toess  to  assail  him  should  he  become  engaged  with  General  Ripleys 
command. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  j a PEMBERTON, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  AND  _pE0EG^> 

Charleston , May  23, 1862. 


General  N.  G.  Evans  : 

You  can  attack  him  if.  after  thorough  reconnaissance,  you  are  satim 

fied  your  men  will  not  he  too  much  exposed  to  his  shell.  Don  t get 
your  artillery  where  you  can’t  get  it  off.  j q pBMBEKTON) 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Chai>.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  515 

Headquarters  State  of  South  Carolina, 

May  23,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond , Va. : 

My  Dear  Sir:  In  your  letter  to  me  dated  the  15th  of  May  instant 
you  were  so  kind  as  to  say,  “I  would  be  glad  to  hear  your  suggestions 
as  to  the  most  advisable  mode  of  remedying  the  evil.”  I now  write,  in 
conformity  to  your  suggestion,  freely.  There  is  great  disorganization,  I 
fear,  in  both  forts,  but  particularly  Eort  Sumter.  When  in  Virginia  last 
summer  with  a company  Calhoun  offended  Major  Wagner  and,  I be- 
lieve, General  Ripley,  and  when  he  returned  charges  were  preferred 
against  him.  This  generated  wide  spread  dissensions.  Ripley  has  lately 
had  Calhoun  out  of  the  fort,  I believe,  on  a protracted  court-martial, 
and  he  also  made  a special  assignment  of  Major  Wagner  as  inspector 
of  ordnance  generally  outside  at  the  batteries  in  his  district.  This  has 
left,  I believe,  Captain  Rhett  in  command  of  the  fort.  He  is  said  to  be 
a favorite  of  General  Ripley.  Lately  5 men  deserted  from  the  fort  and 
went  to  the  fleet,  as  I am  informed,  and  I hear  that  some  of  the  guns 
have  been  spiked.  Four  of  the  companies  belonging  to  that  fort  have 
been  assigned  to  other  posts,  and  this,  as  you  know,  has  weakened  the 
garrison  too  much.  There  are  eighty-seven  guns  there,  all  mounted, 
and  if  surrounded  they  could  fight  sixty  at  one  time.  To  garrison  it 
for  fighting  night  and  day  in  a great  engagement  would  require  at  least 
800  men,  as  you  yourself  once  observed  to  me.  Ripley  has  had  difficul- 
ties with  Dunovant,  who  commands  the  fine  regiment  of  regulars,  and 
was  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and  at  Fort  Moultrie.  Ripley  ordered  him  to 
Church  Flats,  with,  I believe,  four  or  five  of  his  companies.  No  officer 
ought  to  be  in  command  of  Moultrie  and  the  island  unless  he  is  a 
thorough  military  man  of  experience,  and  that  regular  regiment  ought 
not  to  be  divided  if  we  expect  an  attack.  I therefore  most  respectfully 
suggest  that  an  ordnance  officer  of  high  standing  be  immediately  ordered 
to  inspect  both  forts  as  to  ammunition,  men,  and  guns,  and  report  if 
they  are  in  thorough  trim  for  immediate  action.  There  are  only  about 
56,000  pounds  of  powder  in  Fort  Sumter.  Let  the  regular  regiment 
of  artillery  all  be  ordered  into  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie  (it  is  780 
strong)  and  let  the  regular  regiment  of  infantry  be  ordered  to  Sullivan’s 
Island,  with  two  of  the  companies  into  Moultrie  to  support  the  artillery 
companies.  Let  two  native-born  artillery  companies  from  Charleston  be 
immediately  ordered  into  Fort  Sumter  as  a guard  upon  the  enlisted  men, 
who  are  strangers,  and  after  the  Fort  Jackson  mutiny  let  us  not  be 
placed  in  the  same  position  at  Fort  Sumter.  Let  two  of  the  regular  en- 
listed companies  of  artillery  be  ordered  from  Sumter  to  Moultrie,  and 
a battalion  of  native  infantry  be  stationed  there  as  a guard  against 
mutiny  amongst  the  regulars.  If  Charleston  is  to  be  attacked  at  all  thus 
late  in  the  season  it  will  only  be  by  iron- clad  boats  through  the  regular 
approaches,  and  the  management  of  these  forts  is  all  important.  De- 
fective or  inexperienced  officers  will  inevitably  lose  us  everything.  I 
know  of  no  heavy  ordnance  officer  as  experienced  as  General  Huger, 
and  he  would  be  the  very  man  for  the  place  if  it  were  not  that  he, 
unfortunately,  would  not  act  with  us  at  first,  and  this  is  well  known  in 
Charleston,  and  there  is  great  ill-feeling  toward  him  there  even  amongst 
his  relations.  We  are  making  large  chains,  and  I sent  some  immense 
chains  down  from  this  place  to  stretch  across  the  channel.  Fort  Timber 
is  being  erected  at  the  mouth  of  the  channel  inside  of  the  forts ; its 
position  is  good,  and  heavy  batteries  are  being  erected  at  Fort  John- 
son, so  as  to  command  the  interior  harbor  if  the  boats  should  pass. 
Castle  Pinckney  is  being  put  in  condition  also  for  this  purpose.  In 


516  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 

addition  to  this  I think  some  heavy  guns— at  least  three  rifled  32- 
pounders — should  be  put  on  White  Point  Battery,  and  the  largest 
mortars  should  be  put  in  position  at  Fort  Johnson,  and  several  should 
also  be  put  on  the  high  points  in  the  upper  part  of  the  city  toward  the 
Neck,  so  as  to  be  used  if  the  gunboats  got  into  the  harbor;  or,  it  any 
landing  is  attempted,  if  they  get  in,  these  mortars  and  heavy  guns  in 
the  city  should  be  used  upon  them,  and  let  the  city  stand  the  shelling. 
One-third  of  it  is  burnt  already,  right  through  the  lower  part  of  it,  and 
it  cannot  be  extensively  burnt  except  from  the  burnt  district  down  to 
the  water.  Our  people  are  thoroughly  prepared  for  it.  At  this  season 
of  the  year  they  can  have  no  infautry  force  to  land  unless  they  whip 
us  in  Tennessee  and  Virginia.  All  of  our  ports  are  taken  now.  It  is 
of  the  last  importance  we  should  hold  Charleston  to  the  last  extremity, 
as  we  can  have  no  intercourse  in  any  event  with  the  foreign  world  if 
Charleston  is  taken.  If  you  will  send  a superior  heavy  ordnance  officer 
there— and  I think  on  the  whole  Huger  is  the  man,  unless  you  know 
of  some  other— and  six  heavy  rifled  cannon,  with  ten  or  twelve  10-inch 
and  13-inch  mortars  (I  let  General  Beauregard  send  eight  of  our  large 
State  mortars  to  Pensacola  after  the  fall  of  Sumter ; can  we  not  get 
them  back  now  ?)  and  give  the  orders  that  Charleston  shall  be  defended , 
even  amid  conflagration  and  blood , it  shall  be  done.  If  I could  have  any 
assurance  that  the  Confederate  officers  would  not  withdraw  their  forces 
until  we  have  fought  it  out  in  the  harbor  and  in  the  streets  I will  pledge 
myself  to  give  all  the  powers  and  resources  I can  command  to  aid  and 
assist  them  in  any  emergency.  I speak  what  I believe  is  the  deliberate 
feeling  of  the  State  when  I say  that  we  universally  prefer  it  a city  of 
ashes  and  the  site  defended  to  its  being  in  possession  of  the  enemy. 

We  can  concentrate  about  15,000  men  with  arms  to  defend  it,  and 
this  is  far  more  than  they  can  send  to  take  it;  but  what  we  want  is  heavy 
cannon  planted  all  around  our  inner  harbor,  with  heavy  mortars  on  the 
rising  land  surrounding  the  city,  and  orders  issued  to  use  all  human 
exertion  to  defend  it.  It  is  duo  to  us  and  to  our  cause  that  we  should 
make  it  a slaughter-house  rather  than  to  retire,  even  if  threatened  to 
be  overpowered.  Let  me  entreat  you  to  look  at  this  matter  imme- 
diately, and  let  it  be  known  that  you  take  the  deepest  interest  in  it, 
and  that  you  expect  every  officer  to  do  his  duty. 

You  will  pardon  me  for  writing  thus  freely  to  you,  for  you  have  been 
amongst  us,  and  your  father  before  you  was  on  every  bloody  field  m 
our  State  in  our  first  Revolution.  I think  as  my  grandfather  was  with 
him  so  often  in  battle  1 have  a right  to  appeal  to  you  uow  in  this  confi- 
dential manner.  There  has  been  so  much  ill  feeling  amongst  the  officers 
in  Charleston  that  we  want  a new  man  of  large  experience  who  will  talk 
and  act  like  a hero  and  raise  the  enthusiasm  of  our  people.  Let  it  be 
boldly  known  that  the  defense  is  to  be  desperate.  I will  go  with  you 
in  everything  and  stand  by  your  officers  to  the  last,  and  if  I had  com- 
mand 1 would  stand  with  them  at  the  guns,  let  the  consequences  be  what 
they  may.  We  can  afford  to  lose  the  city  entirely,  but  not  our  honor. 

Please  let  me  hear  from  you. 

With  great  esteem,  I am,  yours,  very  truly ^ ^ plCKENS> 


Headquarters 


State  of  South  Carolina, 

Columbia , May  23,  18G2.  * 


Major-General  Pemberton: 

Dear  Sir  : I am  informed  from  the  highest  sources  that  5 men  re* 


517 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

cently  deserted  F«>rt  Sumter  and  went  to  the  fleet,  and  that  there  is 
great  disaffection  among  the  garrison.  I hear  that  the  cannon  have 
been  spiked,  &c.  I hear  also  that  the  division  amongst  the  officers  has 
produced  the  worst  effects  as  to  the  strict  organization.  The  example  of 
Fort  Jackson  may  have  produced  its  effects  upon  our  garrison  also. 

I beg  leave  most  respectfully  to  suggest  that  two  native-born  artillery 
companies  from  Charleston  troops  be  immediately  ordered  into  the 
fort,  so  as  to  give  a feeling  of  security  as  a guard  over  disaffection. 
I would  most  respectfully  suggest  that  Captain  Boyce’s  fine  artillery 
company  be  ordered  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  to  be  in  position  as  a guard 
to  defend  Moultrie  from  any  disaffection  amongst  the  regular  infantry 
regiment  stationed  there,  and  they  perhaps  might  be  of  great  service 
in  garrisoning  Fort  Moultrie  as  an  artillery  company. 

It  is  too  late  in  the  season  for  the  enemy  to  send  any  land  force  to 
invest  Charleston  regularly,  but  they  may  send  their  gunboats  any  day 
into  the  harbor,  and  if  so  the  great  fight  will  be  from  the  forts  at  first. 

I hope  and  pray  that  it  is  well  known  that  the  defense  is  to  be  des- 
perate, and  if  they  can  be  repulsed  even  with  the  city  in  ruins  we  would 
unanimously  prefer  it.  It  is  due  to  our  cause  and  our  country  that  we 
should  make  a desperate  fight  in  Charleston.  We  can  afford  to  lose 
our  city,  but  not  our  honor.  I will  stand  by  you  in  anything  you  de- 
sire. I pray  you  will  excuse  my  writing  thus  freely  to  yon. 

I suggest  the  Washington  Artillery,  Captain  Walter,  Marion  Artil- 
lery, Captain  Parker,  and  the  Palmetto  Guard,  Captain  Buist,  as  fit  to 
be  sent  into  Fort  Sumter.  These  men  would  restore  confidence,  and  it 
is  all-important  that  this  confidence  should  be  restored. 

In  great  haste,  but  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  23,  1862. 

Hon.  James  Chesnut,  Jr., 

Chief  of  Department  of  Military : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  30th  instant,  bringing  to  my  notice  certain  reports  touching  the 
loyalty  of  “ a large  portion  of  the  garrison  of  Fort  Sumter,”  extending 
(you  say)  to  threats  of  mutiny  and  refusal  to  fire  against  the  enemy  if 
he  should  appear.  Previous  to  the  receipt  of  your  letter  I had  directed 
Brigadier-General  Ripley  to  cause  an  investigation  to  be  made  as  to 
the  reliability  of  similar  reports  current  in  this  city,  and  which  I have 
since  found  are  traceable  to  the  same  sources  as  those  brought  by  your- 
self to  my  attention.  It  may  be  that  there  are  disaffected  individuals 
among  the  rank  and  file  of  Fort  Sumter,  as  there  probably  are  disaf- 
fected individuals  in  most  of  the  corps  in  Confederate  service,  but  that 
this  feeling  extends  to  any  considerable  number  I see  no  reason  to  be- 
lieve. Colonel  Calhoun  and  the  officers  of  his  command,  to  use  the  words 
of  the  colonel  himself,  “have  confidence  in  the  courage,  patriotism, 
and  discipline  of  the  men,”  and  he  adds,  u I myself  have  no  misgivings.” 

Private  John  Aiken,  of  Company  I,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  is  now  in  confinement,  and  will  be  brought  to  trial  before  a 
general  court-martial,  charged  with  making  use  of  seditious  language 
in  presence  of  Mr.  James  W.  Simons,  a citizen  of  Charleston.  If  there 
is  truth  in  his  allegations,  I see  no  procedure  so  likely  to  develop  as 


518 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


that  about  to  be  taken  in  his  case.  I inclose  you  aopies  * of  Colonel 
Calhoun’s  letter,  as  also  one  from  myself  to  Brigadier- General  Ripley, 
referring  to  this  subject. 

Respectfully, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  May  23, 1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Send  a good  brigade  selected  from  troops  of  upper  part  of  Georgia 
and  South  Carolina  that  could  not  stand  summer’s  campaign  on  coast; 
a brigadier-general  selected  by  you  to  report  here  without  delay. 

Very  respectfully,  B.  EEE. 


Marion,  S.  C.,  May  23, 1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Reliable  information  has  been  received  that  four  of  the  enemy’s  gun- 
boats were  15  miles  above  Georgetown  last  night,  in  the  Waccamaw 
River.  There  are  really  no  militia  in  this  region  to  be  ordered  out,  and 
with  a small  force  the  railroad  at  Fair  Bluff  can  be  approached  and 
destroyed.  Whether  the  boats  can  pass  the  obstructions  on  the  Pee 
Dee  remains  to  be  tested.  I go  there  forthwith. 

Very  respectfully, 

J F ’ W.  W.  BARLLEE. 


Headquarters  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  24,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District : 

General  : General  W.  W.  Harllee  telegraphs  me  that  reliable  in- 
formation has  been  received  that  four  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  were  15 
miles  above  Georgetown,  in  the  Waccamaw  River.  It  is  very  desirable 
if  possible  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  the  railroad  at  Fair  Bluff  or 
Santee.  I wish  you  to  send  eight  companies  of  infantry  and  a section 
of  field  artillery  by  rail  toward  Santee  or  Fair  Bluff,  as  the  case  may  re- 
quire, well  equipped  for  the  temporary  service.  The  commander  of  this 
force  should  be  a perfectly  reliable  person.  On  arrival  he  will  report 
the  condition  of  affairs  and  act  as  emergencies  may  require. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  

J 1 ’ ’ J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  May  24, 1862. 


Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens: 

Have  ordered  a regiment  and  one  section  of  field  artillery  to  proceed 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  5 IS 

at  once  to  Fair  Bluff,  Mars  Bluff,  or  Santee,  as  circumstances  may  re- 
quire. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON', 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Charleston,  May  24,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond : 

General  Ripley,  with  Moore’s  South  Carolina  and  Gibson’s  Georgia 
regiments,  ordered  to  Richmond. 

Enemy’s  gunboats  reported  in  Waccamaw  River,  have  ordered  a regi- 
ment and  section  of  artillery  on  line  of  Manchester  and  Wilmington 
Railroad  to  protect  bridges,  &c.  Gunboats  in  Stono $ shall  probably 
attack.  I need  more  brigadier-generals  in  this  department. 
Respectfully, 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  24,  1862. 

Hon.  James  Chesnut,  Jr., 

Chief  of  Department  of  Military  South  Carolina , Columbia  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  very  respectfully  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  communication  to  myself  of  the  22d*  ultimo,  as  well  as  a copy 
of  your  communication  to  General  R.  E.  Lee,*  Confederate  States  Army, 
dated  January  20,  1862,  relative  to  the  necessity  of  stationing  military 
guards  “ at  the  important  bridges  on  the  lines  connecting  this  State 
with  Georgia  and  North  Carolina.” 

In  reply  I would  respectfully  state  that  it  will  be  impossible  for  me 
to  furnish  from  the  Confederate  soldiers  under  my  command  the  neces- 
sary guards  for  the  points  above  alluded  to.  I do  not  think  any  greater 
necessity  exists  at  present  why  these  bridges  should  be  guarded  by 
Confederate  States  troops  than  did  exist  when  General  Lee  had  com- 
mand of  this  department.  The  points  to  be  guarded  too  are  in  th© 
most  unhealthy  portions  of  the  State,  and  would  require  under  the 
military  system  a much  larger  force  than  100  men,  though  I admit  they 
could  be  guarded  by  100  citizens  not  subject  to  military  duty  employed 
by  the  different  railroad  companies,  which  I confess  appears  to  me  the 
most  legitimate  kind  of  guards  to  employ  on  such  duty.  I w'ould  also 
add  that  my  command  has  been  very  much  diminished  since  General 
Lee’s  departure  from  this  department,  and  I have  within  the  five  min- 
utes received  a telegraphic  order  to  send  to  Virginia  one  of  my  brigades. 

Regretting  my  inability  to  oblige  His  Excellency  the  Governor  and 
Council  in  this,  I am,  &c., 

i . J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  57.  f Charleston , May  24,  1862. 

I.  Colonel  Moore,  now  stationed  in  the  Third  Military  District,  will 


Not  found. 


520 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


proceed  at  once  to  this  city  with  his  regiment  and  join  Colonel  Gibson’s 
regiment  Georgia  Volunteers.  The  two  regiments  will  then  move  under 
the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Con- 
federate States,  to  Richmond,  Va.,  tor  duty  in  that  vicinity. 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  A.  R.  Lawton  will  at  once  order  Brigadier-General 
Mercer,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  with  two  regiments 
of  Georgia  Volunteers,  to  proceed  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  for  permanent 
duty. 

#*#*### 

-By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton  : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  of  S.  C., 

No.  446.  ( Charleston , May  24,  1862. 

I.  The  steamer  Chesterfield,  with  a gunboat  in  tow,  will  proceed  this 
afternoon  to  a point  in  the  marsh  waters  beyond  Secession ville,  where 
the  boat  will  be  placed  in  position  by  Captain  Bonneau  according  to  in- 
structions heretofore  given.  The  quartermaster’s  department  will  pro- 
vide a steamer  to  do  the  duty  of  the  Chesterfield  while  she  is  absent 
from  the  harbor. 

II.  The  steamer  Marion,  having  in  tow  a gunboat,  and  being  in  charge 
of  Lieut.  C.  W.  Morris,  will  proceed  through  Wappoo  Cut  this  afternoon 
to  the  Stono  River,  where  she  will  be  located  under  the  protection  of 
the  battery  at  Elliott’s  Cut.  The  commanding  officer  will  receive  in- 
structions at  that  point. 

III.  Brigadier-General  Gist  will  as  soon  as  possible  place  in  position 
the  guns  already  designated  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Stono  River  and 
man  the  rifle  pits  which  have  been  dug  in  that  vicinity. 

IV.  Each  commander  of  shore  batteries  and  of  detachments  manning 
the  rifle  pits  will  be  careful  to  withhold  their  fire  while  the  enemy  is  as- 
cending the  river  should  he  make  such  movement,  and  to  deliver  it  ag 
heavily  as  possible  consistently  with  accuracy  when  he  retreats.  The 
point  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  to  be  aimed  at  is  near  the  water-line,  just 
aft  the  smoke-stack.  Particular  attention  will  be  given  to  the  helms- 
man and  gunners  by  the  riflemen. 

V.  Instructions  will  be  given  when  to  open  fire,  but  should  it  be  neces- 
sary in  the  absence  of  instructions  commanders  are  authorized  to  use 
their  discretion. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley : 

LEO.  D.  WALKER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Charleston,  May  26,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond: 

As  telegraphed,  only  two  regiments,  but  armed  with  Enfield  rifles,  go 
with  General  Ripley.  I wanted  one  brigadier-general  for  Georgia  and 
one  for  South  Carolina  troops ; also  two  bonded  quartermasters  for  gen- 
eral service. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  521 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  0.  and  Ga., 

No.  59.  j Charleston , May  26,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States,  will  relieve  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley  in  the  command  of  the 
Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 

II.  General  Mercer  will  immediately  place  himself  in  communication 
with  General  Ripley,  and  obtain  from  that  officer  all  necessary  informa- 
tion in  relation  to  the  present  disposition  of  troops  and  the  location  of 
works  for  the  defense  of  this  harbor  and  city,  whether  already  com- 
pleted or  in  progress.  General  Ripley  is  desired  to  impart  as  far  as 
practicable  to  General  Mercer  his  own  views  as  to  the  plan  most  likely 
to  effect  the  speedy  completion  of  the  defenses,  and  generally  his  inti- 
mate knowledge  of  the  resources  available  in  any  way  for  the  defense 
of  the  city. 

******* 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton: 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Mars  Bluff,  May  27,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  A.,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

Dear  Sir  : I was  much  gratified  and  thankful  that  you  so  promptly 
sent  a force  to  the  Pee  Dee,  which  was  threatened  by  the  enemy’s  boats. 
Pour  companies  of  Colonel  Graham’s  regiment  arrived  at  the"  obstruc- 
tion at  Stone’s  Landing  last  night,  and  I left  there  this  morning  with 
the  confidence  that  the  approach  of  any  boats  beyond  that  point  was 
cut  off  unless  they  landed  far  below  and  marched  in  large  force,  which 
was  not  probable  now.  The  works  there  are  a complete  success,  and 
any  forces  which  could  be  brought  by  the  small  boats  able  to  get  up  the 
river  could  be  repulsed  and  I think  captured,  with  their  boats,  before 
getting  off.  On  my  return  I met  Colonel  Graham,  who  showed  me  your 
dispatch  ordering  the  return  of  his  regiment,  at  which  I was  surprised. 
The  four  companies  will  answer  our  purpose  there  and  save  the  rail- 
road bridge,  when  five  regiments  could  not  do  it  at  the  bridge  on 
account  of  its  locality  and  the  facility  of  shelling  our  forces  from  the 
river. 

I At  the  point  selected  for  obstructions  the  bluff  on  the  west  bank  is 
about  40  feet  high,  almost  perpendicular,  and  the  river  not  over  100 
yards  wide.  On  the  eastern  bank  for  miles  the  swamp  is  low,  marshy, 
and  impenetrable.  At  the  point  of  obstruction  the  river  makes  a turn 
at  right  angle,  and  only  200  yards  below  it  curves  again  and  sweeps 
around  for  some  miles,  so  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  harm  the  men 
on  the  bluffs  by  shells  from  the  boats  or  even  to  land  with  any  sort  of 
resistance.  The  obstructions  are  rafts  of  heavy  timber,  3-ply,  and  up- 
strapped  with  iron  and  securely  bolted,  but  easily  opened,  so  as  to  ad- 
mit ot  the  passage  of  our  boats.  These  are  in  150  yards  of  two  cannon 
(18  and  12  pounders),  planted  securely  in  batteries  dug  down,  and  leav- 
ing the  solid  earth  50  feet  in  front.  To  attempt  to  cut  or  destroy  the 
rafts,  which  have  been  fully  secured  and  closed,  will  expose  the  men 
there  to  certain  destruction  from  our  large  guns  and  small-arms.  The 
only  means  of  passing  is  to  land  below  and  turn  the  batteries,  and  with 
the  force  there  now  this  I am  satisfied  cannot  be  done  from  the  size  of 


522 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


the  crafts  necessary  to  come  up  the  river.  Hence  my  telegram  to  you 
to-day  urging  that  these  companies  remain. 

We  have  now  no  force  in  the  country.  Our  militia  are  utterly  unavail- 
ing except  for  police,  and  are  scarcely  enough  of  effective  men  for  that. 
Our  best  men  are  in  the  service  (2,200)  from  this  district,  being  there 
out  of  less  than  2,000  voters.  Those  at  home  are  poor  men,  and  to 
abandon  their  crops  now  would  be  to  do  without  bread  for  their  fam- 
ilies. 'I  state  these  facts  in  no  spirit  of  fault-finding  or  complaint,  but 
from  my  solicitude  to  save  our  railroad  communication,  the  value  of 
which  it  is  needless  for  me  to  mention  to  you. 

My  last  advices  were  that  the  enemy  had  gone  out  to  the  blockading 
fleet  without  lauding,  except  at  Oat  Island,  as  their  boats  there  were 
too  large  to  navigate  the  Pee  Dee,  but  they  can  command  the  Planter 
and  the  Darlington,  both  of  which  have  run  the  river  often. 

A letter  to  Colonel  Graham  by  the  train  leaving  at  1 p.  m.  to-morrow 
by  Northeastern  Railroad  would  be  in  time,  as  he  will  march  to  Myers- 
ville,  which  will  take  him  the  day. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

’ W.  W.  HARLLEE. 


Fort  Pemberton,  May  27,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  O.  Pemberton: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  work  of  obstructing 
the  Stono  River  below  this  post  is  progressing  as  speedily  as  the  means 
of  transportation  in  my  possession,  both  on  land  and  water,  will  per- 
mit. Already  several  large  piles  of  live-oak  are  plainly  visible  at  low 
water,  and  with  increased  facilities  for  carrying  the  timber  to  its  posi-  ll 
tion  I think  I would  be  able  in  a few  days  to  effectually  obstruct  the 
passage  of  the  river  to  all  boats  drawing  6 feet  and  over.  I would 
therefore  respectfully  request  that  another  steamer  and  lighter  be  fur- 
nished me  at  this  place  to  assist  in  obstructing  the  river.  The  steamer 
Marion  is  admirably  adapted  to  the  purpose ; she  has  also  a large  lighter, 
which  would  assist  us  very  materially. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  M.  RAMSAY, 
Engineer  in  Charge  Fort  Pemberton. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , May  28,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton, 

Commanding , <#c.,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Sir:  I am  instructed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  inform  you  that  you 
are  authorized  to  change  the  position  of  the  Ricco’s  Bluff  batteries  if 
found  necessary.  General  Finegan  commands  the  Department  of  Mid- 
dle and  East  Florida. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J 1 ’ E.  H.  CHILTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


(Letter  of  same  purport  sent  to  Major-General  Finegan,  Tallahassee, 
Fla.) 


523 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  0.  and  Ga., 

21.  1 Charleston , May  28,  1862. 

I.  The  troops  serving  within  this  department,  with  exceptions  here- 
inafter to  be  named,  will  be  immediately  organized  into  divisions  and 
brigades.  Those  within  the  present  First  and  Second  Military  Districts 
will  constitute  the  First  Division  First  Military  District;  those  within 
the  Military  District  of  Georgia,  the  Second  Division  District  of  Georgia; 
those  within  the  Third  and  Sixth  Military  Districts  will  respectively 
constitute  independent  brigades,  and  will  be  addressed  Brigade  Head- 
quarters, Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina.  The  troops  now 
serving  within  the  present  Fourth  and  Fifth  Military  Districts  will  con- 
stitute an  independent  command,  and  will  be  addressed  Headquarters 
Third  Military  District,  South  Carolina.  The  Georgia  troops  now  in 
South  Carolina  and  the  Louisiana  troops  in  Georgia  will  for  the  present 
be  attached  to  the  brigades  within  the  military  district  in  which  they 
are  respectively  located,  but  will  not  be  considered  as  forming  a part  of 
the  permanent  organization  of  such  brigades. 

Commanders  of  divisions  will  forthwith  organize  their  respective 
divisions  into  two  brigades,  each  brigade  to  consist  of  not  less  than 
forty  companies,  making  as  far  as  practicable  an  equal  distribution  of 
regiments,  battalions,  and  independent  companies  (field  artillery  and 
cavalry).  When  a brigade  shall  not  be  under  the  command  of  a gen- 
eral officer  the  senior  colonel  will  be  assigned  to  the  command. 

The  following-named  officers  are  assigned  to  the  command  of  the 
several  military  districts  as  above  designated,  viz:  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W. 
Mercer,  First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina;  Brig.  Gen.  A.  R. 
Lawton,  Military  District  of  Georgia;  Brig.  Gen.  T.  F.  Drayton,  Fourth 
Military  District  of  South  Carolina;  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  Second 
Military  District  of  South  Carolina  ; Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  Third  Military 
District  of  South  Carolina. 

# # # * * * # 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

[No  signature.] 


Headquarters,  Richmond , Fa.,  May  29, 1862. 
Major-General  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  Dept  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia , Charleston , S.  C. : 

General  : It  is  desired  that  you  give  particular  attention  to  the 
condition  of  the  fortifications  in  Charleston  Harbor,  not  only  as  regards 
the  armament  and  supplies,  but  also  as  regards  the  Condition  and  feel- 
ing of  the  garrisons.  This  is  particularly  important,  as  any  disaffection 
might  be  attended  by  irreparable  mischief. 

Since  the  example  of  Fort  Jackson  we  cannot  be  too  particular  in 
guarding  against  mutiny.  Since  your  forces  have  been  to  some  extent 
reduced  and  may  be  still  further  diminished  it  becomes  necessary  for 
you  to  make  up  in  vigilance  any  want  of  physical  force  you^may  have 
to  contend  against.  The  importance  of  defending  both  Charleston  and 
Savannah  to  the  last  extremity,  particularly  Charleston,  is  earnestly 
brought  to  your  attention.  The  loss  of  Charleston  would  cut  us  off 
almost  entirely  from  communication  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  and 
close  the  only  channel  through  which  we  can  expect  to  get  supplies 
from  abroad,  now  almost  our  only  dependence.  You  will  therefore 
make  use  of  every  means  at  your  command  to  put  these  cities  in  the 
most  perfect  state  of  defense.  Your  attention  is  particularly  called  to 


524  COASTS  OF  S.  C.}  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL  ^ 

the  river  and  harbor  obstructions.  These  should  be  rendered  as  strong 
as  it  is  possible  for  them  to  be  made.  Spare  no  labor  or  expense  upon 
them.  It  is  also  of  the  greatest  importance  that  the  discipline  of  the 
garrisons  of  the  different  works  should  be  brought  to  the  highest  state 
of  perfection.  Let  it  be  distinctly  understood  by  everybody  that  Charles-  4 
ton  and  Savannah  are  to  be  defended  to  the  last  extremity.  If  the  har-  h 
bors  are  taken  the  cities  are  to  be  fought  street  by  street  and  house  by 
house  as  long  as  we  have  a foot  of  ground  to  stand  upon.  The  State 
authorities  of  both  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  will  doubtless  lend  you 
every  means  at  their  command  to  aid  you  in  your  operations. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General . 


Headquarters,  Richmond , Fa.,  May  29, 1862.  I 

His  Excellency  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  South  Carolina : 

Governor  : Your  letter  of  May  23  has  been  received.  I thank  you 
most  cordially  for  the  freedom  with  which  you  have  made  your  sugges-  a 
tions  about  the  state  of  affairs  at  Charleston  and  will  assure  you  that  i 
they  are  duly  considered.  I am  sure  that  we  both  estimate  alike  the 
importance  of  defending  the  city  of  Charleston  to  the  last  extremity.  ' 
To  lose  this  city  now  would,  as  you  remarked,  close  our  only  channel  of  ; 
communication  with  the  foreign  world,  through  which  we  have  and  still 
hope  to  receive  many  valuable  cargoes  of  munitions  of  war.  The  dis- 
sensions which  have  arisen  among  the  officers  who  have  been  called  to 
the  defense  of  Charleston  are  truly  to  be  regretted.  Steps  have  been 
taken  as  far  as  practicable  at  present  to  remedy  to  some  extent  this 
evil.  General  Bipley  has  been  relieved  from  duty  in  Charleston  and 
ordered  elsewhere  and  another  competent  officer  will  be  sent  to  replace 
him.  I will  here  insert,  for  your  information,  a copy  of  my  instructions 
to  General  Pemberton : * 

******* 

I feel  well  assured,  Governor,  of  your  hearty  co-operation  with  the 
Confederate  forces  serving  in  your  State.  Harmonious  action  between 
the  State  and  Confederate  authorities  is  greatly  to  be  desired,  and  must 
result  in  promoting  the  general  good. 

There  are  now  in  position  in  the  different  works  about  Charleston 
over  two  hundred  guns,  many  of  these  of  the  most  improved  class.  I 
feel  confident  that  this  number  of  guns,  if  properly  managed  and  fought, 
will  render  Charleston  impregnable.  If  it,  however,  be  found  that  other 
guns  are  needed,  and  they  can  be  procured,  they  shall  be  sent  to  Charles- 
ton. There  are  none  available  at  this  place  now. 

In  regard  to  General  Huger,  just  at  this  time  it  is  impossible  to  comply 
with  your  suggestion.  He  commands  a division  of  General  Johnston’s 
army’around  this  city.  Having  commanded  it  many  months,  knowing  its 
condition,  and  being  accustomed  to  the  command,  he  cannot  be  relieved 
without  injury  to  the  service.  I esteem  him  very  highly,  and  he  has 
always  been  regarded  as  an  officer  of  great  merit,  especially  as  an  artil- 
lerist. I do  not  know  how  far  the  causes  you  mention  might  impair  his 
usefulness  in  Carolina. 

I am,  Governor,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 


See  p.  523. 


CHlu\  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


525 


Adams  Run,  S.  0.,  May  29,  1862. 
General  Thomas  F.  Drayton,  Hardeeville , S.  G.  : 

Bend  a regiment  at  once  to  Pocotaligo;  they  are  fighting.  Have 
another  regiment  and  battery  ready.  We  will  attack  on  the  return. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

P.  S. — Hurry  on  your  troops  in  trains  at  Hardeeville.  Be  careful  how 
you  approach  Coosawhatchie  and  Pocotaligo.  If  possible  communi- 
cate with  Colonel  Walker  at  Pocotaligo  before  the  train  leaves  as  to 
disposition  of  troops. 


Adams  Run,  S.  C.,  May  29,  1862. 
Ool.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , 8.  G. : 

In  three  hours  will  have  400  men  at  Pocotaligo ; by  night  two  regi- 
ments. Let  none  of  my  messages  fall  into  hands  of  the  enemy.  Burn 
the  buildings  at  the  station  should  the  enemy  drive  our  men  to  the  rail- 
road. Don’t  burn  unless  necessary. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Adams  Run,  S.  C.,  May  29, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  A.  R.  Lawton,  Savannah , Ga.  : 

Send  a regiment  at  once  by  railroad  to  Pocotaligo.  I have  ordered 
cars  from  the  Central  Railroad.  They  are  fighting. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  29,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton,  Adams  Bun , S.  G. : 

Eleven  companies  of  infantry  and  two  sections  of  artillery  are  at 
Pocotaligo  from  Hardeeville.  The  enemy  at  Old  Pocotaligo.  Walk- 
er’s horse  shot.  Two  men  of  Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen  killed. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Charleston,  May  30, 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  Savannah: 

Yesterday  the  enemy,  in  the  forenoon,  commenced  throwing  shot  and 
shell  in  the  direction  of  Fort  Pemberton,  all  of  which  fell  short;  then 
dropped  down  opposite  Dill’s  farm  and  commenced  shelling  the  siege 
gun  on  the  left  of  the  intrenchments. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


526  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Dept,  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

^°*  63*  J Savannah , May  30,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  A.  B.  Lawton  will  without  delay  proceed  to  furthe 
obstruct  the  Savannah  Biver  at  a site  just  below  the  present  obstruc 
tions,  by  stretching  a chain  across  the  river  according  to  the  plan  pur 
sued  in  Charleston  Harbor.  The  chains  will  be  supported  by  at  leasi 
two  cribs,  and  if  necessary  by  three. 

II.  In  preparation  of  this  obstruction  the  labor  will  be  divided  as  fa 
as  practicable.  The  most  efficient  workmen  will  be  selected  and  placed 
in  charge  of  forging  the  chain;  some  will  be  selected  for  making  ant 
sinking  the  cribs ; others  will  be  appointed  to  collect  material.  Tht 
iron  will  be  obtained  by  Brig.  Gen.  A.  B.  Lawton  in  the  best  mannei 
practicable. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton : 

J.  B.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General.  ..! 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

T _ _ Charleston , May  31,  1862. 

W.  J.  Magrath,  ’ 

President  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad : 

Sir:  To  expedite  the  work  of  obstructing  the  channel  near  Ports 
Sumter  and  Moultrie  it  is  a matter  of  the  first  necessity  that  every 
facility  of  railroad  transportation  for  supplies  of  timber  be  furnished 
those  having  the  work  in  charge.  I therefore  earnestly  beg  that  every 
exertion  be  used  on  your  part  to  assist  in  the  rapid  completion  of  this 
essential  work.  Mr.  John  Cheves,  Mr.  F.  J.  Porcher,  and  Capt.  F.  D. 
Lee,  Engineer  Department,  are  authorized  to  call  upon  you  for  this 
object  and  to  make  all  necessary  arrangements. 

J.  0.  PEMBEBTOK, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


~ , -p.  _ Charleston,  May  31, 1862. 

General  B.  E.  Lee,  Richmond: 

General  E.  Kirby  Smith  asks  me  to  send  two  or  more  armed  regi- 
ments to  Chattanooga  or  arms  for  his  unarmed  men.  I have  neither 
to  spare.  A prisoner  taken  at  Pocotaligo  says  the  enemy  is  collecting 
a large  force  on  Edisto. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTOK, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Brig. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

~ ^ „ Charleston , May  31,  1862. 

Gen.  K.  G.  Evans, 

Commanding  Third  Military  District : 


General:  Major-General  Pemberton  wishes  you  to  increase  the  ob- 
structions in  Stono  Biver  at  Church  Flats  with  live-oak  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. 1 


I am,  &c., 


J.  B.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


CUAF.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


527 


Hdqes.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  31,  1862. 


W.  J.  Magrath: 

Sir:  It  is  very  desirable  to  keep  open  the  direct  communication  be- 
tween Charleston  and  Savannah.  I have  not  sufficient  force  at  my  dis- 
posal to  station  troops  at  all  the  assailable  points.  Any  disposition 
made  must  have  in  view  availability  for  the  defense  of  Charleston  and 
Savannah.  If  the  company  will  agree  to  keep  sufficient  rolling  stock 
always  ready  to  move,  and  at  a cost  to  the  Confederate  Government  of 
the  running  expenses  only,  I will,  so  long  as  it  shall  be  practicable, 
keep  a regiment  of  infantry  and  a section  or  more  of  artillery,  in  addi- 
tion to  the  cavalry  already  on  the  line  of  road,  at  some  convenient  and 
healthy  point,  say  McPhersonville,  and  the  rolling  stock  to  be  habitually 
near  the  Salkehatchie  Station  to  avail  of  the  turn-table  for  movements 
in  either  direction.  I shall  also  expect  the  regiment  to  be  moved  in  the 
first  instance  free  of  expense. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  31,  1862. 


Col.  A.  L.  Long, 

Military  Secretary  to  Commanding  General : 


Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  General 
Lee’s  letter  of  the  29th  instant  in  regard  to  the  disaffection  of  the  gar- 
rison of  Fort  Sumter  to  which  the  general  refers.  I have  to  say  that 
after  as  thorough  an  investigation  as  the  nature  of  the  allegations  would 
admit  of  I have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  real  cause 
for  apprehension. 

The  officers  of  the  garrison  express  full  confidence  in  the  integrity, 
courage,  and  discipline  of  their  men.  I presume  that  in  all  commands 
of  several  hundred  men  there  are  some  few  discontented,  and  perhaps 
in  heart  disloyal ; but  I see  no  reason  to  suspect  the  garrisons  of  Forts 
Sumter  and  Moultrie  to  be  less  trustworthy  than  others.  It  would  be, 
as  the  general  must  be  aware,  a very  difficult  matter  to  replace  these 
men  by  others  of  anything  like  the  same  efficiency ; they  are  admirably 
well  drilled,  and  are  in  that  invaluable  in  their  present  position.  I 
presume  the  general  has  heard  all  the  reports  which  have  reached  me 
on  this  subject.  If  he  considers  it  advisable  to  make  changes  in  the 
garrison  it  can  be  done,  but  I do  not  myself  think  it  necessary.  I am 
fully  alive  to  the  necessity  of  the  greatest  vigilance  on  our  part  to  make 
up  as  far  as  possible  for  the  very  considerable  reduction  of  force  ; so 
great  indeed  has  been  this  reduction  as  to  require  the  abandonment  of 
the  defense  of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  almost  entirely. 

The  general  may  feel  assured  that  I appreciate  the  vast  importance 
of  the  two  cities,  and  that  I will  do  my  best  to  defend  them  to  the  last 
extremity. 

If  it  is  possible  to  give  me  more  heavy  guns  I beg  that  they  may  be 
sent  at  once.  I desire  to  establish  heavy  batteries  in  and  about  the 
city ; but  I can  have  no  guns  for  them  until  the  obstructions  between 
Sumter  and  Moultrie  are  completed  unless  they  are  furnished  from 

other  places. 


528  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FDA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

Be  pleased  to  inform  me  whether  there  is  a reasonable  prospect  oi 
my  obtaining  them.  I also  need  more  powder  for  Charleston  am 
Savannah  both. 

A very  large  proportion  of  my  men  are  still  unarmed.  I earnestly 
request  that  these  subjects  may  have  the  generaPs  immediate  attention, 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major - Genera  l , Commanding. 


Richmond,  May  31, 1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Apply  to  General  Forney,  Mobile,  to  know  if  he  can  spare  any  guns 
removed  from  Pensacola.  Do  you  want  smooth  32-pounders  I No  co-i 
lumbiads  here. 

Very  respectfully, 

R.  E.  LEE. 


Charleston,  May  31, 1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond  : 

Yes ; I want  32  pounders  or  any  others  1 can  get. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Richmond,  May  31,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton: 

At  this  season  I think  it  impossible  for  the  enemy  to  make  any  ex-1 
pedition  into  the  interior.  The  troops  that  you  retain  there  will  sufferi 
more  from  disease  than  the  enemy.  Charleston  and  Savannah  must 
be  held.  Retain  troops  for  that  purpose.  Send  two  good  regiments 
here  immediately. 

Yery  respectfully, 

R.  E.  LEE. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , May  31,  1862, 

General  John  H.  Forney, 

Commanding  at  Mobile , Ala . : 

General  : Major-General  Pemberton  to-day  received  a telegram 
from  General  Lee  telling  him  to  call  on  you  for  heavy  guns.  He  there- 
fore wishes  to  know  whether  you  can  send  any  8 or  10  inch  columbiadsj 
if  not,  any  (banded)  rifled  42s  or  32s,  and  as  a last  resort  any  smooth- 
bores 32  or  42  pounders,  and  any  ammunition  will  be  thankfully  re- 
ceived, should  you  have  it.  He  hopes  you  will  give  this  matter  yona 
earliest  attention,  as  it  is  very  essential  that  the  guns  and  ammunition  i 
should  ho  furnished  as  soon  as  possible  for  the  defense  of  the  city  oi 
Charleston. 

I am,  &e. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


3hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


529 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  strength  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Geor- 
gia, commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  for  May,  1862. 


Commanding  officer. 


Major  Emanuel 

Not  indicated] 

Not  indicated] 

}ol.  W.  S.  Walker 

Not  indicated] 

3rig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer. 

Grand  total 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

j - and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

First  Military  District  of  South 

21 

396 

487 

603 

Carolina. 

Second  Militarv  District  of  South 

333 

5,  909 

7,  917 

9,591 

Carolina. 

Thiid  Military  District  of  South 

266 

4.117 

5,  632 

6,  255 

Carolina. 

Fourth  and  Fifth  Military  Dis- 

68 

1,  070 

1,  272 

1,  550 

tricts  of  South  Carolina. 

Sixth  Military  District  of  South 

145 

2,  599 

3,  254 

3,  517 

Carolina. 

James  Island  ......  ........  .... 

• 188 

2,  985 

3,  925 

4,  431 

Military  District  of  Georgia*  .... 

8, 165 

1,  021 

17,076 

22,487 

34, 112 

* No  return  made. 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton , May , 1862. 

FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 

Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel  commanding. 

SECOND  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 

46th  Georgia,  Col.  [P.  H.]  Colquitt. 

1st  South  Carolina,  Col.  Johnson  Hagood. 

18th  South  Carolina,  Col.  J.  M.  Gadberry. 

20th  South  Carolina,  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt. 

21st  South  Carolina,  Col.  R.  F.  Graham. 

22d  South  Carolina,  Col.  S.  D.  Goodlett, 

23d  South  Carolina,  Col.  H.  L.  Benbow. 

Byrd’s  (South  Carolina)  battalion,  Major  Byrd. 

Smith’s  (South  Carolina)  battalion. 

3d  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

German  Hussars. 

Mulligan’s  company  cavalry. 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Alston’s  battaliou  artillery,  Captain  Alston. 

Boyce’s  light  battery,  Captain  Boyce. 

Ferguson’s  light  artillery,  Captain  Ferguson. 

German  Lig  t Artillery,  Company  A. 

Kanapaux’s  light  battery,  Captain  Kanapaux. 

Nelson  (Virginia)  Light  Artillery. 

White’s  battalion  artillery  (four  companies). 

Gunboats  Nos.  1 and  2. 

THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 

51st  Georgia,  Col.  W.  M.  Slaughter. 

16th  South  Carolina,  Col.  James  McCullough. 

17th  South  Carolina,  Col.  J.  H.  Means. 

Holcombe  (South  Caroliua)  Legion,  Col.  P.  F.  Stevens. 

3d  South  Carolina  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  James. 

7th  South  Carolina  Battalion,  Maj.  P.  H.  Nelson. 

1st  Battaliou  Rilles,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore. 

34  R R — VOL  XIV 


530 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA— Continued. 

Detachment  First  South  Carolina  Infantry  and  McCord’s  and  Rion’s  companies 
1st  Battalion  Cavalry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Black. 

Rebel  Troop,  Capt.  j.  Jenkins. 

Cavalry  on  John’s  and  Wadmalaw  Islands,  Captain  Owen. 

Marion  Artillery,  Captain  Parker. 

Virginia  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Leake. 

Washington  Artillery,  Captain  Walter. 

FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  MILITARY  DISTRICTS  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA.  \ 

Col.  W.  S.  Walker  commanding. 

SIXTH  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 

Phillips’  (Georgia)  Legion,  Col.  William  Phillips. 

11th  South  Carolina,  Col.  D.  H.  Ellis. 

15th  South  Carolina,  Col.  W.  D.  De  Saussure. 

Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Col.  C.  J.  Colcock. 

Saint  Peter’s  Guards,  Capt.  H.  C.  Smart. 

Caroline  (Virginia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  T.  R.  Thornton. 

JAMES  ISLAND. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist  commanding. 

24th  South  Carolina,  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens, 

2d  Battalion  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Maj.  J.  W.  Brown. 

Charleston  Battalion  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard 
Eutaw  Battalion  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Simonton. 
Palmetto  Battalion  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Maj.  E.  B.  White. 

3d  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Company  D. 

1st  Battalion  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Colonel  Lamar. 

Preston’s  (South  Carolina)  light  artillery. 

Fort  Pemberton,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Huger. 

MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  GEORGIA. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer  commanding. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  troops  of  the  Military  Department  of  East  and  Middl 
Florida, , commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  for  May , 1862. 


Troops. 


5th  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers 

6th  Regiment  Florida  Volunteers 

1st  Special  Battalion 

Fifteen  separate  companies  of  infantry 
Four  separate  companies  of  cavalry  — 
Three  separate  companies  of  artillery 

Grand  total 


Present  for  duty. 

Infantry.  Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

i Officers. 

1 

d 

o 

3 

Officers. 

d 

% 

Officers. 

Men. 

29 

31 

22 

46 

615 
347 
340 
1,  003 

10 

254 

14 

306 



128 

2,  305 

10 

254 

14  306 

800 
749 
423 
1,  137 
296 
385 


1,05 
99) 
54. 
1, 35! 
38. 
4.-: 


531 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  June  1,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  The  work  of  obstructing  the  harbor  and  other  water  approaches 
to  this  city  is  very  much  impeded  by  the  want  of  funds  to  pay  the 
workmen  and  defray  their  current  expenses.  I have  made  temporary 
arrangements  to  borrow"  money  for  this  purpose  from  the  Bank  of 
Charleston,  but  must  earnestly  beg  that  immediate  arrangements  be 
made  by  the  Department  to  provide  the  necessary  funds.  I under- 
stand there  is  in  the  hands  of  the  assistant  treasurer  here  $100,000 
subject  to  the  order  of  Captain  (now  Colonel)  Ives,  late  chief  engineer 
of  this  department.  This  money  can  only  be  draw  n on  his  order.  I 
request  that  it  be  made  subject  to  draft  by  Capt.  Francis  D.  Lee,  En- 
gineer Corps,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States.  Of  this 
$100,000  say  $60,000, 1 understand,  is  already  due  for  services  rendered 
and  material  purchased.  There  should  be  not  less  than  $100,000  at  the 
disposal  of  Captain  Lee,  as  disbursing  officer  for  the  Engineer  Depart- 
ment. I send  Mr.  James  Manigault,  of  South  Carolina,  to  see  you  per- 
sonally on  the  subject. 

Yery  respectfully, 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  G.,  June  1,  1862. 

Col.  W.  B.  Boggs,  Engineer  Officer : 

Colonel:  I am  directed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  say  that 
he  prefers  Fort  Gadsden,  or  just  below  it,  as  a site,  with  the  guns  from 
Kicco’s  Bluff,  to  any  other  point  on  the  river.  He  has  no  guns  that  he 
can  spare  you.  He  would  advise  that  the  obstructions  be  placed  near 
the  guns — say  600  or  700  yards  from  the  guns. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , June  2,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia , &c. : 

General  : You  are  respectfully  referred  to  the  annexed  copy  of  a 
letter  from  Maj.  G.  W.  Eains  in  regard  to  the  defense  of  Augusta,  and 
j ou  are  requested  to  station  such  troops  as  can  be  spared  for  the  better 
protection  of  the  place. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  EANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 

[Incloaure.J 

Augusta,  Ga.,  May  25, 1862. 
Lieut.  Col.  J.  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance : 

Colonel:  Some  three  months  since  I received  a communication  from 
General  Lee,  authorizing  and  instructing  me  to  place  such  obstructions 


532  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  fCHAr.  XXVI. 

in  the  Savannah  River  below  Augusta  and  erect  such  defenses  as  I 
might  judge  proper  to  protect  this  city  from  an  attack  by  water.  The  j 
defenses  and  obstructions  have  been  completed  as  far  as  my  limited 
facilities  would  permit,  and  if  properly  held  will,  I think,  be  able  to  stop 
his  approach  by  water  with  such  of  his  gunboats  as  would  be  able  to 
ascend  the  river.  To  provide  against  a land  attack  by  a body  of  troops  j 
landed  from  his  gunboats  it  would  be  necessary  to  construct  one  or  more 
held  works  of  small  command  in  the  vicinity  ot  the  defenses  of  the  river, 
and  I would  respectfully  call  the  attention  of  the  Department  of  War 
to  such  necessity. 

The  city  of  Augusta,  I presume,  is  regarded  by  the  commanding  gen- 
eral, fr  om  the  tenor  of  his  communications  to  myself,  as  of  vital  impor- 
tance to  the  Confederacy,  being  the  great  center  of  the  inland  line  of! 
communication  between  the  States  of  the  East  and  West,  which,  if  taken,  i 
might  and  probably  would  result  in  the  complete  isolation  of  the  por- 
tions of  the  Confederacy,  without  a possibility  of  practical  communica- 
tion between  the  two;  also  completely  neutralizing  the  resources  of  the  t 
State  of  Georgia  for  the  purposes  of  the  war. 

The  city  admits  of  easy  defense  if  the  necessary  arrangements  are  on 
hand  when  required,  but  experience  has  demonstrated  to  us  the  neces- 
sity of  timely  taking  matters  in  hand  instead  of  counting  on  exertions, 
how’ever  energetic,  in  the  hour  of  action. 

The  very  valuable  Government  works  here  located  and  great  amount 
of  cotton  here  accumulated,  independently  of  the  strategic  importance 
of  the  point  itself,  requires  all  proper  precautions  to  be  taken  for  its 
preservation. 

Until  within  a few  days  I could  procure  no  force  to  man  the  defenses 
erected  below  the  city,  notwithstanding  my  efforts  in  different  quarters, 
and  even  now  but  two  incomplete  companies  belonging  to  Major  Capers’  | 
new  artillery  battalion  are  there  stationed. 

On  such  a force,  with  but  one  piece  of  heavy  artillery  and  some  field 
jneces,  does  the  safety  of  this  city  depend  should  the  attempt  be  sud- 
denly made  to  ascend  the  river  if  Savannah  be  taken. 

I have  endeavored  to  get  the  citizens  (through  the  mayor)  to  organize 
companies  for  such  defense,  but  the  large  number  supplied  by  Augusta 
to  the  Confederate  Army,  joined  to  the  inability  to  digest  the  actual 
condition  of  things  until  just  at  hand,  have  prevented  so  far  any  success 
in  this  direction.  I think  if  one  regiment  or  battalion  (say  Major  Capers’) : 
were  permanently  stationed  in  this  vicinity  it  would  perhaps  be  all  that 
would  be  required  to  resist  effectually  an  attempt  up  the  ri  ver,  if  they  had 
the  advantage  of  one  or  two  field  works  as  points  d?appni  near  the  forti- : 
fications  of  the  river  on  the  bluff.  In  such  case  it  would  be  necessary 
that  they  should  have  small-arms  in  addition  to  their  field  artillery.  Of 
course  I understand  by  this  that  such  a force  would  be  able  to  resist  aj 
raid  up  the  river  and  not  an  attack  in  force  ; the  latter  would  neces- 1 
sarily  involve  time  by  the  enemy  and  give  it  to  prepare  for  his  advance; ; 
in  such  case  the  forces,  or  a portion  of  them,  now  near  Savannah  and 
Charleston  would  be  made  available. 

The  defenses  or  works  I have  erected  on  the  river  are  on  a plateau 
about  50  or  GO  feet  above  the  water,  projecting  out  from  the  high  adja- 
cent bluff  which  commands  them,  and  which  is  about  150  feet  in  height; 
somewhat  like  West  Point,  except  the  plateau  is  but  just  large  enough 
for  the  batteries,  and  the  bluff  rises  immediately  above.  The  river  is 
only  250  yards  broad  at  this  place,  with  a swift  current.  I have 
passed  a heavy  chain  across  the  river,  supported  by  and  underneath 


XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


533 


rafts,  the  whole  extent  of  which  is  under  the  fire  of  the  columbiad  and 
light  artillery  and  small-arms. 

Having  no  authority  to  shut  up  the  river  I have  been  compelled  to 
partially  drop  the  chain  and  remove  some  of  the  rafts  to  allow  some  of 
the  boats  to  pass,  which  I think  places  things  somewhat  to  hazard  on 
an  emergency,  and  would  suggest  to  the  War  Department  that  author- 
ity be  given  to  close  up  the  river  at  this  point,  the  navigation  being  of 
but  little  moment. 

Should  an  emergency  arise  it  would  be  highly  desirable  and  indeed 
absolutely  necessary  that  power  should  be  vested  in  some  one  resident 
in  or  near  the  city  to  place  it  under  martial  law ; otherwise  the  safety  of 
the  city  would  be  endangered,  and  the  very  large  amount  of  cotton 
stored  here  would  be  taken  by  the  enemy. 

I regret  to  say  that  although  no  community  are  more  pathetic  or 
willing  to  make  all  required  sacrifices  for  the  common  cause,  as  they 
have  shown  on  various  occasions,  there  are  individuals  of  influence  and 
position  who  would  be  entirely  willing  to  enter  into  commercial  rela- 
tions with  the  enemy  should  he  succeed  in  forcing  his  way  to  this  city, 
and  I feel  confident  "it  is  with  such  views  that  the  efforts  to  delay  rail- 
roads through  the  streets  to  the  cotton  warehouses  to  facilitate  its  re- 
moval, which  I strongly  urged,  have  entirely  failed,  although  doubtless 
many  have  been  reluctant  to  remove  the  cotton  on  account  of  the  dam- 
age and  loss  it  would  experience. 

In  conclusion  I state  that  it  was  mutually  agreed  upon  between  the 
city  authorities  and  myself  to  divide  the  cost  of  the  river  defenses,  and 
as  the  amount  thus  expended  has  been  entirely  defrayed  by  the  city  up 
to  the  present  time  by  agreement  to  take  the  trouble  off  my  hands,  I 
would  desire  to  know  if  1 have  authority  to  pay  out  from  the  funds  in 
my  hands  the  proportion  of  the  expense  attaching  under  the  arrange- 
ment to  the  Government  and  amounting  to  about  $6,000,  or  whether 
the  same  is  to  be  paid  out  by  the  Engineer  Department. 

I have  written  this  communication  under  the  supposition  that  it  will 
be  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  as  it  refers  to  matters  outside  of 
the  legitimate  duties  of  the  Ordnance  Bureau. 

Kespectfully, 

GEO.  W.  BAINS, 

Major  Artillery  and  Ordnance , Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

May  29,  1862. 

Bespectfully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  with  an  earnest  request 
that  some  force  be  permanently  stationed  at  Augusta,  Ga.,  to  cover  the 
city,  arsenal,  and  powder-mills,  and  that  a commanding  officer  be  as- 
signed, with  power  to  declare  martial  law  in  case  of  invasion. 

J.  GORGAS, 
Colonel , Chief  of  Ordnance . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  2,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee  : 

General  Forney  is  absent.  His  adjutant-general  says  he  has  no  guns 
to  spare.  I must  have  more  guns.  Please  furnish  me  at  once. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding , 


534 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiai\  XXVI. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  2, 1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

General  Lee  is  in  the  field.  Needs  re-enforcements.  Can  you  give 
them?  Decisive  operations  are  pending  here  in  this  section,  and  the 
climate  already  restrains  operations  on  the  coast.  You  may  render 
important  service  by  the  prompt  detachment  of  as  many  troops  as  you 
can  spare. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Columbia,  S.  C.,  June  2,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

I understood  you  intend  to  take  thirty  or  forty  guns  out  of  Sumter. 
I would  be  greatly  obliged  to  know  if  this  is  so,  for  General  Lee  has 
just  written  we  can  get  more  guns.  I allowed  Beauregard  to  take  ten 
of  our  State  guns  and  seven  State  mortars  to  Pensacola.  We  can  get 
them  back  now. 

F.  W.  PICKENS.  , 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  <7.,  June  2,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Eyans, 

Commanding  Third  Military  District : 

General  : General  Gist  informed  me  that  [there  are]  seven  additional 
gunboats,  making,  as  I understand  it,  fifteen  in  all,  In  the  Stono,  and 
five  outside  and  others  in  view.  I presume  this  is  a beginning  of  Burn- 
side’s fleet  and  we  shall  probably  be  attacked.  I wish  you  to  be  in 
readiness  to  act  as  circumstances  may  require.  It  is  essential  that  you 
keep  the  communication  by  Rantowles  and  Wallace’s  Bridge  open. 
Have  everything  in  readiness.  You  had  better  establish  youT  own 
headquarters  at  Adams  Run  Station  for  the  present,  that  I may  readily 
communicate  with  you. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

[ Major-General , Commanding .J 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  C\,  June  2,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  F.  Drayton,  Eardeeville: 

Send  Colonel  De  Saussure’s  regiment  to  this  city  at  once.  The 
transportation  will  be  furnished  from  Savannah. 

J.  W.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  2, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  A.  R.  Lawton,  Savannah , Ga.: 

You  will  furnish  transportation  at  once  for  one  regiment  from  Har- 
deeville  and  hold  your  command  in  readiness  to  move  to  Charleston, 


S.  C. 


R.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


535 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  June  2,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Mercer, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District : 

General:  I have  just  received  a telegram  from  General  Gist,  of 
vhich  the  following  is  a copy : 

Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  2,  1862. 

Seven  additional  gunboats  in  Stono,  five  at  anchor  outside,  and  others  in  sight.  We 
nay  look  out  for  the  attack  at  any  hour.  Two  of  the  vessels  are  reported  transports. 

S.  R.  ulu  1 . 


Have  all  troops  notified  and  ready  to  move  at  a moment’s  notice; 
et  the  batteries  look  to  their  ammunition.  Send  proper  persons  to 
?ee  they  have  all  that  is  necessary.  Every  regiment  should  carry  40 
winds  of  ammunition  and  have  in  wagons  as  much  more.  You  must 
;hrow  another  regiment  over  to  General  Gist  and  a field  battery  to  be 
it  hand;  another  regiment  to  man  the  lines  east,  at  Newton’s  Cut,  and 
in  additional  battery  for  the  same  part  of  the  lines.  If  the  enemy 
ittempts  to  land  he  must  be  attacked  to-night  or  whenever  he  leaves 
he  cover  of  his  gunboats.  Cooks  must  be  left  in  camp  to  keep  the 
men  supplied.  Every  man  should  fill  his  canteen  with  water  before 
starting.  Notify  commanding  officers  of  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  Forts 
Johnson  and  Beauregard. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


James  Island, 

Charleston  S.  (7.,  June  2,  1862 — 9.30  p.  m. 


Jefferson  Davis,  President: 

Twenty  vessels  are  in  and  off  the  Stouo  and  increasing  in  number. 
If  they  attack  it  will  be  by  land  and  water.  If  you  say  risk  it,  I will 
order  5,000  men  from  Savannah,  but  I think  it  will  be  dangerous.  1 
am  now  in  the  field.  I have  ordered  them  to  be  ready. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Lawton,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Send  immediately  to  this  point  two  more  regiments,  making  in  all 
three.  Send  General  Smith  with  them. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3,  1862. 

George  W.  Bandolph, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , V a. : 

There  are  strong  indications  of  a general  attack  on  Charleston.  I 
shall  be  obliged  to  draw  largely  on  Savannah  for  troops.  Can  I get 
any  from  North  Carolina 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


536 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiai*.  XXVI. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  3,  18G2. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

General  Lawton  desires  to  come  to  Virginia  with  troops  from  Georgia. 
I hear  the  enemy  in  Virginia  are  drawing  re-enforcements  from  forces 
opposed  to  you. 

E.  E.  LEE. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  June  3,  1862. 


Maj.  J.  B.  White: 

Major  : I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say  you  t 
are  desired  to  move  the  guns  at  the  Citadel  in  Charleston  and  place  \ 
them  in  position  on  the  redans  and  redoubts  on  the  lines  on  James  I 
Island  west  of  Newton’s  Cut. 

E.  W.  MEMMINGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3, 1862 — 1.45  p.  m. 
George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

The  enemy  are  advancing  in  considerable  force  toward  the  railroad 
from  Seabrook  Island.  General  Evans,  with  two  regiments  and  artil- 
ler3r,  will  attack  them. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Major-  General , Commanding . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3, 1862. 
General  Evans,  Adams  Bun  or  Logansville  : 

A regiment  has  been  ordered  to  support  your  right.  Have  some  one 
•at  Adams  Eun  to  conduct  the  regiment. 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3,  1862. 

General  Drayton,  Hardeeville : 

Send  the  Eleventh  Eegiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  to  support 
the  right  flank  of  General  Evans  to  stop  at  Adams  Eun  and  report  at  ; 
once  to  General  Evans. 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3, 1862. 
Brigadier-General  Lawton,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Have  two  more  regiments  in  readiness  to  move  to  this  point.  Have 
transportation  prepared, 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Major-General , Commanding , 


Chat*.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  537 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  Secessionville , S.  C. : 

General  Mercer  bas  gone  down  with  my  instructions.  General  Evans 
reports  by  telegraph  advance  of  enemy  toward  his  position  with  cavalry, 
artillery,  and  infantry.  I have  ordered  an  additional  regiment  from 
Hardeeville  and  one  from  Savannah,  one  regiment  to  be  halted  at  the 
railroad  depot  in  Saint  Andrew’s  to  give  you  assistance  if  necessary. 
Unless  absolutely  necessary  I cannot  leave  here  at  present.  One  reg- 
imen# should  be  kept  in  reserve  on  the  lines  east  of  Newton’s  Cut; 
Colonel  Colquitt’s  regiment  west  of  Newton’s  Out.  Give  all  attention 
to  keeping  ammunition  dry. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  Adams  Run : 

Prisoners  this  morning  captured  on  James  Island  report  1,700  landed 
at  Legareville,  on  John’s  Island.  If  possible  attack  them  at  once;  look 
out ; keep  open  your  rear. 

J.  R,  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  June  3,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Mercer, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  direct 
that  you  have  a good  force  in  reserve  near  the  bridge  crossing  the 
Wappoo  Cut  on  this  side. 

J.  C.  TAYLOR, 

Aide-de-  Camp. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Lawton,  Savannah , Ga.  : 

No  cavalry  or  artillery  will  be  included.  You  will  take  tents,  but 
not  be  encumbered.  The  enemy  landed  on  Stono  in  considerable  force. 
May  need  you  here. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  June  3,  1862. 

General  S.  R.  Gist, 

Commanding  James  Island , S.  C. : 

General:  The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you  make 
arrangements  to  man  the  guns  on  the  east  side  of  the  lines  of  intrench- 
ments  at  Newton’s  Cut.  You  can  take  the  men  from  Maj.  J.  B.  White’s 
command  or  from  Colonel  Lamar’s  regiment.  The  eight  pieces  from 


538 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

the  Citadel  and  the  Corps  of  Cadets  from  the  Citadel  leave  under  the 
command  of  Mai.  J.  B.  White  for  you  as  soon  as  possible. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  3, 1862. 

General  Lawton,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Send  one  regiment  here  for  temporary  service.  * 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  June  3,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Mercer, 

Commanding , &c.  [James  Island] : 

General  : You  will  use  the  utmost  vigilance  to  prevent  the  enemy 
from  gaining  information  of  the  country  by  reconnaissance.  Your  men 
should  keep  concealed,  lying  down  to  avoid  the  effect  of  shells.  If  your 
attack  is  made  at  night  let  your  men,  on  approaching  the  position  of 
the  enemy  in  skirmish  order,  deliver  a fire  from  one  rank  only,  and  im- 
mediately after  let  all  lie  down,  those  who  have  discharged  their  pieces 
reloading  in  that  position,  or  if  near  enough  to  use  the  bayonet  do  so 
immediately  after  the  discharge  of  the  pieces.  I certainly  expect  to 
have  a good  account  from  you  before  daylight. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major  - General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  \ Headquarters  Dept,  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  67.  j Charleston , S.  (7.,  June  3,  1862. 

####*** 

III.  The  city  of  Charleston  being  at  this  time  threatened,  Maj.  J.  B. 
White,  superintendent  of  the  State  Military  Academy,  will  proceed  with 
as  little  delay  as  possible  with  the  Corps  of  Cadets  and  the  eight  pieces 
at  the  Citadel  belongiug  to  the  State  of  South  Carolina  to  James  Island 
and  report  to  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confed- 
erate States,  to  occupy  the  west  side  of  the  line  of  intrenchments  at 
Newton’s  Cut. 

* * * * * 

VIII.  Lieutenant  Colonel  Wagner,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  will 
proceed,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  to  erect  a battery  at  Cummings  Point 
at  such  point  as  may  be  selected.  Colonel  Benbow  will  lurnish  a daily 
detail  for  carrying  on  the  work  under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wagner  until  such  time  as  laborers  can  be  furnished. 

Bv  order  of  Maior-General  Pemberton: 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  4, 1862. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Clark,  Raleigh , N.  C.: 

General  Pemberton  telegraphs  that  he  is  expecting  every  moment  an 


hat.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


539 


ttack  at  Charleston,  and  wishes  assistance  from  North  Carolina,  if  pos- 
ible.  Success  there  will  bring  the  enemy  upon  you.  Assist  Pember- 
on  if  you  can. 

G.  W.  BANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  June  4,  1862. 

>rigadier-General  Mercer, 

Commanding  James  Island , S.  C. : 

General  : 1 am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say 
hat  you  are  not  to  fall  back  with  your  command  behind  the  intrench- 
lents  nor  to  abandon  Secession  ville.  Beenforcements  have  been  or- 
ered  from  Savannah,  and  will  soon  arrive,  who  will  relieve  your 
resent  regiments,  allowing  time  for  rest.  Sui>plies  will  soon  be  fin- 
ished and  a supply  of  whisky  will  be  sent  to  revive  your  fatigued 
coops. 

I am,  &c., 

B.  W.  MEMMINGEB, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Bichmond,  Va.,  June  4, 1862. 

lajor-General  Pemberton: 

The  call  made  on  you  for  troops  was  the  result  of  pressing  necessity, 
t was  hoped  the  season  would  secure  you  against  operations  inland, 
ml  that  you  could  spare  troops  without  weakening  your  strength  for 
lie  defense  of  Charleston.  You  cau  estimate  the  consequence  to  the 
ommon  cause  which  depends  upon  success  here.  Send  three  regi- 
lents,  or,  if  you  think  it  safe  to  do  so,  send  the  larger  number  named 
v you. 

JEFFEBSGN  DAVIS. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  4,  1862 — 7 p.  m. 
efferson  Davis,  President: 

Have  just  received  your  dispatch.  Shall  order  three  regiments  from 
iavannah.  Am  drawing  re-enforcements  from  there  for  Charleston  also, 
'he  enemy  is  re-enforcing  also,  both  in  gunboats  and  troops.  I may 
ave  to  abandon  one  city  or  the  other.  Shall  meet  all  your  require- 

lents  promptly. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  4, 1862. 

efferson  Davis,  President : 

I send  four  strong  regiments  under  Brigadier  General  Lawton.  If  I 
ould  get  more  heavy  guns  I could  do  well. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major- General  j Commanding. 


540 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.  XXVI. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  4,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Under  the  circumstances  communicated  in  your  last  dispatch  you 
will  delay  compliance  with  my  requisition.  The  troops  being  brought 
to  Charleston  can  be  sent  on  in  a few  days  if  the  demonstration  proves 
a feint.  If  you  gain  a victory  you  can  do  more  for  this  line  than  was 
proposed. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  4,  1862. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Columbia , 8.  C.; 

Your  dispatches  of  yesterday  received.  It  was  notintended  to  weaken 
the  force  for  defense  of  Charleston,  but  to  obtain  troops  by  withdraw- 
ing from  positions  where  the  season  will  prevent  active  operations.  The 
proposition  was  induced  by  a seeming  necessity.  To  your  inquiry  I 
answer,  not  safe.  The  event  maybe  local  ; its  consequences  will  be 
general. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Headquarters  State  of  South  Carolina, 

Columbia , June  4,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton,  Commanding: 

General:  Adjutant- General  De  Saussure  will  deliver  this  to  you. 
He  is  authorized  to  offer  you  any  aid  in  the  power  of  the  State  to  assist 
you  either  in  the  held  or  in  organizing  the  local  reserves  for  the  defense 
and  protection  of  the  city.  He  will  inform  fully  on  this  point  if  desired. 
He  is  also  intimately  acquainted  with  the  efficiency  and  strength  of  all 
city  companies  that  may  have  been  mustered  into  Confederate  service.. 

I shall  be  most  happy  to  serve  and  aid  you  in  any  manner  that  you 
may  desire.  We  have  mustered  all  our  troops  into  Confederate  serv- 
ice, and  armed  them  almost  entirely  from  our  own  State  resources;  but 
in  furnishing  a city  police  and  holding  the  reserves  of  the  State  under 
orders  to  support  you  we  may  be  of  service,  and  for  this  purpose  Gen- 
eral De  Saussure  has  full  and  ample  authority. 

Respectfully, 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  C .,  June  4,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  C.  K.  Huger,  Fort  Pemberton , 8.  C. : 

Colonel:  The  24-pounder  rifled  guns  to  which  you  refer  had  better  j 
be  placed  in  the  battery  with  the  rifled  (banded)  32-pounder  pointing 
down  the  river.  You  say  nothing  of  cartridges  for  those  guns.  I trust 
you  have  them.  There  is  not  another  pound  of  cannon  powder  in  the 
arsenal.  You  had  better  take  some  of  the  blasting  powder  out  of  the 
torpedoes  and  mix  with  other  powder  for  the  mortars,  and,  if  you  have 
none  other,  for  the  24-pounder  also. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Comma  nding. 


5 til 


Jit  a i NXVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  June  4,  1862. 

Maj.  W.  P.  Emanuel, 

Commanding  near  Georgetown : 

Major  : I have  received  a communication  from  Mr.  Francis  S.  Par* 
ter,  of  Georgetown  District,  in  relation  to  the  deficiency  of  arms  for 
roar  companies ; also  in  regard  to  the  disposition  of  the  command  in 
•eference  to  prevention  of  slaves  escaping.  You  are  directed  to  obtain, 
)y  impressment  or  otherwise,  all  double-barrel  guns,  rifles,  pistols,  &c. 
iTou  are  authorized  to  arm  your  men,  as  far  as  they  will  go,  with  the 
nstols  said  to  belong  to  the  Government  and  to  have  been  left  by 
iteamer  Nashville,  sending  your  receipt  therefor  to  Colonel  Gorgas, 
3hief  of  Ordnance,  Bichraond.  I have  no  arms  of  any  description  to 
hrnish  you  with,  nor  do  1 see  any  prospect  of  getting  them.  You 
will  locate  your  troops  with  a view  to  prevent  the  escape  of  slaves  and 
or  protection  of  persons  and  property  against  insubordination  of  ne- 
rroes.  You  will  use  every  energy  to  effect  these  objects  as  far  as  it 
nay  be  practicable  with  your  small  command. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  4,  1862. 

Uol.  J.  Gorgas,  Richmond , Va. : 

1 must  have  cannon  powder  to  defend  Charleston.  Captain  Childs 
las  lately  sent  15,000  pounds  to  Macon  and  the  same  quantity  to  At- 
anta.  I need  this  and  more.  I request  that  neighboring  arsenals  be 
nstructed  to  fill  requisitions  made  by  me  for  small-arms  and  ammuni- 
tion in  preference  to  all  other  orders. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Baleigh,  N.  C.,  June  4,  1862. 


GrEORGE  W.  Bandolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I would  gladly  comply  with  your  request  to  aid  General  Pemberton, 
hut  the  regiments  I had  collected  and  prepared  for  our  State  defense 
aave,  without  consultation  with  me,  been  sent  off  by  General  Holmes 
to  Petersburg  and  Bichmond,  and  1 am  now  in  want  of  troops  for  Wil- 
mington, Goldsborough,  and  Weldon.  General  Holmes  has  the  control 
regiments  at  each  of  these  places  and  you  can  call  on  him. 

HENBY  T.  CLABK. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Richmond , Va.,  June  4,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  Commanding , &c. : 

General  : I am  directed  by  General  Lee  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  letter  of  the  21st  ultimo,  and  to  say  that  he  had  referred  the 
same  to  His  Excellency  the  President  for  his  consideration,  at  the  same 


542  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XXVI 

time  expressing  his  convictions  that  it  is  not  always  possible  for  iron 
ships  to  pass  batteries  when  the  latter  are  well  fought,  as  was  proven 
at  D re  wry’s  Bluff,  on  James  Kiver.  The  general  thinks,  moreover,  that 
if  the  enemy  is  allowed  to  enter  the  harbor  he  could  establish  himseh 
on  James  Island,  at  Dill’s  Bluff,  and  construct  batteries  which  would 
command  any  you  might  erect  in  the  city.  Though  he  cannot  recom- 
mend the  dismantling  of  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  he  thinks  certain 
guns  might  be  quietly  removed  from  them,  perhaps  without  injury,  and 
used  to  advantage  elsewhere.  Lam  instructed  by  the  general  to  add 
that  he  has  to-day  communicated  with  the  Chief  of  Ordnance  Bureau 
on  the  subject  of  procuring  small  arms  and  heavy  guns  for  you,  aud 
that  he  will  do  what  is  possible  toward  supplying  your  wants  in  these 
respects. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOB, 
Major  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


Columbus,  Ga.,  June  4,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  C.  8.  Forces , 8.  C.  and  Ga .,  Charleston , 8.  C . : 

General  : In  closing  so  abruptly  the  work  upon  which  I am  engaged 
I have  considered  it  proper  to  send  you  copies  of  my  entire  correspond-] 
ence,  except  such  as  I have  had  with  yourself.  From  this  correspond- 1 
ence  you  will  see  the  steps  taken  by  myself  to  insure  the  proper  com- 
pletion of  the  work. 

On  my  return  from  Tallahassee  I wrote  to  Captain  Dillard,  quarter-' 
master  at  Columbus,  requesting  him  to  get  as  soon  as  possible  at  leastj 
100  laborers,  with  rations,  tents,  &c.,  and  advise  me  by  telegraph  at! 
Chattahoochee  how  many  hands  he  could  get,  and  whether  lie  would 
require  my  boat  for  their  transportation.  In  the  mean  time  I made  a i 
more  complete  examination  of  the  lower  river.  I inclose  herewith  his 
advertisement  for  the  hands. 

On  my  return  to  Chattahoochee  I received  a letter  from  Captain 
Dillard,  of  which  I inclose  a copy.  I at  once  determined  to  return 
to  this  place  and  seek  the  assistance  of  Dr.  Bozeman,  mayor  of  Colum- 
bus; also  that  of  Dr.  Thornton,  mayor  of  Eufaula,  and  Mr.  McNab, 
also  of  Eufaula,  who  were  commissioners  to  act  upon  the  subject,  never  i 
for  a moment  doubting  that  the  laborers  would  be  furnished  with  the ! 
utmost  promptness.  I had  all  the  supplies  for  the  hands  stored  upon 
the  boat.  Yesterday  morning  Dr.  Bozeman  informed  me  that  it  was ; 
almost  impossible  to  get  hands  from  Columbus  or  Eufaula,  but  sug- 
gested that  higher  wages  be  offered  as  an  inducement.  I at  once 
authorized  $1  per  day,  medical  attendance,  rations,  &c.,  and  requested 
him  to  telegraph  to  Eufaula  to  that  effect  and  ask  how  many  hands 
could  be  had.  Upon  the  receipt  of  the  answer  (a  copy  of  which  I in- 
close) I telegraphed  you  that  no  laborers  could  be  had  and  my  serv-  j 
ices  were  no  longer  necessary.  Your  reply  was  received  this  evening, 
and  I shall  return  to  Milled geville  to-morrow.  Learning  that  Judge 
Iverson  was  in  the  town  I called  upon  him  and  laid  the  whole  matter 
before  him,  reading  him  the  entire  correspondence  and  pointing  out 
upon  the  map  the  results  of  my  reconnaissance.  He  seemed  grieved 
at  the  turn  of  affairs,  but  could  see  no  remedy.  A proposition  has 
been  made  to  suspend  the  work  until  the  crops  are  gathered  in,  &c.  j to 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  543 

this  I object,  and  shall  respectfully  decline  giving  my  personal  super- 
vision under  such  circumstances. 

To  Captain  Dillard,  of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department,  I am  very 
much  indebted  for  his  prompt  response  to  all  my  calls  upon  him,  also 
to  the  captain  of  the  steamer,  pilots,  and  guides. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Engineer , &c. 

I*  [Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  June  15,  1862. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  War  Department. 
The  work  is  not  going  on,  the  planters  in  that  district  of  country  hav- 
ing failed  to  furnish  the  necessary  labor  to  carry  on  the  work  and  it 
being  impracticable  to  obtain  it  otherwise. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-General , Comdg.  Department  of  8.  C.  and  Ga. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 


Steamer  Munnerlyn,  May  24,  1862. 
Captain  Dillard,  Quartermaster , Columbus , Ga. : 

Captain  : I will  require  for  my  work  upon  the  river  from  150  to  200 
laborers,  50  tents,  and  4 wall-tents.  Will  you  please  engage  as  many 
laborers  as  you  can,  and  arrange  with  the  commissary  that  men,  tents, 
and  provisions  shall  come  down  together"?  Among  the  laborers  there 
should  be  5 or  6 common  carpenters,  1 or  2 ordinary  bricklayers,  and  4 
good  cooks.  Some  of  the  laborers  I may  be  able  to  get  elsewhere.  I 
have  written  to  General  Pemberton  to  send  instructions  to  the  commis- 
sary concerning  the  rations.  I inclose  a requisition  for  2,000,  which  I 
would  be  pleased  to  have  you  hand  him  and  explain  its  nature.  Please 
telegraph  me  at  Chattahoochee  how  many  laborers,  &c.,  you  can  get  ; 
also  if  you  will  need  this  boat  to  bring  down  the  men,  rations,  &c. 

I am,  &c., 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Engineer , &c. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


Columbus,  Ga.,  May  28,  1862. 

Col.  W.  R.  Boggs  : 

Dear  Sir  : Your  favor  of  the  24th  instant  duly  received.  It  will 
be,  I think,  impossible  to  procure  the  laborers  you  ask  for,  but  I will 
try  and  advise  by  telegraph.  The  tents  and  commissary  stores  I will 
furnish  as  soon  as  possible.  You  have  not  sent  me  the  receipts  for  the 
last  requisitions  which  I sent  you.  Please  do  so  at  once. 

Yours:  truly, 

F.  W.  DILLARD, 
Assistant  Quartermaster. 


[Inclosuro  No.  3.] 

Steamer  Munnerlyn,  May  29,  1862. 
Capt.  F.  W.  Dillard,  Columbus , Ga. : 

Captain:  Yours  of  yesterday  reached  me  this  morning  and  deter- 
mined me  to  return  at  once  to  Columbus.  I shall  leave  the  boat  at 


544  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AlTt)  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Fort  Gaines  and  will  meet  lier  again  at  Columbus  on  Monday.  I have 
written  to  Dr.  Bozeman  for  assistance  in  getting  hands;  also  to  Messrs. 
McNab  and  Thornton  at  Eufaula.  I hope  to  organize  my  force  and 
start  down  the  river  again  on  Monday,  June  2.  If  I succeed  in  getting 
the  number  of  hands  I want  I will  require  2,000  more  rations  than  I 
wrote  for.  Please  advise  the  commissary  for  me.  I will  also  require 
cooking  utensils  for  200  men.  I prefer  to  take  hands,  rations,  tents, 
&c.,  on  the  Munnerlyn. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Engineer , &c. 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 


Columbus,  Ga.,  May  20,  1862. 

Captain  Boggs, 

Chief  of  Engineers  and  Artillery , State  of  Georgia  : 

Dear  Sir:  I am  sorry  that  I did  not  have  the  pleasure  of  meeting 
with  you  as  you  passed  through  this  city,  it  seems  that  events  worked 
around  in  a circle,  jdacing  you  where  it  was  we  desired  to  have  you 
more  than  two  months  ago. 

I have  just  returned  from  Eufaula  to  confer  with  authorities  there  on 
the  subject  of  aiding  in  protecting  the  river  against  approaches  next 
winter.  I am  happy  to  assure  you,  on  the  part  of  Dr.  Thornton,  mayor 
of  Eufaula,  and  myself,  that  in  our  respective  spheres  we  will  cordially 
co-operate  with  you  in  carrying  out  effectually  your  vigorous  efforts  to 
that  end.  Any  agency  that  I can  exercise  for  you  here  you  my  readily 
command  me. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

JAS.  F.  BOZEMAN, 
Mayor. 

[Inclosure  No.  5.J 

Steamer  Munnerlyn, 

Chattahoochee  River , Ga.,  May  29,  1862. 
Dr.  J.  F.  Bozeman,  Mayor  of  Columbus , Ga. : 

My  Dear  Sir:  I am  all  ready  now  to  go  to  work  if  I can  get  the 
hands.  I want  209,  and  will  be  obliged  to  you  for  your  assistance  in 
getting  them.  1 have  written  to  Messrs.  McNab  and  Thornton,  at 
Eufaula,  to  telegraph  you  how  many  they  can  furnish.  1 will  send  the 
steamer  to  Columbus  for  the  hands,  provisions,  tents,  &c.,  and  will  join 
them  here  on  Monday,  June  2.  If  the  hands  are  ready  by  that  time  I 
shall  go  down  again  at  once.  The  Confederacy  will  pay,  find,  and  fur- 
nish medical  attendance  and  medicines,  also  the  necessary  shelter  for 
the  hands.  It  will  be  my  special  care  to  see  that  the  hands  are  cared 
for  while  under  my  control. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Engineer , &c. 

[Inclosure  No.  6.] 

Eufaula,  Ala.,  June  3,  1862. 

Dr.  Bozeman: 

No  hands  ready ; several  engaged.  Difficult  to  obtain  laborers  until 
crops  are  secured. 


J.  MoNAB. 

W.  II.  THORNTON. 


..  xxvt.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


545 


!ftAP 


[Tnclosuro  No  7 ] 


Eufaula,  Ala.,  May  21,  1862. 


Colonel  Boggs: 


Sir:  We  take  the  liberty  of  writing  you  to  state  that  we  have  been 
appointed  by  Governor  Shorter  commissioners  on  the  part  of  Alabama 
o represent  the  State  in  carrying  into  execution  such  duties  as  may 
levolve  on  us  in  the  system  of  operations  that  y#u  adopt,  as  engineer, 
^vith  a view  to  obstruct  the  river.  We  are  advised  by  the  mayor  of 
Oolumbus  that  you  have  proceeded  down  the  river  to  commence  the 
work  and  we  think  proper  to  write  you,  informing  you  of  our  appoint- 
ment! and  that  we  are  ready  and  desirous  to  co-operate  in  carrying  out 
our  duties.  Oblige  by  informing  us  what  is  expected  of  us  to  do  in  aid 
of  the  work  at  present,  if  such  information  is  to  emanate  from  you,  as 
we  suppose,  bearing  that  you  have  full  authority  m the  premises. 

Very  respecting  JOHN  McNAB, 

WM.  H.  THORNTON, 

Com  missi  oners. 


[Inclosure  No.  8.] 


Steamer  Munnerlyn, 
Chattahoochee  River , May  24,  1862. 

Messrs.  J.  McNab  and  W.  H.  Thornton, 

Commissioners , &c.,  Eufaula , Ala. : 

Gentlemen  : Your  letter  of  May  21  reached  me  to-day.  I am  aware 
of  the  correspondence  between  Governors  Shorter  and  Brown,  and  it 
was  the  intention  of  Governor  Brown  to  send  me  to  act  with  yourselves, 
the  commissioners  of  Governor  Shorter.  In  the  mean  time,  at  the  re- 
quest of  General  Pemberton,  0.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  department, 
I was  ordered  by  Governor  Brown  to  report  to  General  I emberton  tor 
instructions,  and  am  now  acting  under  his  orders.  1 should  be  very 
much  gratified  to  have  you  visit  this  part  of  the  river  to  see  what  is 
about  lo  be  done.  Such  a visit  would  probably  be  more  satisfactory  to 
yourselves  and  your  people,  and  would  a fiord  me  much  pleasure,  if  t le 
quartermaster  at  Columbus  can  procure  sufficient  laborers  at  the  place 
it  may  be  necessary  to  call  on  you  for  assistance. 

I am,  gentlemen,  your  obedient  servant, 

VV  . R.  hUbub, 

Engineer , &c . 


[Inclosure  Xo.  9.] 


Steamer  Munnerlyn,  May  29,  1862. 
Messrs.  J.  McNab  and  W.  H.  Thornton,  Eufaula , Ala. : 

Gentlemen:  From  a letter  I received  to-day  from  Captain  Dillard, 
at  Columbus,  I infer  that  1 shall  have  some  difficulty  in  obtaining  labor- 
ers. I want  at  least  200,  and  will  be  obliged  to  you  for  your  assistance 
in  obtaining  them.  The  Confederacy  will  pay,  feed,  and  furnish  the 
medical  attendance  and  medicines,  also  shelter  for  these  hands.  ^ 1 
be  my  special  care  to  see  that  they  are  properly  cared  for  so  long  as 
they  are  under  my  control.  1 shall  go  to  Columbus  for  the  purpose  o 
getting  laborers,  rations,  tents,  &c.,  and  hope  to  return  Monday,  June 
2.  Please  advise  Dr.  Bozeman,  at  Columbus,  by  telegraph  how  many 


35  R R— vol  xiy 


546 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai?.  XXVI 


hands  you  can  have  ready  for  me  at  Eufaula  by  that  time  and  of  any 
others  that  I may  get  en  route  down  the  river. 

I remain,  gentlemen,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  E.  BOGGS, 

Engineer , &c. 

[Inclosure  No.  10.1 


Steamer  Mitnnerlyn, 
Chattahoochee  River,  May  29,  1862. 
Dr.  J.  E.  G.  Hunter,*  Bainbridge , Ga.  : 

Doctor  : I am  now  on  my  way  to  Columbus,  Ga.,  for  the  purpose  of | 
organizing  a working  party  of  about  200  hands.  It  will  be  necessary 
for  me  to  have  a physician  with  the  party,  and  I shall  be  pleased  to 
have  your  services.  You  will  be  provided  for  in  the  boat,  and  I feel 
authorized  to  pay  you  the  same  as  an  assistant  surgeon  in  the  C.  S. 
Army.  I should  be  glad  to  have  you  bring  your  own  medicines,  and 
will  pay  for  such  as  you  may  use.  I will  advise  you  by  telegraph  when 
we  leave  Columbus,  and  will  be  pleased  to  hear  from  you  or  meet  you 
at  Chattahoochee. 

I remain,  doctor,  very  respectfully, 

W.  E.  BOGGS, 

Engineer , &c. 


[Inclosure  No.  11.] 


Columbus,  Ga.,  June  4,  1862.  ' I 
Dr.  J.  M.  G.  Hunter,*  Bainbridge , Ga. : 

Doctor  : Having  entirely  failed  to  organize  the  working  party  for 
the  obstructing  and  defense  of  tlie  river,  I have  to  inform  you  that  I 
shall  not  need  your  services. 

Hoping  that  my  letter  of  the  29th  ultimo  has  put  you  in  no  consid- 
erable inconvenience,  I remain,  doctor,  very  respectfully, 

W.  E.  BOGGS, 

Engineer , &c. 


[Inclosure  No.  12.] 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  3, 1862. 
Col.  W.  E.  Boggs,  Columbus , Ga. : 

There  are  no  guns  to  be  had,  except  those  at  Eicco’s  Bluff.  At  this 
time  Dr.  Callahan  cannot  be  spared  from  Savannah. 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure  No.  13.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  0.,  May  29,  1862. 

Col.  W.  E.  Boggs,  Columbus , Ga. : 

I am  directed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  say  to  you  that  he 
expects  the  labor  to  be  furnished  by  the  planters  themselves  free  of 
charge,  and  if  the  negroes  should  not  have  the  tools  you  are  authorized 
to  get  them  from  the  quartermaster.  While  the  general  does  not  posi- 
tively prohibit  shelter,  yet  he  thinks  it  better  to  bivouac,  as  information 

*No  means  of  ascertaining  the  correct  initials. 


On  Ah  XNVt.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


547 


has  been  received  that  no  more  tents  can  be  furnished  until  winter. 
The  general  will  make  requisition  for  the  $15,000,  and  as  soon  as  re- 
ceived will  have  it  placed  at  your  disposal.  At  present  the  Engineer 
Department  is  without  funds.  The  general  prefers  the  position  just 
below  Fort  Gadsden  for  the  obstructions.  He  cannot  at  this  time  fur- 
nish any  other  guns  than  those  at  Ricco’s  Bluff. 

I am,  &c. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

« 

[Inclosure  ~No.  14.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  June  1,  1862. 

Col.  W.  R.  Boggs,  Engineer  Office: 

Colonel  : I am  directed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  say  that 
he  prefers  Fort  Gadsden  or  just  below  it  as  a site,  with  the  guns  from 
Ricco’s  Bluff,  to  any  other  point  on  the  river.  He  has  no  guns  that  he 
can  spare  you.  He  would  advise  that  the  obstructions  be  placed  near 
the  guns— say  600  or  700  yards  from  the  guns. 


I am,  &c., 


J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure  No.  15.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah , Ga .,  May  13,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Joseph  E.  Brown, 

Governor  of  Georgia: 

Governor  : 1 have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  a letter  from  the 
Secretary  of  War  to  myself,  received  by  the  hands  of  Hon.  Alf.  Iver- 
son on  the  11th  instant>  During  the  very  few  days  of  my  control  over 
the  Department  of  Eastern  and  Middle  Florida  I examined  the  Chat- 
tahoochee River  as  far  up  as  the  town  of  the  same  name,  with  a view 
to  the  location  of  a battery  between  Apalachicola  and  Chattahoochee. 
I saw  no  site  which  offered  so  many  advantages  as  that  of  old  Fort 
Gadsden.  This  opinion  I expressed  to  Brigadier-General  Trapier,  and 
advised  its  occupation.  The  guns,  however,  had  been  landed  at  Ricco’s 
Bluff  and  works  commenced,  and  for  these  reasons  only  I believe  Gen- 
eral Trapier  determined  to  establish  his  batteries  there.  Between 
Chattahoochee  and  Columbus  I know  nothing  by  personal  observation 
of  the  desirable  localities.  To  my  mind,  however,  it  is  very  plain  that 
the  battery  and  obstructions  should  cover  as  much  of  the  country  as 
possible  from  invasion  by  the  river.  Fort  Gadsden  has  many  requi- 
sites. The  site  is  sufficiently  elevated ; there  are  good  roads  in  the 
rear;  a long,  straight  road  in  front;  the  banks  on  either  side  are 
swampy,  and  nearly  or  quite  impracticable  to  an  enemy;  the  width  of 
the  river  is  about  the  average,  and  in  no  part  is  it  too  wide  or  too  deep 
to  be  easily  and  effectually  obstructed.  I prefer  to  all  other  methods 
the  plan  of  cribs  as  constructed  and  laid  in  the  Savannah  River.  The 
addition  of  trees  in  large  numbers  placed  just  below  the  cribs  and  under 
fire  of  the  batteries  should  prevent  the  passage  of  boats  of  the  smallest 
draught.  It  may  be  that  Fort  Gadsden  is  unhealthy;  if  so,dt  is  eer- 


Of  May  7,  see  p.  493. 


548  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  FAST  FLA.  tCHAr.XXVt  I 

tainlyli  disadvantage,  but  should  not  be  regarded  an  insuperable  objec-  4 
tion.  1 am  informed  of  a position  some  ten  miles  above  Chattahoochee, 
known  as  Eock  Island.  I have  not  seen  the  locality.  Unless  it  has  J 
very  greatly  superior  advantages  in  other  respects  it  is  higher  up  than 
I should  like.  Wherever  the  site  selected  may  be  it  will  become  nec-  ' 
essary  to  apply  to  the  War  Department  to  withdraw  the  guns  from  ' 
Kicco’s  Bluff,  unless  Fort  Gadsden  be  chosen,  to  any  point  below  Chat- j 
tahoochee  lying  within  the  Department  of  Eastern  and  Middle  Florida,  •* 
over  which  I have  no  control.  Should  Fort  Gadsden  be  selected,  Gen-  i 
eral  Finegan,  commanding  the  department,  is  competent  to  make  the 
change.  I leave  the  choice  of  the  localities  to  Colonel  Boggs,  whom  I 
understand  Your  Excellency  to  place  under  my  orders  for  the  proposed 
object,  and  I will  thank  yon  to  instruct  him  in  my  name  to  proceed  at  I 
once  to  make  the  necessary  reconnaissance,  reporting  to  me  the  result. 
For  this  end  lie  is  authorized  to  employ  such  transportation  and  assist-  j 
ance  as  he  may  deem  necessary.  If  my  other  duties  will  permit  I shall  | 
endeavor  to  visit  the  river  myself  in  a few  days. 

Very  respectfully* 

J.  C.  PEMBEETOK, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  C.f  June  5,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  C.  K.  Huger,  Fort  Pemberton , 8.  C. : 

I wish  the  suggestion  of  placing  a sunken  battery  for  eight  siege 
howitzers  in  the  woods  below  the  fort  carried  out  at  once.  So  soon  as 
the  battery  is  constructed  the  guns  can  be  placed  there.  Captain 
Eamsay  will  at  once  procure  a sufficient  number  of  sand  bags  to  make 
merlons  as  described  by  Mr.  A.  J.  Gonzales,  and  so  locate  them. 

1 Very  respectfully, 

J J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  5, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Lawton,  Savannah , Ga. : 

You  are  ordered  to  command  the  troops  to  Eichmond,  but  will  not 
move  until  further  ordered.  You  will  have  four  regiments  in  readiness 
to  move  to  Eichmond,  one  taking  the  place  of  Colonel  Harrison’s,  who 
will  not  move  to  Eichmond. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETOE, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  June  5,  1862. 

George  A.  Trenholm, 

Commissioner  on  Defense  of  City: 

Sir:  Major-General  Pemberton  desires  that  100  hands  be  furnished 
from  the  city  for  immediate  work  on  the  main  harbor  obstructions. 


Ciiap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  549 


The  hands  he  wishes  turned  over  to  Mr. 
work. 

I am,  &c., 


John  Cheves,  in  charge  of  the 


J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  5, 1862. 

General  NT.  G.  Evans,  Adams  Run , 8.  G. : 

Send  me  a cavalry  company  to  report  to  General  S.  R.  Gist,  on  James 
Island : one  well  armed  if  possible. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  5,  1862. 

Major-Qeneral  Pemberton,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Did  you  receive  my  dispatch  of  last  night? 

J JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  5, 1862. 

Jeff.  Davis,  President: 

Received  your  dispatch  of  yesterday  this  morning.  It  may  only  be 
a feint,  to  prevent  my  sending  troops  to  Richmond.  If  he  does  not 
increase  his  strength  considerably  I can  resist  him.  No  demonstra- 
tions at  present  against  the  harbor.  He  remains  under  cover  of  his 
gunboats  on  Stono.  Four  regiments  will  be  ready  to  move  at  your 
call  by  night.  Hope  to  be  able  to  say,  “Can  send  them.” 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  5,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

When  your  condition  permits  send  on  the  troops.  The  urgency  in- 
creases. 1 Order  was  sent  yesterday  to  forward  you  from  Danville  some 
32-pounders.  Anything  we  can  furnish  you  shall  have.  The  forts,  if 
well  defended,  will,  I hope,  protect  the  harbor. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  5,  1862. 

Jefferson  Davis,  President: 

The  urgency  has  not  apparently  increased  here.  I have  ordered  four 
regiments  to  proceed  at  once  to  Richmond,  and  will  hasten  them  as 
much  as  possible. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General,  Commanding. 


550 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  (CHAr.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  5,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Drayton,  Hardecville , 8.  C.: 

Have  your  command  ready  to  move  in  any  direction  should  it  be 
required. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General.  I 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  5,  1862. 
General  A.  R.  Lawton,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Delay  the  movement  of  the  troops  heretofore  ordered  to  Rich-  1 
mond  until  further  orders,  but  hold  them  ready  to  move  should  they  be  ] 
required. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  5,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Gist,  Seeessionville , 8.  C.: 

If  General  Mercer  has  not  moved  he  will  remain  for  the  present. 
The  movement  to  Richmond  is  suspended  until  I hear  further  from  you 
as  to  strength  of  enemy. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON. 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  June  5,  1862. 
General  W.  D.  Smith,  Seeessionville , 8.  C. : 

1 will  order  Colonel  Harrison’s  regiment  to  take  post  on  the  lines 
near  your  present  headquarters.  I have  received  a supply  of  ammu- 
nition for  small-arms.  The  gunboat,  with  two  8-inch  Dahlgren  guns 
and  two  Blakely  guns,  small,  will  go  to  Seeessionville  to-night.  An 
8-inch  columbiad  is  also  ordered. 

I will  give  $200  to  any  man  that  will  succeed  in  burniug  the  bridge 
to  Cole’s  Island. 

You  will  cause  the  enemy’s  pickets  to  be  annoyed  as  much  as  possi- 
ble to-night.  I suggest  this  plan  : Deploy  some  50  or  100  men  at  ten 
to  fifteen  paces  intervals,  to  advance  if  possible  within  good  range, 
musket  or  rifle,  as  they  may  be,  and  if  musket  use  ball  and  buck.  At 
a concerted  signal  fire  into  their  groups  of  four,  and  fall  back  without 
collecting  in  groups  themselves ; have  a sufficient  force  lying  down  j 
resist  an  advance  at  a point  which  your  skirmishers  shall  be  made 
acquainted  with  and  toward  which  they  shall  move. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  69. 

# * 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 
Charleston , 8.  (7.,  June  5, 1862. 
* # # # # 


IY,  The  two  companies  of  Colonel  Graham’s  regiment  now  detached 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  551 

from  tlie  regiment  will  proceed  at  once  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  rejoin 
| their  regiment. 

Y.  Colonel  Harrison,  commanding  regiment  Georgia  Volunteers,  will 
proceed  at  once  to  the  vicinity  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist’s  headquarters 
and  report  to  Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith,  Provisional  Army  Confederate 
States.  Colonel  Harrison  can  encamp  with  his  regiment  at  any  con- 
venient point  near  his  place  of  destination. 

YI.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith,  commanding  on  James  Island,  will  cause 
one  or  more  companies  to  work  on  a battery  to  be  constructed  below  Fort 
Pemberton,  relieving  by  others  as  he  shall  see  fit.  The  greatest  caution 
and  silence  must  be  observed.  No  negroes  will  be  allowed  to  approach 
the  works  during  its  construction  or  afterward.  The  construction  of 
the  work  will  be  under  the  superintendence  of  Mr.  E.  White,  assistant 
engineer. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton: 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs..  Military  District  of  South  Carolina, 
Adams’  Run , S.  0.,  June  5,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston , S.  C.  : 

Major  : In  answer  to  the  communication  just  received  by  the  hands 
of  Lieutenant  Morrison  I have  the  houor  to  report  that  I have  yet  been 
unable  to  ascertain  the  exact  intentions  or  designs  of  the  enemy. 

There  are  about  1,500  on  Seabrook  Island,  and  are  being  re-enforced 
from  Fenwick’s-and  Edisto  Islands.  There  is  also  a* small  force  at  Le- 
gareville.  I have  three  regiments  at  the  bridge-  at  Church  Flats,  with 
orders  to  move  to  the  island  at  the  shortest  notice. 

I have  just  directed  Colonel  Dunovant,  First  Regiment  Infantry,  to 
attack  the  enemy  at  Seabrook  to-morrow  morning.  The  attack  will 
not  probably  take  place  until  the  afternoon. 

I am  compelled  to  guard  strongly  both  the  Wadmalaw  and  Stono 
Rivers,  and  I think  the  present  force  of  this  district  should  not  be 
diminished  more  than  one  regiment. 

The  cavalry  are  so  indifferently  armed  that  they  are  of  little  service 
in  a general  engagement.  I have  now  six  companies  of  cavalry  on 
John’s  Island.  Two  light  batteries  are  also  at  Church  Flats,  ready  to 
move  to  the  island  if  necessary. 

Should  any  troops  be  ordered  to  Virginia  from  this  military  district 
I would  respectfully  ask  permission  to  make  the  detail. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- Genera  l,  Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  6,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Evans,  Adams  Bun , S.  C.  : 

Two  12-pounder  guns  have  been  ordered  to  Rautowles,  50  rounds  of 
ammunition  each ; want  them  placed  in  battery  there. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


552 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai*.  XXVI. 


CHARLESTON,  S.  C., , 1862. 

General  Drayton,  Hardeeville.  8.  C.  : 

You  will  not  move  until  ordered.  The  cavalry  companies  will  not 
be  moved.  The  two  companies  of  the  Eleventh  Regiment  will  not  be 
moved. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  24.  ( Charleston , 8.  6’.,  June  6,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  T.  M.  Wagner,  Firat  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
is  hereby  announced  as  chief  of  ordnance  of  the  Department  of  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia. 

Bv  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton: 

J.  R.  WADDY, 

A ssi  stant  A d jut  ant-  Gen  eral. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga, 

No.  25.  f Charleston , 8.  (7.,  June  6,  1862. 

Captain  Echols,  Engineer  Corps,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confeder- 
ate States,  is  hereby  announced  as  chief  engineer  of  the  department. 
He  will  without  delay  proceed  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  report  at  these 
headquarters. 

By  order  of  Major  General  Pemberton  : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  70.  ) Charleston , 8.  0.,  June  6,  1862. 

# * * * * * * 

YI.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States,  is  hereby  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  First  Military  Dis- 
trict of  South  Carolina,  and  will  relieve  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Pro- 
visional Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  who,  being  relieved,  will  pro- 
ceed to  Savannah  and  relieve  Brigadier-General  Lawton,  now  under 
orders  for  Virginia. 

* # # * # * # 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton  : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  7,  1862 — 1 a.  m. 

Jefferson  Davis: 

A prisoner  taken  to-night  says  the  enemy  has  landed  a division  and 
three  light  batteries  and  a siege  train  on  James  Island  and  a division 


Chap.  XXVI.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


553 


on  John’s  Island ; also  cavalry  and  artillery.  The  generals  are  Stevens 
and  Wright.  Says  his  division  (Stevens’)  is  10,000  strong. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major - General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

Tallahassee , Fla .,  June  7,  1862. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond  Va.  : 


General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  failed  to  receive 
any  guns  from  Pensacola  to  place  in  battery  on  the  Apalachicola  River. 
I am  erecting  a battery  of  seven  guns  at  Alum  Bluif,  between  Ricco’s 
Bluff  and  Chattahoochee— four  32-pounders,  two  24-pounders,  and  one 
18-pouuder.  The  position  is  an  elevated  one,  where  a plunging  tire  can 
be  had  on  any  vessel  attempting  to  pass.  Two  guns  are  now  ready  for 
service  and  the  balance  will  be  mounted  in  the  course  of  a week  or  ten 
days.  The  carriages  for  most  of  the  guns  had  to  be  made  here.  I have 
moved  (he  two  32-pounder  rifle  cannon,  mounted  on  siege  carriages, 
from  Ricco’s  Bluff  for  service  on  the  Saint  John’s  River  and  put  two 
18-pounders  in  their  place.  I am  also  removing  two  8-inch  howitzers 
from  the  battery  near  Saint  Mark’s  for  the  same  service  and  putting 
two  32- pounders  in  their  place.  I propose  making  a casemate  battery 
near  Saint  Mark’s,  using  heavy  timber  and  railroad  iron  for  the  purpose. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  7, 1862. 

Brigadier- General  Evans,  Adams  Run , S.  C. : 

The  enemy’s  gunboats  went  down  last  night  to  Grimball’s,  on  John’s 
Island.  I got  your  dispatch  so  late  I could  not  comply  with  your  wishes. 
Let  me  know  what  you  want  now. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

June  7,  1862. 


Brigadier-General  Smith  : 

General  : The  m aj or- general  commanding  directs  that  you  have  the 
bomb-proof  at  Secessiouville  completed  at  once  by  the  soldiers.  This 
work  is  important  and  its  speedy  completion  necessary.  Also  that  you 
have  working  parties  organized  ready  to  erect  batteries  between  James 
Island  Creek  and  Newton’s  Cut, 

J.  C.  TAYLOR, 

Aide  de-  Camp. 


554 


; 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  June  7,  1862. 


Brigadier-General  Smith, 

Commanding  First  Military  District : 


General : You  will  direct  Capt.  W.  W.  McCreery,  ordnance  officer, 
to  make  an  immediate  personal  inspection  and  report  to  me  as  early 
to-morrow  as  possible — 

1st.  The  exact  number  of  guns  on  the  line  of  intrenchments  from 
Secessionville  to  the  Cut  (Wappoo),  giving  the  correct  caliber  of  each,  t 
with  a diagram  showing  the  position  on  the  lines.  This  he  can  take, 
well  enough  from  the  sketch  of  the  intrenchments  as  laid  down  on 
General  Gist’s  map. 

2d.  How  many  rounds  there  are  for  each  caliber  of  shot,  canister, 
and  grape,  also  how  many  rounds  of  cartridges  for  each  caliber. 

3d.  How  many  friction-tubes,  how  many  port  fires,  port-fire  clippers, 
how  much  slow  match,  how  many  port-fire  stocks. 

4th.  How  many  handspikes  for  siege  guns  are  needed,  how  many 
barbette  guns,  how  many  priming-wires,  gunner’s  gimlets,  and  thumb- 
stalls,  haversacks,  and  tube-pouches  are  needed,  also  vent  aprons. 

5th.  State  in  the  calibers  given  whether  rifled  or  smooth-bore. 

6th.  I trust  that  Captain  McCreery  will  use  the  utmost  accuracy 
and  diligence  in  ascertaining  and  giving  this  information.  It  is  of  the 
greatest  importance  that  I should  be  correctly  informed  on  all  these 
points,  that  I may  take  measures  to  keep  up  supplies.  It  is  of  imme- 
diate and  pressing  necessity  that  I should  know  the  caliber  and  number 
of  guns  and  the  amount  of  ammunition  now  on  the  lines,  and  I desire 
you  to  have  at  least  20  rounds  of  cartridges  and  projectiles  with 
every  gun  iu  position.  It  is  also  extremely  important  that  proper  ar- 
rangements be  made  on  the  continuous  line  for  the  disposition  of  field 
artillery,  upon  which  we  shall  be  forced  to  depend  in  a great  degree. 

I desire  to  place  at  least  50  rounds  of  ammunition  with  every  siege 
and  barbette  gun.  H you  are  deficient  in  anything  let  me  know  and  I 
will  endeavor  to  have  it  supplied. 

Very  respectfully, 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  8,  1862. 

W.  J.  Magrath, 

President  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad: 

Sir:  The  worthless  condition  of  nearly  all  the  steamboats  in  the 
employ  of  the  Government  renders  it  necessary  that  I call  upon  you 
for  the  use  of  the  ferry-boats  of  the  railroad  company.  I regret  this 
necessity  extremely,  but  I have  no  other  resource.  The  enemy  in  large 
force  is  preparing  to  attack  Charleston— probably  through  James  and 
John’s  Islands.  I request  you  to  have  several  trains  ready  to  move  at 
a moment’s  notice  for  or  with  troops.  It  is  desirable  that  the  regular 
passenger  train  should  not  move  to-day,  as  it  is  highly  probable  the 
cars  may  be  needed  for  transportation  of  men  or  stores. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


553 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  8,  18G2 — 1 a.  m. 
General  Mercer,  Savannah,  Ga. : 

Have  all  of  your  command  ready  to  move  at  the  shortest  notice. 
Send  me  at  once  the  best  field  battery  you  have.  I want  some  rifled 
nieces  and  12-pounder  howitzers.  Send  all  their  ammunition. 

1 J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  8,  1862 — 1 a.  m. 

Captain  Childs: 

Send  to  General  Smith  (receipts  from  Captain  McCreery)  70,000  per- 
cussion caps  by  bearer.  The  enemy  is  reported  by  a prisoner  10,000 
strong  on  James  Island,  three  light  batteries  and  a siege  train,  and  as 
much  on  John’s  Island.  Have  ready  also  300  rounds  of  ammunition 
for  12  pounders,  ammunition  for  18-pounders, and  200  for  24-pounders; 
also  rifled  ammunition  for  24-pounders — say  200  rounds  port-fires  and 
friction-tubes.  I wish  you  to  have  everything  I need  ready  at  a mo- 
ment’s notice. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

[ Major-General , Commanding .] 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  8,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  Adams  Run: 

The  prisoner  taken  yesterday  states  that  the  enemy  are  landing  in 
large  force  on  John’s  Island  and  on  this  side  also. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  8, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith: 

General  : I wish  the  large  woods  west  of  Secessionville  strongly 
occupied  with  troops,  and  field  artillery  on  the  road  or  in  easy  commu- 
nication with  the  road.  It  is  of  the  first  importance  to  hold  this  wood. 
You  will  give  strict  orders  to  prohibit  the  roads  being  blocked  up  with 
wagons,  artillery,  or  any  other  obstruction  to  the  movement  of  troops. 
Should  the  enemy  attempt  this  woods  with  artillery  you  will  retain  it 
at  any  cost  and  endeavor  to  capture  his  artillery.  I shall  endeavor  to 
see  you  this  morning. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


• Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  June  8,  1862. 

Col.  Johnson  Hagood,  Provost-Marshal : 

Colonel:  Your  communication  of  this  day’s  date*  and  inclosing 
report  of  Capt.  G.  B.  Lartigue,  assistant  provost-marshal,  in  reference 
to  the  guards  of  the  city,  has  been  received,  and  in  reply  I am  directed 

* Not  found. 


556 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI, 

by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say  he  desires  you  should  manage 
to  the  best  of  your  ability  with  your  present  force,  as  he  is  unable  tc 
spare  a greater  force. 

R.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  8, 1862. 

General  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga.: 

You  will  send  to  this  point  a strong,  well-armed  regiment — one  oi 
your  best;  send  Major  Anderson. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major - General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  26.  j Charleston , S.  6\,  June  8,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales,  artillery,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Con- 
federate States,  is  announced  chief  of  artillery,  Department  of  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia.  He  will  forthwith  proceed  to  this  point  and 
report  for  further  instructions. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton: 

J.  R.  WADDY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  9, 1862. 
General  S.  R.  Gist,  Secessionville , S.  C.  : 

Don’t  allow  your  command,  and  especially  the  batteries,  to  waste  am- 
munition. They  must  not  fire  merely  because  they  are  fired  at.  The 
large  guns  must  not  waste  their  ammunition. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  9,  1862. 

General  S.  R.  Gist: 

General  Evans  will  probably  attack  the  enemy  to-night  near  Legare- 
ville.  If  you  hear  his  guns,  make  a demonstration  toward  Grimball’s 
or  Legard’s,  or  both,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  re-enforcing. 

J/  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- Genera  l , Commanding. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  10,  1862. 
General  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga.: 

Brigadier-General  Drayton  will  support  Savannah  upon  your  call. 
I send  Colonel  Harrison’s  regiment  this  morning  and  will  probably 
send  another  to-night. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding . 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  5,57 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  10,  1862. 

Mayor  of  Savannah,  Ga.  : 

Charleston  is  threatened;  have  therefore  d<  awn  troops  from  Savan- 
nah. If  Savannah  is  threatened,  shall  draw  troops  from  Charleston. 
With  means  at  my  disposal  shall  defend  both  to  the  best  of  my  ability. 
Expect  to  send  two  regiments  back  to-morrow. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTONS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C..  June  11,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Mercer  : 

General:  I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  say  to 
yon  that  some  six  weeks  ago  he  ordered  Cap  ain  Echols  to  construct  a 
work  in  rear  of  Fort  Jackson,  a covered  way,  to  strengthen  the  rear  of 
the  fort.  The  major-general  wishes  you  to  call  on  the  mayor  and  coun- 
cil for  sufficient  negro  labor  to  complete  the  work.  One  hnudred  hands 
would  finish  the  work  in  three  weeks.  You  will  also  call  the  attention 
of  the  Navy  officers  to  the  importance  -of  completing  the  naval  battery. 
Should  the  negroes  not  be  furnished  the  work  cannot  go  on.  The  naval 
battery  should  be  constructed  under  the  control  of  the  Navy  officer. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  June  11,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Mercer, 

Commanding  Military  District  of  Georgia  : 

General  : In  auswer  to  your  communication  of  .Tune  9 I am  directed 
by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  inform  you  that  he  considers  the  posi- 
tion of  Fort  Boggs  one  of  so  much  importance  that  he  is  unwilling  to 
take  the  10-iuch  columbiad  now  in  position  at  that  work  to  place  it  on 
the  ladies’ gunboat  until  the  strength  of  the  gunboat  has  been  thor- 
oughly tested  with  a 10-inch  columbiad  or  an  8 -inch  rifled  gun  at  a dis- 
tance of  about  300  yards.  After  the  strength  of  the  gunboat  has  been 
thus  ascertained  and  found  capable  of  resisting  such  heavy  metal  the 
general  will  then  consider  your  request  at  once. 

As  regards  the  number  and  quality  of  troops  you  now  have  at  Sa 
vannah,  the  general  is  well  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  force  is  not  suf- 
ficiently large  for  the  defense  of  the  city.  You  are  aware  of  the  fact 
that  the  force  in  and  around  Charleston  is  inadequate  to  the  defense  of 
Charleston  and  the  lines  of  James  Island.  Charleston  is  now  threatened, 
and  the  general  has  been  forced  to  withdraw  troops  from  Savannah 
while  the  latter  city  is  not  threatened.  Should  Savannah  be  threatened, 
he  should  under  similar  circumstances  withdraw  troops  from  Charleston 
for  the  defense  of  Savannah. 

Colonel  Harrison’s  regiment  Georgia  Volunteers  has  been  ordered  to 
and  will  probably  reach  Savannah  to-day  before  reading  your  letter. 
Captain  Read’s  battery  has  been  ordered  to  leave  for  Savannah  to-mor- 
row. General  Drayton,  at  Hardeeville,  has  been  ordered  to  hold  his 
entire  command  in  readiness  to  move  to  your  support,  in  case  Savannah 


558 


COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [chttr.  XXVT.  I 

should  be  threatened,  upon  your  summons  without  further  reference  to 
these  headquarters.  The  general  will  also  endeavor  to  strengthen  you 
from  other  points.  You  should  also  call  on  the  Governor  for  all  arms 
in  the  State,  so  as  to  enable  you  to  thoroughly  arm  what  men  you  now 
have.  You  should  also  call  on  the  citizens  to  arm  themselves  for  the 
defense  of  the  city. 

On  June  6 General  A.  E.  Lawton  telegraphed  as  follows : 

If  the  troops  now  in  Charleston  sent  from  here  under  General  Smith  return  to  this 
place,  when  I have  taken  four  regiments  to  Richmond,  there  will  remain  here  about  ^ 
11,000,  so  that  you  will  now  have  11,000  men  less  the  number  brought  from  Savannah 
by  General  Smith,  which  does  not  exceed  1,000  or  1,700,  which  should  leave  you  about 
9,300  or  9,400  men. 

Should  you  be  threatened  in  the  least  you  will  call  on  General  Dray-  i 
ton  for  the  Eleventh  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  at  once.  You 
are  also  authorized  to  call  on  all  troops  in  Georgia  should  their  services! 
be  required.  Savannah  is  therefore,  in  the  opinion  of  the  general,  as 
well  defended  as  Charleston.  To  properly  defend  either  city  requires 
a force  of  at  least  20,000  men  at  each  city,  but  you  are  well  aware  that 
the  general  has  no  such  force  at  his  disposal. 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  11,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Eyans,  Adams  Run,  S.  G.  : 

Send  me  as  many  infantry  troops  as  you  can  spare  for  temporary 
service.  How  many  can  you  spare  ? Answer. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  11, 1862. 

George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

My  force  is  very  inadequate  to  the  defense  of  both  Charleston  and 
Savannah.  Exclusive  of  garrisons  of  forts,  at  this  time  I have  not  vo 
exceed  10,000  effectives  to  defend  Charleston,  including  Evans7  com- 
mand, and  to  defend  Savannah  not  more  than  5,000  effectives,  includ- 
ing Drayton’s;  some  of  these  are  unarmed;  many  badly  armed.  Can 
I not  get  some  troops  frbm  North  Carolina  ? 

J.  G PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  11,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Movements  of  an  important  and  decisive  character  are  practicable  if 
we  can  get  re-enforcements  from  the  South.  Send  them  if  you  possibly 
can  without  too  much  risk  to  Charleston. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


559 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  11,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I not  only  cannot  spare  any  more  troops  from  this  department,  but 
there  is  danger  here  unless  I am  re-enforced. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  11,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith,  James  Island , S.  C.  : 

The  enemy  are  reported  to  be  two  regiments  and  ten  pieces  of  artil- 
lery strong  in  nearly  the  same  position  that  they  occupied  yesterday. 
The  section  of  Chatham  Artillery  has  been  ordered  back  which  had  not 
been  ordered  to  move. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  June  11,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Smith  : 

General  : I have  every  reason  to  believe  the  enemy  is  erecting  a 
battery  in  about  the  position  where  you  found  him  yesterday.  As  we 
have  not  done  it  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  he  will,  from  the  impor- 
tance of  the  position.  I am  informed  this  evening  that  he  has  two  regi- 
ments and  ten  pieces  of  field  artillery  there.  Can  you  not  take  his 
batteries,  or  at  least  derange  his  plans  ? You  must  keep  up  a constant 
skirmishing  with  him.  It  will  accustom  the  men  to  fire,  which  is  essen- 
tial, if  it  effects  nothing  else.  Is  it  possible  to  burn  the  woods  I have 
been  so  anxious  to  hold?  You  can  get  resin  and  turpentine  and  the 
wind  is  favorable.  Give  me  your  own  and  General  Gist’s  views.  My 
own  are  decided  as  to  the  importance  of  driving  him  from  that  woods 
in  some  way,  or  at  least  of  exposing  him  to  our  artillery. 

Your  pickets  must  be  very  much  on  the  alert — the  officer  of  the  day 
constantly  moving.  Have  you  field  officers  of  the  day?  I shall  get 
a little  more  powder  to-night,  but  if  it  is  wasted  by  firing  at  gunboats 
from  Secessionville  it  might  as  well  not  be  here.  I am  informed  Colonel 
Lamar  has  been  returning  their  fire  again.  You  must  put  a stop  to  this. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  11,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  Adams  Run , S.  C.  : 

Have  you  received  my  telegram  ? Send  at  least  one  good  regiment; 
more  if  you  can.  It  is  evident  that  the  enemy  is  not  in  great  force 

before  you. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


560 


COASTS  OP  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


I 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  11,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee  : 

Dear  Sir  : It  is  with  extreme  reluctance  that  I address  you  this 
letter,  but  I think  it  my  duty  to  say  what  1 am  about  to  communicate. 
General  Pemberton  does  not  possess  the  confidence  of  his  officers,  his 
troops,  or  the  people  of  Charleston.  Whether  justly  or  unjustly,  rely 
upon  it  the  fact  is  so.  I speak  with  positive  certainty.  It  is  useless 
to  inquire  into  all  the  reasons  for  this  unfortunate  condition  of  senti- 
ment in  both  soldiers  and  people.  Such  is  the  deplorable  fact. 

Yesterday  I found  some  of  our  best  and  most  influential  citizens  were 
actually  about  to  get  up  a petition  asking  for  his  removal.  I remon- 
strated with  them  against  such  a proceeding,  urging  that  the  Govern- 
ment could  not  condemn  (for  such  would  be  the  effect)  an  officer  of  high 
rank  and  approved  reputation  on  the  score  of  his  extreme  unpopular- 
ity: but  I have  very  deliberately  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would 
be  far  better  to  remove  General  Pemberton  honorably  and  without  any 
intimation  of  dissatisfaction  from  this  department  to  some  other  sphere 
of  duty.  1 have  been  urged  by  many  of  my  most  esteemed  and  promi- 
nent fellow-citizens  to  bring  this  grave  matter  to  your  notice  in  an  unoffi- 
cial and  confidential  manner.  I believe  that  almost  any  one  whom  you 
could  select  would  be  better  for  us  than  General  Pemberton  ; not  that 
I pretend  to  judge  of  his  qualifications,  but  were  these  of  the  very 
highest  character  (which  I fear  they  are  not)  still  his  usefulness  would 
be  utterly  destroyed  by  the  entire  want  of  confidence  felt  in  him,  I re- 
peat, by  officers,  men,  and  people.  I believe  General  Smith,  now  second 
in  command,  would  answer  very  well.  I do  not  know  him  personally, 
but  he  has  made  quite  a favorable  impression  upon  the  troops.  But  I 
do  not  propose  to  make  any  further  suggestions  than  that  General  Pem- 
berton should  be  honorably  relieved  from  the  command  of  this  depart- 
ment without  the  slightest  information  which  could  wound  his  sensitive- 
ness, and  that  some  other,  any  other,  officer  should  at  once  be  assigned 
here.  Nothing  but  a solemn  sense  of  duty  has  compelled  me  to  write 
this  painful  letter.  And  now,  ray  dear  general,  with  perfect  confidence 
in  your  calm  judgment  I submit  the  whole  matter  to  join  early  and 
earnest  consideration. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

J WM.  POROHER  MILES. 


[Indorsement  No.  1] 


Secretary  of  War  for  attention. 


J.  D. 


June  25,  1862. 

Respectfully  referred  to  His  Excellency  the  President.  I hardly  see 
how  the  removal  of  Pemberton  can  be  avoided.  Magruder  is  the  best 
person  that  is  available  to  relieve  him.  Pemberton  might  go  to  Bragg 
or  to  relieve  Leadbetter. 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 

[Indorsement  No.  2.] 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  12, 1862. 
Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Columbia , 8.  C. : 

Beauregard  has  stated  that,  his  own  health  not  being  strong,  he  can- 


Chap.  XX VI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  561 

not  spare  Bragg,  who  has  much  of  the  administrative  duty  of  the  army 
to  perform.  Perhaps  Beauregard  would  be  glad,  under  the  circumstances, 
to  take  charge  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  If 
you  will  be  satisfied  with  that  arrangement  it  might  be  well  for  you  to 
propose  it  to  him. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS  * 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  O.,  June  12,  1862. 

Maj.  H.  Lee,  Quartermaster,  Ac. : 

Major  : The  major-general  directs  me  to  ascertain  from  you  whether 
an  engine  can  be  sent  to-day  to  Adams  Run  to  bring  General  Evans 
to  this  place ; if  so,  at  what  time  ? Two  regiments  are  to  be  trans- 
ported from  Adams  Run  to  Charleston  to-day  and  battery  of  artillery 
is  also  to  go  on  the  road  from  here  to  Savannah,  but  if  possible  it  is 
desirable  that  an  engine  be  sent  for  General  Evans  as  soon  as  practi- 
cable. 

m J.  C.  TAYLOR, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston,  8.  C.,  June  12,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  T.  M.  Wagner: 

Colonel  : There  are  now  at  Saint  Andrew’s  Depot  two  42-pounder 
carronades  and  two  24-pounder  navy  guns,  with  100  rounds  of  ammuni- 
tion per  gun.  The  major-general  commanding  wishes  them  sent  down 
on  James  Island,  to  be  placed  in  position  on  the  lines  at  such  points  as 
may  be  designated  by  Lieut.  Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — Lieutenant  Wilkinson  will  attend  to  the  matter  referred  to. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston,  8.  C.,  June  12,  1862. 

Lieut,  Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales, 

Chief  of  Artillery  Department : 

Colonel  : There  are  tw7o  42-pounder  carronades  and  two  24  pounder 
navy  guns  now  at  Saint  Andrew’s  Depot,  with  100  rounds  of  ammunition 
per  gun.  The  major-general  commanding  wishes  you  to  designate  the 
position  for  them  to  be  placed  on  the  lines.  The  general  wishes  these 
guns  to  be  placed  in  the  most  advantageous  position  you  can  possibly 
select, 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Maj 


War  Department, 
Richmond,  June  12,  1862. 

. Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  Georgia  and  South  Carolina,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 


General  : Your  attention  is  respectfully  called  to  the  annexed  copy 


36  R R— VOL  xiv 


562 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


of  a letter  from  Col.  G.  W.  Rains  to  Lieut.  Col.  J.  Gorgas  and  referred 
by  him  to  me,  and  you  are  requested  to  take  such  action  in  the  matter 
as  you  may  deem  advisable. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


[Inclosure.] 


Augusta  Arsenal,  June  7, 1862. 


Col.  J.  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance  ; 

Colonel  : I herewith  inclose  proceedings  * of  a public  meeting  held 
in  this  city  relative  to  taking  measures  for  its  defense,  and  in  which 
resolutions  were  adopted  requesting  the  Secretary  of  War,  through  my- 
self, to  assist  in  affording  aid  to  the  defense  of  this  place  and  the  Gov- 
ernment works. 

As  the  matter  has  already  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Secretary 
of  War  by  yourself  perhaps  these  resolutions  ^tre  unnecessary,  but  as 
they  request  me  to  do  so  I submit  them  to  the  Secretary  through  your 
bureau. 

Would  it  be  practicable  to  obtain  100  Enfield  rifles  to  assist  in  arming 
two  companies  of  sharpshooters  now  forming  ? I dislike  to  trouble  you 
in  any  manner  that  I can  avoid,  knowing  so  well  the  little  time  you  have 
to  spare  on  matters  outside  of  your  department,  but  as  we  are  much 
interested  in  preserving  the  public  works  here,  which  may  become  our 
rallying  point,  I think  we  cannot  exert  ourselves  too  much  for  their 
preservation.  The  want  of  a military  commander  at  this  point  would 
be  much  felt  in  an  emergency,  and  I would  be  glad  if  the  Secretary’s 
attention  could  again  be  brought  to  the  subject,  my  time  being  so 
much  occupied  in  my  legitimate  ordnance  duties  that  I can  ill  afford 
to  take  upon  myself  the  additional  duties  of  attending  to  the  military 
defense.  General  Gardner  is  living  here,  and,  although  a cripple,  I 
think  could  render  efficient  service  in  the  premises,  and,  if  I might  be 
allowed  to  suggest  a commandant,  I would  name  him  as  an  officer  who 
would  be  glad  to  serve  in  such  capacity,  and  it  would  be  agreeable  to 
his  townsmen.  I of  course  will  assist  the  commandant  in  all  ways  it 
may  be  in  my  power  without  requiring  orders  so. to  do.  The  general 
and  myself  are  old  friends,  and  I presume  there  would  be  entire  unity 
of  purpose  between  us. 

I have  to  state  in  relation  to  siege-gun  carriages  that  those  which 
were  at  this  arsenal  were  sent  to  Corinth,  excepting  one  18-pounder 
carriage,  for  the  Shell  Bluff  defense. 

Respectfully, 

GEO.  W.  RAINS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  South  Carolina  Regiment  Artillery, 

Fort  Sumter , June  12,  1862.  . 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  letters  addressed  to  me  by  sev- 
eral captains  of  this  regiment  in  relation  to  reports  of  the  disaffection 


* Not  found. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


563 


in  the  garrison  of  Fort  Sumter.  The  opinions  of  the  company  officers 
are  the  only  guides  I have  in  this  matter.  They  are  aware  of  the 
rumors  and  of  the  seditious  language  held  by  one  or  two  of  the  men, 
but  still  have  confidence  in  the  loyalty,  courage,  and  fidelity  of  their 
commands.  If  it  should  be  deemed  necessary  to  make  any  change  in 
the  garrison  of  Fort  Sumter  I respectfully  request  that  my  regiment 
be  sent  into  the  field,  with  as  many  companies  serving  together  as  is 
consistent  with  the  exigencies  of  the  day.  While  all  the  officers  of  this 
garrison  would  feel  sensibly  the  mortification  of  being  removed  from  a 
post  of  so  much  importance  at  such  a critical  time,  we  would  prefer  to 
be  placed  immediately  in  front  of  the  enemy,  where  an  opportunity 
would  be  afforded  to  restore  that  confidence  in  our  rank  and  file  which 
has  been  shaken  by  rumors  amongst  an  anxious  and  excited  commu- 
nity. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  R.  CALHOUN, 

Colonel , Commanding  South  Carolina  Artillery . 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 


Fort  Sumter,  May  23,  1862. 


Lieut.  C.  W.  Parker, 

Adjutant  First  Regiment  Artillery  : 

Sir:  In  reply  to  the  question  addressed  to  me  this  morning  by 
Colonel  Calhoun,  in  reference  to  my  opinion  of  the  loyalty  of  Company 
B,  First  Regiment  Artillery,  to  the  cause  in  which  they  are  enlisted,  I 
have  the  honor  to  say  that  since  I have  been  in  command  of  that  com- 
pany I have  never  had  any  grounds  for  suspecting  the  loyalty  of  their 
motives,  and  I feel  at  the  present  time  an  entire  confidence  in  the  sin- 
cerity of  their  allegiance  to  the  flag  of  the  Confederate  States. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  G.  FLEMING, 
Captain  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


Fort  Sumter,  May  22, 1862. 
Col.  W.  R.  Calhoun,  Commanding  Fort  Sumter : 

Colonel  : In  compliance  with  your  request  I have  the  honor  to  state 
that  I have  the  utmost  confidence  in  the  loyalty  of  every  man  now 
present  in  my  company,  and  it  is  my  sincere  belief  that  as  far  as  patri- 
otism is  concerned  they  will  compare  favorably  with  any  company  in 
the  service  of  the  Confederate  States. 

I remain,  very  respectfully, 

F.  H.  HARLESTON, 

Captain  Company  D,  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery . 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 


Fort  Sumter,  May  25,  1862. 

Col.  W.  R.  Calhoun: 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  reply  to  your  question,  with  regard 
to  the  loyalty  and  fidelity  of  Company  F,  that  I have  never  seen  the 


5f)4  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

least  cause  to  doubt  either,  and  that  I do  not  for  one  moment  question 
their  willingness  to  fight  for  the  cause  in  which  they  are  enlisted. 

I have  the  honor,  colonel,  to  be,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  GADSDEN  KING, 

Capt.  First  Begt.  Arty.  S.  C.,  P.  F.  C.  8.,  Comdg.  Company  F. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 


Fort  Sumter,  May  22, 1862. 
Col.  W.  R.  Calhoun,  Comdg.  Begt.  8.  C.  Arty.,  Frov.  Forces  C.  8.  : 

Colonel  : In  reply  to  your  inquiry  of  this  morning  I would  beg 
leave  to  state  that  I place  the  most  implicit  reliance  upon  my  company. 
I feel  entire  confidence  in  their  loyalty  and  patriotism. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  H.  PERONNEAU, 

Captain , Comdg.  Company  G , Begt.  South  Carolina  Artillery . 


[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

Fort  Sumter,  May  31, 1862. 

Col.  W.  R.  Calhoun,  Fort  Sumter  : 

Colonel  : I have  been  much  annoyed  in  the  last  few  days  by  the 
expression  of  the  feeling  of  the  people  of  Charleston  against  this  regi- 
ment. They  seem  to  have  lost  all  confidence  in  us,  and  I have  no  doubt 
that  it  would  be  as  agreeable  to  them  as  it  would  be  certainly  to  me, 
and  I think  to  many  of  the  officers  of  the  regiment,  that  we  should  be 
removed  to  some  other  field  of  action.  I would  therefore*  respectfully 
request  that  you  take  such  measures  as  in  your  judgment  may  relieve 
us  from  the  unpleasant  position  we  now  occupy,  and  at  the  same  time 
place  us  in  some  other  position,  where  we  may  be  enabled  to  assume 
our  full  share  of  responsibility. 

I remain,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  H.  PERONNEAU. 


[Inclosure  No.  C.] 

Fort  Sumter,  May  31,  1862. 
Col.  W.  R.  Calhoun,  Commanding  Fort  Sumter : 

Colonel  : As  we  in  this  fort  are  placed  in  such  an  unpleasant  and 
unfair  position  by  the  late  actions  of  the  citizens  of  Charleston  as  re- 
gards the  loyalty  of  our  men,  I would  most  earnestly  request  you,  if 
in  your  opinion  you  think  it  advisable,  to  apply  for  a transfer  either  to 
Virginia  or  the  West. 

The  above  is  simply  my  application  as  an  individual,  but  as  my  feel- 
ings have  been  greatly  hurt  at  the  imputations  cast  upon  us,  I earnestly 
desire  to  be  removed.  I think  we  are  competent  to  take  the  field  as 
infantry. 

I remain,  colonel,  very  respectfully, 

F.  H.  HARLESTON, 
Captain  Company  D,  Begiment  Artillery. 


[Inclosure  No.  7.] 

Fort  Sumter,  May  30, 1862. 

Col.  W.  R.  Calhoun,  Comdg.  First  Begt.  South  Carolina  Arty. : 
Colonel  : As  there  exists  in  Charleston  such  very  strong  sentiment 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  565 

against  the  troops  of  this  garrison  as  regards  their  loyalty,  and  as  this 
feeling  has  spread  over  various  parts  of  the  State,  I must  respectfully 
request,  if  it  be  compatible  with  the  defense  of  this  post  and  harbor, 
that  we  be  transferred  to  some  place  where  some  confidence  can  be 
placed  in  us,  and  where  we  will  have  an  early  opportunity  of  proving 
to  the  citizens  of  Charleston  the  wrong  they  have  done  us.  If  not  as 
artillery,  the  men  are  sufficiently  well  drilled  as  infantry  to  take  the 
field  as  such  immediately. 

I earnestly  request  that  this  feeling  may  be  brought  to  the  notice  of 
the  brigadier-general  commanding  for  his  consideration.  It  is  evident 
in  what  an  unpleasant  and,  as  regards  us,  unfair  position  we  are  placed 
by  the  strong  distrust  evinced  toward  us  by  the  citizens  of  Charleston. 
Iam  confident,  sir,  that  if  the  sentiment  of  the  officers  of  this  garrison 
were  known  they  would  coincide  with  mine  entirely. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 
Captain  Artillery , C.  S.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  June  14,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales,  Chief  of  Artillery,  &c.: 

Colonel  : The  major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  inform  you 
that  he  has  instructed  Capt.  W.  H.  Echols  to  lay  out  a battery  near 
Newton’s  Cut,  to  consist  of  a 42-pounder  rifled  gun,  barbette,  four  siege 
8-inch  howitzers,  and  two  siege  24-pounder  rifled  guns,  the  position  to 
be  designated  by  Colonel  Wagner.  The  major-general  directs  that  you 
render  all  assistance  in  your  power  to  Captain  Echols,  that  the  work 
mav  be  completed  at  the  earliest  possible  moment. 

J J.  C.  TAYLOR, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  14,  1862. 

Colonel  Colquitt: 

Colonel  : It  is  a matter  of  the  greatest  importance  that  the  enemy’s 
gunboats  be  prevented  from  lying  off  Newton’s  Cut  and  thus  cutting 
us  off  from  using  the  bridge  and  the  road.  I design  establishing  a bat- 
tery at  the  lower  extremity  of  the  wood  on  the  western  side  of  the  Cut. 
The  battery  will  consist  of  a banded  and  rifled  42-pounder,  four  8-inch 
siege  howitzers,  and  two  24-pounder  rifled  guns.  With  this  battery  we 
ought  to  drive  the  gunboats  as  low  down  as  Grimball’s;  but  to  erect 
it  it  will  be  necessary  to  employ  the  soldiers  of  your  and  Colonel  De 
Saussure’s  regiments.  Negroes  could  not  be  trusted  to  work  so  near 
the  enemy.  The  most  perfect  silence  should  be  maintained  and  the 
greatest  energy  and  determination  upon  the  part  of  the  men  to  carry 
the  work  through  with  the  greatest  rapidity.  Commanding  officers 
should  be  present  with  the  working  parties.  You  will  furnish,  in  con- 
junction with  Colonel  De  Saussure,  as  many  men  as  the  engineer  officer 
in  charge  of  the  work  may  find  it  necessary  to  call  for,  and  I ask  of 
Colonel  De  Saussure  and  yourself  to  aid  and  advance  it  to  the  utmost 
of  your  abilitv. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
[Major- General,  Commanding.] 


566 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYl. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  14,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Lawton  : 

Send  to  Captain  Gibbon,  ordnance  officer  here,  100,000  rounds  of 
ammunition  for  smooth-bore  muskets,  caliber  .69  principally,  and  what 
you  can  spare  for  Enfield  rifles.  Send  it  quickly  as  possible. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major - General , Commanding. 


President  Davis: 


Columbia,  S.  C.,  June  14,  1862. 


The  following  adopted  by  the  Governor  and  Council : 

Resolved,  That  in  the  opinion  of  the  Governor  and  Council  the  utter  want  at  this 
late  date  of  proper  and  adequate  arrangements  for  the  successful  defense  of  Charles- 
ton demands  that  another  appeal  should  he  made  to  the  Confederate  authorities  for 
some  change  in  the  conduct  of  affairs. 

Resolved , That  the  chief  of  the  military  department  he  requested  to  represent,  in  the 
name  of  the  Governor  and  Council  of  South  Carolina,  to  the  President  of  the  Confed- 
erate States,  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  General  Lee  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 
difficulties  which  exist,  and  to  urge  upon  the  Confederate  authorities  the  necessity  of 
immediate  and  efficient  action. 


I write  you  a letter  by  mail,  to  which  I beg  your  attention. 

JAS.  CHESNUT,  Jr., 
Chief  of  Military  Department , South  Carolina. 


Tallahassee,  Fla.,  June  15, 1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond , Va. : 

Five  Federal  vessels  reported  inside  the  River  Saint  Mark’s  and  one 
vessel  coming  over  the  bar.  Have  ordered  the  Seventh  Regiment  Flor- 
ida Volunteers  back  to  this  place  until  I can  ascertain  the  design  of  the 
enemy.  Have  also  ordered  Dunham’s  artillery  and  the  First  Special 
Battalion  from  the  river.  Will  keep  you  advised. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  79.  1 Charleston , S.  C .,  June  15,  1862. 

#*#*### 

Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  Provisional  Army  of  Confederate  States, 
is  hereby  assigned  to  duty  in  First  Division  First  Military  District  of 
Department  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  He  will  exercise  the  com- 
mand thereof  until  further  orders. 

##*#*## 

By  order  of  Major  General  Pemberton: 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  567 

Columbia,  S.  C.,  June  15, 1862. 

President  Davis  : 

I telegraphed  you  Beauregard’s  answer.  He  could  not  leave  his  army. 
I have  heard  not  a word  since,  and  every  day  is  important  at  Charles- 
ton. I fear  great  confusion,  and  all  may  be  lost.  I mentioned  Hardee 
and  Van  Dorn  because  I supposed  you  could  spare  no  one  from  Vir- 
ginia ; but  Huger,  Magruder,  or  Longstreet  would  be  of  great  service 
if  immediately  ordered.  p w.  PI0KENS. 


[Indorsement.] 

General  Lee  : 

The  officer  first  named  of  your  army  from  which  one  can  be  most  im- 
mediately sent  is  General  Huger.  Can  you  spare  him  ? If  so,  I would 
be  glad  to  comply  with  the  request. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  0.,  June  15,  1862. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Columbia , 8.  C. : 

Governor  : It  is  proposed  that  you  should  be  fully  acquainted  with 
the  fact  that  the  troops  at  my  disposal  for  the  defense  of  Charleston 
are  inadequate  for  that  purpose,  should  the  enemy  attack  in  large  force 
either  now  or  later  in  the  season.  In  order  that  you  may  take  measures 
to  increase  this  force  as  far  as  practicable  it  is  necessary  that  Sulli- 
van’s Island  and  Morris  Island  be  occupied  by  at  least  one  regiment  of 
infantry.  The  approaches  by  John’s  Island  are  as  important  as  that 
by  James  Island.  On  this  last-named  island  I have  not  at  this  moment 
to  exceed  6,500  effective  men,  and  yet  the  general  health  is  as  good  as 
it  was  previous  to  the  occupation  of  the  island  in  force.  One  regiment 
and  one  battery  of  these  6,500  troops  have  been  drawn  from  Savannah, 
one  regiment  from  Hardeeville,  and  a regiment  and  battery  from  Gen- 
eral Evans’  district.  One  regiment  is  in  reserve  in  the  city,  one  on 
Sullivan’s  and  one  on  Morris  Island. 

Including  General  Evans’  district,  therefore,  and  with  the  troops  from 
Savannah  and  Hardeeville  now  here  and  those  on  Sullivan’s  and  Mor- 
ris Islands,  there  is  not  to  exceed  10,000  effectives,  if  they  even  reach 
that*  number.  Very  few  regiments  have  600  men  for  duty ; many  far 
less 

In  this  state  of  the  case  I respectfully  call  upon  you  to  furnish  such 
aid  in  men  and  arms  as  may  be  within  your  power. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  15, 1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Bandolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I am  very  scarce  of  ammunition  : want  more  powder. 

J J.  C.  PEMBEBTOK, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


568 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  18,  1862. 
Hon.  George  W.  Randolph,  /Secretary  of  War : 

I am  very  much  in. want  of  good  artillerists.  Is  it  possible  to  send 
the  officers  and  men  of  the  Navy  that  have  been  engaged  on  the  Mis-  i 
sissippi  since  the  naval  vessels  have  been  rendered  useless? 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[Indorsement  No.  1.] 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  with 
the  request  that  he  will  extend  such  assistance  to  General  Pemberton 
as  he  can. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 

[Indorsement  No.  2.] 

The  Navy  greatly  needs  at  this  time  500  such  men  as  General  Pern-  j 
berton  wants,  and  we  have  not  a man  to  spare. 

S.  R.  MALLORY, 
Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

^°*  82*  i Charleston , S.  <7.,  June  18,  1862. 

****### 

VII.  Under  the  direction  of  the  major-general  commanding,  Brig. 
Gen.  W.  D.  Smith  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  troops  (artillery, 
cavalry,  and  infantry)  now  serving  on  James  Island.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R. 
Gist  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  troops  east  of  James  Island 
Creek.  Col.  Johnson  Hagood  is  relieved  from  duty  with  his  regiment 
(First  South  Carolina  Volunteers)  and  is  assigned  to' the  command  of  the 
troops  west  of  James  Island  Creek.  The  engineer  department  will  be 
under  the  exclusive  control  of  the  major-general  commanding,  unless 
when  specially  assigned  for  temporary  service  during  the  presence  of 
the  enemy  on  the  island.  Should  any  emergency  arise  requiring  im- 
mediate action  the  senior  officer  present  will  exercise  direct  command, 
reporting  at  once  by  telegraph  or  courier  to  the  major-general  com- 
manding. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton  : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  19,  1862. 
Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Columbia , S.  C.  : 

On  receipt  of  your  dispatch  [of  15th  instant]  communicating  reply 
of  General  Beauregard,  General  Cooper  was  directed  to  proceed  to 
Charleston,  to  make  a thorough  examination  of  the  troops  and  the  de- 
fenses and  to  confer  fully  with  General  Pemberton.  Your  subsequent 
dispatch,  expressing  a wish  for  the  presence  of  either  Generals  Huger, 
Magruder,  or  Lougstreet,  has  been  received.  Would  it  not  be  well  for 
you  to  see  General  Cooper  and  afterwards  communicate  to  me  your 
views  in  relation  to  this  last  request  ? 


JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


569 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  Etc —CONFEDERATE. 


Headquarters,  June  19, 1862. 

Mr.  President  : 

I have  just  received  the  dispatch  from  Governor  Pickens.  I think 
General  Huger  can  be  spared.  The  Secretary  of  War  can  have  his 
orders  issued. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


[Indorsement.] 


Secretary  of  War: 

I have  telegraphed  to  Governor  Pickens,  and  will  wait  for  further 
communication  as  to  the  within  or  for  report  from  General  Cooper. 


Headquarters  Second  Military  District, 

Adams  Bun , S.  (7.,  June  21,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  E.  Waddy,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding,  that  my  scouts  report  the  enemy  to  have  left 
John’s  Island ; that  there  are  no  troops  of  the  enemy  at  Legareville. 
The  enemy  were  observed  landing  on  James  Island  on  the  17th  instant. 
There  are  this  morning  three  large  vessels  at  the  mouth  of  the  Wad- 
malaw. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Begiment  Artillery, 

Fort  Sumter)  June  21,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  E.  Waddy,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  one  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats 
came  very  near,  in  the  main  Ship  Channel,  and  shelled  Morris  Island  for 
a short  time  about  2 o’clock  to-day. 

The  battery  at  Cummings  Point  did  not  reply,  though  the  gunboat 
was  within  range.  Although  out  of  my  command,  I sent  over  to  sug- 
gest that  one  or  two  guns  on  siege  carriages  be  masked  by  the  sand 
hills  to-night,  in  order  to  prevent  the  boat  from  shelling  the  island. 
The  troops  are  very  much  exposed,  and  the  work  on  the  island  will  be 
very  much  interfered  with  if  the  boats  are  allowed  to  come  so  near. 

I do  not  deem  it  proper  to  waste  the  powder  in  this  fort  at  extreme 
ranges  for  our  heaviest  guns. 

If  there  is  no  ammunition  at  the  battery  I will  supply  it  to-night. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  E.  CALHOUN,  . 
Colonel)  Commanding. 


Columbia,  S.  C.,  Saturday)  June  21,  1862. 

To  the  President  : 

Sir  : After  making  myself  acquainted,  as  far  as  practicable,  with 
the  defenses  of  Charleston,  both  by  the  harbor  and  the  various  ap- 
proaches by  James  Island,  and  having  had  frequent  conferences  with 
General  Pemberton  on  the  various  points  under  consideration,  I became 
convinced,  as  well  from  my  own  observations  as  the  information  I was 


570 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.XXVI. 


enabled  to  collect  from  various  quarters,  that  General  Pemberton  was 
doing  all  that  a zealous,  active,  and  intelligent  officer  could  do  with  the 
means  placed  at  his  command  to  defend  the  city  against  the  approaches 
of  the  enemy,  both  by  laud  and  water.  With  this  conviction  on  my 
mind  I arrived  in  this  city  this  morning  and  lost  no  time  in  seeking  an 
interview  with  Governor  Pickens,  who  exhibited  to  me  your  telegraphic 
dispatch  to  him  of  the  19th  instant,  wherein  reference  is  made  to  the 
assignment  of  either  Generals  Magruder,  Huger,  or  Longstreet  to  the 
command  of  this  department.  I have  been  made  fully  acquainted  with 
His  Excellency’s  views  in  reference  to  this  change  and  the  arguments 
he  has  presented  in  sustaining  them,  the  chief  of  which  is  the  want  of 
confidence  by  the  authorities  and  the  people  generally  in  the  ability 
and  capacity  of  the  present  incumbent.  These,  in  my  judgment,  are 
sufficient  of  themselves  to  impair  his  usefulness,  and  1 think  it  would 
not  be  doing  justice  to  that  officer  to  retain  him  in  his  present  position 
against  such  a weight  of  opposition.  It  is  therefore  with  much  re- 
luctance that  I suggest  the  assignment  of  General  Magruder  to  the 
command,  or,  what  I presume  would  be  more  acceptable  to  General 
Pemberton,  an  exchange  between  him  and  General  D.  H.  Hill,  if  the 
latter  officer  can  be  spared  without  injury  to  his  present  command. 
This  exchange,  however,  I am  inclined  to  think  may  not  be  made  with- 
out some  embarrassment  to  the  service  in  Virginia ; but  as  it  is  a sug- 
gestion of  the  Governor,  who  assures  me  that  the  assignment  of  General 
Hill  will  be  entirely  acceptable  to  the  authorities  here  and  will  give 
general  satisfaction,  and  as  it  will  cast  less  reproach  on  General  Pem- 
berton than  by  adopting  the  other  course,  I can  only  suggest  it  for 
your  consideration. 

While  I make  the  above  suggestions,  I desire  to  add  that  I have 
great  confidence  in  the  zeal  and  untiring  efforts  of  General  Pemberton 
to  do  all  that  lies  in  his  power  and  the  energy  of  his  will  to  effect  the 
object  we  so  anxiously  hope  for.  I know  that  he  feels — honestly  feels— 
the  weight  of  the  responsibility  which  rests  upon  him,  yet  bears  that 
responsibility  with  calmness  and  a determination  to  discharge  his  dut.v 
honestly  and  faithfully  ; but  with  such  an  opposition  as  constantly  sur- 
rounds him  it  would  be  difficult  for  any  commander  situated  as  he  is 
to  effect  much. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  perfect  regard,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  COOPER, 

[Adjutant  and  Inspector  General.] 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  22, 1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , C.  8.  A .,  Columbia , 8.  C.  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  Judge  Magrath  read  to  me  yesterday  the  letter  he 
had  proposed  to  you,  at  your  suggestion,  upon  the  subject  of  martial 
law  in  this  city.  I suppose  he  sent  it  off  last  night.  I agreed  in  his 
views,  but  it  struck  me  as  he  read  that  he  had  written  rather  diffusely. 
The  whole  upshot  of  the  matter  seems  to  me  to  be  this:  Martial  law  is 
appropriate  to  the  government  of  a conquered  or  a hostile  or  a disloya1 
territory  and  people.  Charleston  is  not  within  either  of  these  classes 
But  there  is  another  contingency  where  the  application  of  martial  law 
is  appropriate:  It  is  when  a territory  is  occupied  for  immediate  press 
ing  military  operations,  such  as  the  defense  of  a beleaguered  city,  as 
New  Orleans  in  1814,  Richmond  and  Charleston  at  this  time.  When  ap 


Chat-.  XXVt]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONEEDERATE.  571 

plied  on  such  occasions  it  should  be  to  the  full  extent  the  exigency  may 
seem  to  require — no  further.  Its  application  and  the  subjects  of  its 
operation  should  be  from  time  to  time  enumerated  as  occasion  may 
demand.  In  all  other  respects  the  municipal  authority,  the  laws  and 
their  tribunals,  should  be  left  in  full  vigor.  In  brief,  martial  law  is  to 
be  the  exception.  The  municipal  law  is  to  continue  to  be  the  general 
rule,  prevailing  wherever  not  excepted.  It  is  the  reverse  of  this  now 
in  Charleston ; I think  very  unwisely.  Your  mind  will  rapidly  trace 
up  the  evil.  The  assumption  by  the  military  power  of  the  administra- 
tion of  matters  having  nothing  to  do  with,  not  interfering  with,  or  in- 
fluencing military  operations,  is  assuming  an  unnecessary  and  unwise 
burden.  The  old  laws  and  tribunals  have  been  suspended  at  one  brush 
in  Charleston.  New  ones  are  to  be  supplied,  or  there  are  to  be  none 
save  the  sit  justitia  of  the  general  commanding  or  his  provost.  I will 
not  ask  you  if  there  is  wisdom  in  this,  any  more  than  I would  think  of 
asking  you  if  Charleston  deserves  to  be  considered  disloyal  or  hostile. 
I know  the  present  state  of  things  did  not  originate  with  the  Confed- 
erate authorities,  and  I beg  you  to  believe  that  it  did  not  arise  troni 
the  wishes  of  the  substantial  or  numerical  power  of  the  citizens  of 
Charleston,  nor  has  it  ever  been  advised  or  countenanced  by  the  judg- 
ment of  such  citizens  as  would  naturally  and  appropriately  be  advised 
with  on  such  an  occasion. 

There  are  some,  perhaps  many,  reflecting  men  who  think  that  besides 
the  defense  and  safety  of  Charleston  other  purposes  influenced  the  origi- 
nators of  the  dishonor  that  is  thus  put  upon  her  and  her  future  history. 
The  truth  would  appear,  if  it  were  worth  while  or  proper  to  discuss  it 
here,  that  the  transfer  of  Charleston  to  exclusive  military  power  was  a 
mere  move  in  State  party  politics,  and  to  aid  in  the  continuance  of  power 
the  men  in  the  State  whom  Charleston  had  just  declared  against  with 
great  unanimity.  But  this  is  wandering  from  my  purpose. 

I am,  very  truly  and  sincerely,  your  friend  ant  I obedient  servant, 

’ JAS.  B.  CAMPBELL. 


Consolidated  Morning  Report  of  effective  forces  on  James  Island , commanded  bij  General 
William  Duncan  Smith,  for  June  23. 


Station. 

Troops. 

Total. 

Aggregate. 

Aggregate. 

Grand  aggre- 
gate. 

Secessionville,  Colonel  Colquitt  com- 

Infantry and  artillery  .... 

1,283 

1,366 

manding.  , _ . ,. 

East  of  James  Island  Creek,  Brigadier 

Lines 

442 

466 

General  Gist  commanding. 

Infantry 

3,  529 

3, 780 

Light  artillery 

345 

361 

Cavalry 

99 

105 

6,078 

West  of  James  Island  Creek,  Colonel 

Port  Pemberton 

263 

277 

De  Saussure  commanding. 

Lines  

718 

761 

Infantry 

1,260 

1, 347 

Light  artillery 

60 

65 

Cavalry 

49 

51 

2, 501 

8,579 

8, 048 

572 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CHAP.XXVt| 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  24, 1862.  :: 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War': 

I have  forbidden  all  sail  vessels  leaving  the  harbor,  as  I think  they 
are  liable  to  be  canght  and  the  cotton  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  I ask  for  instructions. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  24,  1862. 
Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Columbia,  S.  C.  : 

Delayed  action  for  letter  from  General  Cooper;  none  received.  Your 
dispatch  of  yesterday  received.  Have  sent  for  General  Huger;  expect 
him  in  a few  hours. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  25,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Smith,  James  Island , S.  C. : 

Should  the  enemy  open  another  battery  on  the  west  of  Secessionville 
you  had  better  have  a 24-pounder  rifled  gun  brought  down  to  be  placed 
where  the  Parrott-gun  battery  is.  It  is  reported  that  Colonel  Benbow’s 
regiment  lands  at  Fort  Johnson.  The  general  wishes  that  regiment  to 
occupy  the  position  that  Colonel  Graham’s  regiment  occupied  on  the 
island.  If  Colonel  Benbow’s  has  not  arrived  send  another  to  that  point. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  June  25,  1862; 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith,  James  Island , 8.  C.  : 

General:  The  major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  he  de- 
sires you  should  finish  the  battery  at  Secessionville  as  speedily  as  pos- 
sible, and  that  you  should  endeavor  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  erecting 
their  battery  or  batteries  against  that  point. 

R.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  June  26,  1862. 
Hon.  George  W.  Randolph,  Secretary  of  War : 

The  floating  battery  Georgia  is  finished  and  in  immediate  want  of 
a crew.  Cannot  furnish  them  from  my  command,  and  I ask  authority 
to  call  upon  Major  Dunwody  for  as  many  conscripts  as  will  be  re- 
quired. This  matter  is  pressing,  and  the  only  mode  of  promptly  sup- 
plying the  battery  with  a crew,  which  the  Navy  officers  find  themselves 
entirely  unable  to  enlist,  I also  ask  authority  to  retain  3,000  of  the 
rifles  lately  arrived.  I have  more  than  that  number  of  men  without 
arms. 

H.  W.  MERCER, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


573 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , IS.  C .,  June  26,  1862. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Columbia , S.  C. : 

Governor  : Mr.  F.  J.  Porcher  is  bearer  of  certain  papers  relating 
to  harbor  obstructions,  which  I desire  to  lay  before  Your  Excellency  and 
the  Executive  Council  for  consideration.  It  is  useless  to  undertake  this 
work  unless  an  ample  supply  of  labor  is  sent  here.  So  far  from  being 
able  to  furnish  it  from  what  is  now  at  my  disposal,  the  force  laboring 
here  on  the  many  indispensable  works  is  entirely  inadequate.  If  you 
expect  the  city  to  be  saved  my  requisition  for  negroes  must  be  promptly 
met.  I find  myself  now  compelled  to  undertake  many  works  which 
ought  not  to  have  been  left  for  me  to  do.  I may  have  to  call  upon  the 
Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  Company  to  suspend  the  work  upon 
the  railroad  bridge.  This  I shall  greatly  regret,  but  it  should  have 
been  completed  months  ago. 

You  are  aware  that  I have  a small  number  of  troops  for  tbe  defense 
of  this  city  and  Savannah.  It  is  therefore  the  more  necessary  to  sup- 
ply the  deficiency  by  strong  artificial  defenses.  As  for  the  abandon- 
ment of  Cole’s  Island,  if  I am  properly  supported  I believe  it  will  yet 
prove  to  be  the  safety  of  the  city.  Had  I the  number  of  troops  at  my 
disposal  now  which  I had  when  that  measure  was  adopted  we  might 
defy  the  United  States  Army. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major - General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

• Wilmington , N.  (7.,  June  26,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

Sir:  I received  late  last  night  your  dispatch  to  send  to  Charleston 
six  Dahlgren  guns  or  columbiads.  I have  no  Dahlgrens  and  only  eight 
columbiads.  Five  of  the  latter  are  in  Fort  Fisher  in  casemate,  from 
which  work  to  remove  them  would  be  risking  the  loss  of  that  place  in 
case  of  an  attack,  because  they  are  the  best  guns  in  position. 

Considering  the  armament  of  all  my  works  is  very  light,  I have  sent 
none  there.  It  is  as  painful  to  me  not  to  send  them  as  to  run  the  risk 
of  so  weakening  my  defenses  here.  My  guns  are  so  light  that  I am  now 
preparing  to  rifle  and  band  them  as  far  as  possible  here  in  the  city.  I 
feel  sure  if  you  could  examine  the  forts  you  would  not  have  me  remove 
the  guns  required-  I sent  you  a dispatch  this  morning. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 
Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  Battalion, 

McClellanville.,  S.  (7.,  June  28,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Smith  : 

Dear  Sir:  I take  this  opportunity  of  informing  you  of  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  on  South  Santee  River.  Tuesday  night,  the  24th 
instant,  the  enemy  made  their  appearance  at  the  mouth  of  South  Santee 
River,  with  two  steamers,  one  sloop  and  one  tug-boat,  at  which  time  I 
ordered  C-apt.  Thomas  Pinckney  with  his  cavalry  company  and  a de- 
tachment of  Captain  Gaillard’s  light  artillery  to  Mr.  Blake’s  plantation, 
on  the  said  river. 


574  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cnxr.  XXVI.  > 

Wednesday  morning,  the  25th  instant,  I was  called  on  by  Captain 
Pinckney  for  re-enforcements,  said  steamers  being  3 miles  from  them  in 
the  river,  manned  with  twenty-one  guns.  I immediately  ordered  Cap- 
tain Wheeler’s  infantry  company  to  his  assistance.  In  the  afternoon  I 
was  informed  that  the  enemy  had  passed  up  the  river,  firing  three  shots 
at  Captain  Pinckney  and  his  command,  passed  up  the  river  above  him 
some  2 miles,  and  anchored  in  said  river.  Captain  Pinckney  was  com- 
pelled to  remove  his  command  to  a point  of  more  security.  The  next 
morning,  the  26th,  I went  in  person.  I had  no  guns  that  I could  use  to 
any  effect  but  one  6-pounder  rifle  gun  (except  one  32-pounder  gun  and  one 
12-pounder  gun,  which  I could  not  use  for  the  want  of  ordnance  stores,  ■ 
for  which  I made  two  requisitions  previous  to  this  time.  I then  sent  i 
up  for  Captain  Gaillard  to  bring  his  6 pounder  rifle  gun,  with  which  he 
arrived  in  time,  just  as  the  boats  were  moving  down  the  river.  I 
ordered  him  down  to  the  edge  of  the  rice  field  and  to  open  fire  on  them, 
which  he  did  very  promptly ; the  first  shot  did  not  take  effect ; the 
second  shot  entered  the  stern  of  the  last  steamer  as  they  moved  off,  at  i 
which  time  they  (the  enemy)  commenced  shelling  and  shooting  solid 
shot  at  such  a rapid  rate  I ordered  Captain  Gaillard  in  the  woods 
some  distance.  They  kept  up  shelling  until  night  and  moved  down 
the  river  some  3 miles,  and  remained  down  the  river  until  the  morning 
of  the  27th.  They  steamed  up,  and  came  up  the  river  and  commenced 
shelling  the  woods  and  the  buildings  on  the  bluff  of  the  river.  I kept 
my  infantry  and  cavalry  in  a skirt  of  woods  all  the  time,  and  also  kept  j 
my  pickets  out  day  and  night,  waiting  for  them  to  laud  and  to  prevent 
the  negroes  from  going  to  the  enemy  as  much  as  I could.  At  12.30 
o’clock  p.  m.  my  pickets  informed  me  that  the  enemy  had  landed  men 
and  had  sent  them  in  the  direction  of  Mr.  Blake’s  house,  said  house 
being  about  three-fourths  of  a mile  from  the  river.  I then  took  with 
me  Captain  Pinckney’s  cavalry  and  Captain  Wheeler’s  infantry  com- 
panies and  proceeded  down  the  road  some  half  a mile  from  the  point 
where  I was  stationed.  I there  formed  my  men  into  columns,  dis- 
mounting 25  of  Captain  Pinckney’s  men,  and  placed  them  as  skirmishers 
on  the  left  of  Captain  Wheeler’s  company.  Near  Mr.  Blake’s  gate  I dis- 
covered the  enemy.  I moved  in  column  till  meeting  them,  and  they 
appeared  to  pause  and  retired  beyond  the  crook  of  the  road,  but  in  a 
short  time  they  came  up  at  a double-quick  along  the  road.  They  ad- 
vanced in  about  150  yards  and  halted  and  fired  on  my  column  (which  I 
had  in  the  woods,  except  about  12  men).  I had  the  fire  returned,  and 
at  that  moment  they  retreated  around  the  bend  of  the  road  and  fired  on 
my  column  again,  which  I had  returned.  The  enemy  retreated  to  their 
gunboats.  They  also  made  an  attack  in  the  rear  of  my  column  with 
about  10  or  12  men.  Lieut.  P.  Bacot  Allston,  with  4 or  5 privates,  ) 
[who]  was  left  in  charge  of  the  horses,  repulsed  and  drove  them  back. 
In  doing  so  Lieut.  P.  Bacot  Allston  killed  1 man,  who  was  carried  off 
by  the  enemy.  They  all  then  ran  aboard  of  their  boats  and  immediately 
commenced  shelling. 

I ordered  my  command  out  of  range  of  their  guns.  They  threw  some 
9 and  11  inch  shell  and  some  32-pound  balls.  I am  satisfied  that  they 
had  some  one  or  two  killed  and  several  wounded,  but  carried  them  off. 

I must  state  that  the  officers  and  men  behaved  nobly  and  bravely  all 
the  time. 

I did  not  have  a man  hurt  during  the  entire  action. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submit  ted. 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  D.  M.  BYED, 

Major , Commanding  Battalion . 


;haf.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  575 

distract  from  Monthly  Report  of  the  strength  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and 
Georgia , commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton , for  June , 1862. 


Commanding  officer. 


Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans. . . 

Dol.  W.  S.  Walker 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  F.  Drayton. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer. 

Grand  total 


Presont  for 
duty. 

•P 

g 

m 

© 

© 

an 

Troops. 

Officers. 

Men. 

P< 

© 

l 

i 

tc 

<1 

00 

Srg 

be 

◄ 

Second  Military  District 

194 

2,  663 

3,  634 

4,  265 

(formerly  the  Third). 
Third  Military  District 

73 

1,  062 

1, 374 

1,576 

Fourih  Military  District 

112 

1,904 

2,  369 

2,  622 

(formerly  the  Sixth). 
James  Island 

! 677 

10, 257 

13,  882 

16,  963 

Military  District  of  Georgia. 

380 

6,  053 

8,  524 

10, 230 

1,  436 

21, 939 

29,  783 

35,  656 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia y 
commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton , June , 1862. 


FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT. 


Brig.  Gen.  William  D.  Smith  commanding.  (!) 


JAMES  ISLAND. 


Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist  commanding. 


46th  Georgia,  Col.  [P.  H.]  Colquitt. 

47th  Georgia,  Col.  [G.  W.  M.]  Williams. 

51st  Georgia,  Col.  W.  M.  Slaughter. 

1st  South  Carolina,  Col.  J . Hagood. 

15th  South  Carolina,  Col.  W.  D.  De  Saussure. 

18th  South  Carolina,  Col.  J.  M.  Gadberry. 

20th  South  Carolina,  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt. 

21st  South  Carolina,  Col.  R.  F.  Graham. 

22d  South  Carolina,  Col.  S.  D.  Goodlett. 

23d  South  Carolina,  Col.  H.  L.  Benbow. 

24th  South  Carolina,  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens. 

25th  South  Carolina,  Lieut.  Col.  [C.  H.]  Simonton. 

Charleston  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard. 

South  Carolina  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  James. 

South  Carolina  Battalion,  LieutenanfcColonel  Smith. 

3d  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Captain  Hampton. 
Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Major  Byrd. 

South  Carolina  Cavalry  Company,  Captain  Disher. 

Sooth  Carolina  Cavalry  Company,  Captain  Johnson. 

South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Captain  McKewn. 

German  Hussars,  Captain  Cordes. 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar. 

Battalion  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Major  Lucas. 

Battalion  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Lieutenant-Colonel  White. 
German  Artillery,  Company  A,  Captain  Werner. 

South  Carolina  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Kanapaux. 

South  Carolina  Light  Battery,  Captain  Boyce. 

South  Carolina  Light  Battery,  Captain  Campbell. 

South  Carolina  Light  Battery,  Captain  Preston. 

Nelson  Artillery  (Virginia),  light  battery. 

Major  Emanuel’s  command,  near  Georgetown. 

Colonel  Huger’s  command,  James  Island. 


COASTS  OF  S.  e.,  GA.j  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 
SECOND  MILITARY  DISTRICT  (formerly  the  Third.) 


Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans  commanding. 

16th  South  Carolina,  Col.  J.  McCullough. 

17th  South  Carolina,  Col.  J.  H.  Means. 

Holcombe  (South  Carolina)  Legion,  Col.  P.  F.  Stevens. 

Detachment  First  South  Carolina  Infantry,  South  Carolina  Zouaves,  and 
Lyles’  Rifles. 

1st  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Black. 

Company  cavalry,  Capt.  A.  L.  Campbell. 

Company  cavalry,  Capt.  J.  D.  Trezevant. 

Rebel  Troop,  Capt.  J.  Jenkins. 

Marion  (South  Carolina)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  E.  L.  Parker. 

Turner  (Virginia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  W.  D.  Leake. 

Washington  Artillery,  Captain  Walter. 

THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT. 

Col.  W.  S.  Walker  commanding. 

FOURTH  MILITARY  DISTRICT  (formerly  the  Sixth.) 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  F.  Drayton  commanding. 

Phillips’  (Georgia)  Legion,  Col.  William  Phillips. 

11th  South  Carolina,  Col.  D.  H.  Ellis. 

Detachment  Second  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Colcock. 

Saint  Peter’s  Guards,  Capt.  H.  C.  Smart. 

Caroline  (Virginia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  T.  R.  Thornton. 

MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  GEORGIA. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer  commanding. 

8th  Georgia  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Reid. 

25th  Georgia  (company),  Captain  Smith. 

39th  [30th J Georgia,  Col.  [D.  J.]  Bailey. 

47th  Georgia,  Company  I,  Captain  Hines. 

50th  Georgia,  Col.  W.  R.  Manning. 

54th  Georgia,  Col.  C.  H.  Way. 

[32d]  Georgia,  Col.  [G.  P.]  Harrison. 

Battalion  Savannah  Guards,  Maj.  J.  Screven. 

Liberty  Guards,  Captain  Hughes. 

Tatnall  Guards,  Captain  Davenport. 

2d  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bird. 

De  Kalb  Rifles  ( ),  Captain  Hartridge. 

Effingham  Hussars,  Captain  Strobhar. 

Hardwick  Mounted  Rifles,  Captain  McAllister. 

Lamar  Rangers,  Captain  Brailsford. 

Liberty  Independent  Troop,  Captain  Walthour. 

McIntosh  Cavalry,  Capt.  O.  Hopkins. 

Partisan  Rangers  (battalion),  Major  Millen. 

Partisan  Rangers  (company),  Captain  Banks. 

Cavalry  south  of  Altamaha,  Major  Clinch. 

13th  Georgia  Battalion,  Maj.  [G.  A.]  Gordon. 

Chestatee  Artillery,  Captain  Boraar. 

Columbus  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Croft. 

Joe  Thompson  Artillery,  Captain  Hanleiter. 

Light  Battery  Artillery,  Captain  Martin. 

Light  Battery,  Company  D,  First  Georgia  Regulars,  Captain  Read. 

Terrell  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Dawson. 

River  batteries,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson. 

Fort  Jackson,  Captain  Anderson. 

[Irish  Jasper  Greens,  Company  B,  Captain  O’Connor.) 

Troops,  Carston’s  Bluff,  Colonel  Wilson. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


577 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  Middle  and  East  Florida,  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph 
Finegan  commanding , f or  June,  1862. 


* Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  1,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  If.  G.  Evans,  Adams  Run,  S.  C. : 

Firing  on  James  Island;  salute  from  all  our  guns;  complete  victory 
at  Richmond;  officially  notified  by  Secretary  of  War. 

If  you  can  ascertain  the  enemy  has  diminished  his  force  on  James 
Island  will  send  you  a regiment  to  attack  him.  I have  reason  to  think 
they  have  diminished,  but  cannot  determine  from  this  side  of  Stono. 
If  I send  a regiment  it  must  be  returned. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  2 [?],  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  Adams  Run,  S.  C. : 

It  is  believed  that  more  of  the  enemy’s  troops  are  leaving  Stono.  Be 
on  the  alert. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  July  2,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Evans,  Adams  Run,  S.  C. : 

I have  no  doubt  the  enemy  is  moving  his  forces  by  water  from  James 
Island;  a few  may  go  by  John’s  Island.  You  have  sufficient  force  to 
attack  him,  though  I will  send  you  another  regiment  if  you  think  you 
need  it.  Answer  at  once. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Camp  Middleton,  near  Georgetown, 

July  2,  1862. 


Major-General  Pemberton  : 

General:  I have  just  received  information  that  the  enemy  are  on 


37  R R — VOL  XIV 


573 


COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


their  way  up  the  Santee  with  the  intention  of  burning  the  Northeastern 
Eailroad  Bridge.  They  have  been  committing  great  depredations  in  this 
district  of  late;  such  as  burning  barns,  stealing  negroes  and  rice,  &c. 
Very  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  H.  TUCKER, 

Captain , Commanding  First  Military  District . 


James  Island,  July  2,  1862—6.15  p.  m. 

General  Pemberton: 

Scouts  have  penetrated  to  the  hedge  near  GrimbalPs  house.  The 
enemy  appears  to  have  disappeared  and  their  pickets  gone  from  that 
vicinity.  Extensive  redoubts  and  intrenched  lines  are  discovered  in 
rear  of  the  large  Grimball  woods  in  an  unfinished  state.  There  is  no 
one  to  be  seen  this  side  of  the  marsh  near  GrimbalPs.  Four  boats  at 
GrimbalPs;  a good  many  at  Battery  Island.  A regiment  reported  at 
or  near  Legare’s  house.  A close  reconnaissance  has  been  ordered,  and 
their  position  will  be  shelled  from  Secessionville.  As  most  of  them  went 
off  from  GrimbalPs  in  steamers  Evans  may  be  able  to  cut  off  some  who 
may  be  crossing  from  John’s  Island  to-night. 

Respectfully, 

WM.  DUNCAN  SMITH, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  4, 1862. 
Brigadier-General  Smith,  James  Island , S.  C.  : 

I send  to-night  as  near  100  cavalry  as  I can  to  carry  out  an  opera- 
tion against  the  enemy  suggested  by  General  Gist. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  4,  1862. 
General  Harllee,  Florence , 8.  C. : 

Information  is  received  from  Capt.  J.  H.  Tucker  of  the  enemy  going 
up  the  Santee,  with  the  supposed  design  of  burning  the  Northeastern 
Railroad  Bridge.  I have  no  troops  available.  Call  out  the  militia  if 
neccessary,  and  use  the  rifled  Confederate  guns  in  your  possession  for 
its  defense. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  July  4,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

White  Sulphur  Springs , Va.  : 

The  President  desires  to  know  if  you  consider  your  health  sufficiently 
good  to  take  command  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and 


Chap.  XXYI.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  579 

Georgia,  fixing  your  headquarters  in  Charleston  or  such  other  place  in 
the  vicinity  as  you  may  deem  proper. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.  July  5,  1862. 

Hon.  C.  G.  Memminger, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury  : 

Sir  : The  engineer  bureau  in  this  city  is  urgently  in  need  of  funds 
to  conduct  the  necessary  works  for  the  proper  defense  of  this  place. 
Oapt.  Francis  D.  Lee,  engineer  in  charge  of  the  bureau,  informs  me 
that  only  $30,000  have  been  placed  in  his  hands,  and  that  $70,000, 
issued  on  June  7,  have  not  yet  been  placed  to  his  credit  with  the  assist- 
ant treasurer  in  Charleston.  He  has  been  compelled  to  take  a loan 
from  the  Bank  of  Charleston  to  the  amount  of  $100,000.  Thirty  thou- 
sand dollars  have  been  returned  to  the  Bank  of  Charleston,  leaving 
an  indebtedness  to  that  institution  to  the  amount  of  $70,000.  The 
amount  issued  on  June  7 will  just  cover  this  indebtedness,  and  will  be 
so  appropriated  as  soon  as  it  arrives. 

To  properly  conduct  the  work  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  a fur- 
ther sum  of  $100,000  be  issued  and  placed  to  the  credit  of  Captain  Lee 
as  early  as  possible. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  July  5, 1862. 
General  Pemberton,  Charleston , S.  C.  : 

Have  the  enemy  evacuated  James  Island,  and  have  you  made  a re- 
connaissance to  ascertain  whether  his  forces  have  been  entirely  with- 
drawn ? If  this  is  so,  it  would  be  well  to  occupy  Cole’s  and  Battery 
Islands,  Bull  Bay,  and  Georgetown,  constructing  the  necessary  works, 
and  placing  at  each  fort,  necessary  to  hold  on  the  coast  of  South  Caro- 
lina and  the  Savannah  River,  a garrison  of  the  best  artillery  sufficient 
to  serve  the  requisite  number  of  guns,  so  as  to  prevent  the  entrance  of 
marauding  vessels.  The  residue  of  your  troops  you  could  then  bring 
here  with  the  least  delay  for  operations  in  the  field.  Additional  heavy 
guns  will  be  sent  as  may  be  practicable. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  5, 1862. 

General  S,  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

Daily  reconnaissances  are  made.  The  enemy  still  occupies  Battery 
Island  and  probably  Cole’s.  At  least  eight  gunboats  in  Stono.  It  is 
impossible  to  occupy  either  Battery  or  Cole’s  Island  with  heavy  guns. 
It  never  should  be  done ; I hope  it  never  will  be  attempted.  There 
are  few  enough  heavy  guns  for  the  defense  of  Charleston.  We  cannot 


580 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


protect  the  whole  coast.  If  it  is  attempted  to  put  guns  in  position  at 
Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands  and  at  Georgetown  they  will  be  lost. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General,  Commanding . 

— 

Columbia,  S.  C.,  July  5 , 1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Your  telegram  of  yesterday  is  received.  General  De  Saussure  goes! 
immediately  to  call  out  the  militia ; but  none,  if  any,  can  reach  there 
before  to  morrow  (Sunday)  night.  The  rifle  guns  at  Florence  have  been 
removed  to  Wilmington  some  time  since  by  order  of  the  Confederate! 
Government,  and  are  now  in  General  French’s  hands.  General  D. 
requests  you  to  send  a section  of  a light  battery  to  meet  him  at  Gourl 
din’s  Station  as  soon  as  you  can.  We  have  no  guns  that  can  be  gotten ■ 
there  in  time.  He  will  telegraph  you  from  Florence  to-night. 

W.  W.  HARLLEE. 


Headquarters, 

James  Island , July  5,  1862.  . 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  8.  C.  and  Ga .,  Charleston: 

Major:  Upon  receiving  the  major-general’s  telegram  last  evening  I 
immediately  sought  of  Brigadier-General  Gist  a description  of  “the 
operation  ” anticipated  by  the  general’s  dispatch.  After  a consultation 
General  Gist  proposed  to  postpone  the  demonstration  for  the  reasons  i 
stated  in  my  telegram  to  General  Pemberton  last  evening,  which  prop- : 
osition  met  with  my  full  concurrence. 

We,  General  Gist  and  myself,  made  a thorough  reconnaissance  of 
several  hours  to-day,  and  found  that  the  enemy  had  massed  himself  on 
Battery  Island  and  below  and  had  withdrawn  his  pickets  to  his  imme- 
diate vicinity.  Several  large  gunboats  (one  the  Pawnee)  were  lying  in 
the  Stouo,  flanking  their  position  immediately,  and  one  in  the  creek 
which  makes  into  Folly  River.  We  found  that  no  expedition  could  be 
planned  which  promised  any  results  such  as  General  Gist  hoped  for 
yesterday.  Consequently  we  will  not  want  the  cavalry  for  the  purpose! 
designed  last  evening.  1 am  very  anxious,  however,  for  another  com- 
pany of  mounted  men  on  the  island,  and  would  now  respectfully  apply 
for  them. 

I remain,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  DUNCAN  SMITH, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  July  6,  1862. 

Col.  W.  R.  Calhoun, 

Commanding  Fort  Sumter , Charleston  Harbor  : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  to  you  a true  copy  of  a dis- 
patch just  received  from  Brigadier-General  Gist  to  Brigadier-General 
Smithy  the  latter  of  whom  wishes  ^ou  to  communicate  with  Colonel 


3haPi  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — 'CONFEDERATE.  . 581 

Graham,  commanding  on  Morris  Island,  and  endeavor,  if  practicable, 
to  send  out  about  three  good  reliable  men  to  visit  Folly  Island  and 
obtain  the  desired  information.  I would  at  the  same  time  mention 
that  General  Pemberton  is  now  absent  on  an  official  visit  up  the  country 
and  General  Smith  is  now  commanding  this  district. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


[Inclosure.] 

James  Island,  S.  C.,  July  6, 1862. 

General  W.  D.  Smith: 

Twenty-four  sail  in  Stono  and  Inlet  and  some  large  steamers.  A 
scout  on  Folly  Island  sent  from  Morris  Island  might  find  out  to-morrow 
what  thev  are  doing;  something  going  on. 

S.  R.  GIST, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  6,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

It  is  quite  evident  from  reports  made  that  the  enemy  is  leaving  James 
Island  and  going  northward. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Near  Santee  River , July  8,  1862. 

Captain  Werner,  German  Artillery : 

The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you  have  your  command 
in  readiness  to  remove  to  the  south  side  of  the  Santee.  The  necessary 
transportation  by  railroad  will  be  ordered  as  soon  as  practicable.  You 
will  then  take  such  position  as  will  be  most  advantageous,  within  short 
reach  of  the  river,  that  the  field  artillery  may  be  as  effective  as  pos- 
sible, and  such  position  as  cannot  be  easily  flanked  by  infantry,  and 
with  advantages  the  same  as  near  the  railroad  bridge  as  possible  for 
the  convenience  of  supplies.  You  will  sink  your  battery  for  its  pro- 
tection, and  make  requisition  on  the  quartermasters  and  commissary 
departments  for  your  requirements. 

J.  C.  TAYLOR, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  101.  J Charleston , S.  (7.,  July  8,  1862. 

*###**# 

V.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States,  is  hereby  assigned  to  command  of  the  First  Military  District. 
He  will  immediately  make  the  proper  distribution  of  the  troops  within 
the  limits  of  his  district.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  Provisional  Army  of 


582 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


the  Confederate  States,  will  remain  on  James  Island,  and  will,  under 
the  direction  of  Brigadier- General  Smith,  have  command  of  that  island 
and  the  troops  serving  thereon. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton: 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) [First  Military  District], 

No.  2.  f July  8,  1862. 

By  direction  of  the  major-general  commanding  the*following  changes  ; 
wiU  be  made  in  the  position  of  troops  in  this  military  district: 

I.  Colonel  Stevens’  Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  Volunteers  and 
Slaughter’s  Fifty-first  Georgia  will  relieve  Colquitt’s  Forty-sixth  Georgia  \ 
at  Secessionville,  of  which  position  Colonel  Stevens  will  take  command. 
Upon  being  relieved  Colquitt’s  regiment  will  take  post  at  Charleston  i 
City  Battery. 

II.  Gadberry’s  Eighteenth  and  Goodlett’s  Twenty-second  South  Car-  | 
olina  and  Captain  Boyce’s  field  battery  will  take  post  at  Fort  Johnson, 
of  which  post  Colonel  Gadberry  will  take  command. 

III.  Benbow’s  Twenty-third  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  J 
will  take  post  east  of  James  Island  Creek,  on  high  ground  in  the  vicin- 
ity of  Dill’s  Bluff. 

IV.  Siraonton’s  Eutaw  Battalion  will  relieve  De  Saussure’s  Fifteenth 
South  Carolina,  which,  upon  being  relieved,  will  proceed  to  Citadel 
Green,  Charleston,  and  there  encamp. 

V.  James’  South  Carolina  Battalion  will  proceed  to  Summerville,  S. 
C.,  and  there  take  post.  Lieutenant-Colonel  James  will  make  requi- 
sition upon  the  quartermaster’s  department  for  the  necessary  trans- 
portation. 

VI.  The  Charleston  Battalion  will  encamp  near  Saint  Stephen’s  Rail- 
road Station. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  Duncan  Smith  : 

MALLORY  P.  KING, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  July  9,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

My  telegram  of  the  5th  was  by  direction  of  the  President.  Yours  in 
reply  was  submitted  to  him.  Since  your  dispatch  of  the  6th,  that  it 
“is  evident  from  reports  the  enemy  is  leaving  James  Island  and  going 
northward,”  the  President  decides  that  this  information  justifies  the 
movement  already  directed.  He  therefore  desires  that  you  carry  out 
the  instructions  in  my  dispatch  of  the  5th  as  early  as  possible.  Maj. 
Gen.  G.  W.  Smith  will  probably  relieve  you  in  command  of  your  pres- 
ent department. 

Let  me  know  the  strength  of  your  effective  force. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


583 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE, 

Headquarters  John’s  Island, 

July  9,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Lucas, 

Commanding  Fort  Pemberton  .* 

Major  : Captain  Walpole,  returned  last  evening  from  Legareville  and 
vicinity,  reports  that  the  enemy  have  left  Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands 
entirely.  Not  a single  being  was  to  be  seen  in  the  village.  Five  gun- 
boats were  between  Cole’s  Island  and  Grimball’s.  Two  schooners  were 
Visible  at  the  bar.  My  scouts  on  Wadmalaw  report  five  vessels  in 
North  Edisto,  and  that  the  enemy  were  engaged  at  something,  and  at 
the  sites  of  their  old  camps  smokes  were  seen  there.  I think  they  are 
destroyiug  useless  baggage  there  preparatory  to  an  evacuation  of  Edisto 
Island.  Forward  this. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  BLACK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  10, 1862. 

Brigadier-General  Evans  : 

The  enemy  are  making  a demonstration  against  Pocotaligo.  Have 
a regiment  at  Adams  Run  in  readiness  to  move. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  10, 1862. 
Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , S.  C.  : 

Is  there  any  further  information?  Two  regiments  are  leaving  here 
and  a light  battery  leaves  Hardeeville.  I will  be  with  you  as  soon  as 
possible. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  10,  1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond , Va. : 

It  is  absolutely  impossible  to  put  guns  on  Cole’s  or  Battery  Islands, 
or  on  South  or  Cat  Islands,  near  Georgetown.  The  enemy’s  gunboats 
can  always  prevent  it ; they  command  those  places. 

Aggregate  efficient  strength  in  whole  department:  Infantry,  14,357  ; 
heavy  artillery,  3,154;  field  artillery,  some  not  equipped,  seventeen 
batteries,  strength,  1,710 ; cavalry,  4,098. 

This  includes  everything  from  Georgetown  to  Altamaha.  The  ene- 
my’s troops  are  withdrawn  from  James  Island,  but  his  gunboats  are  in 
Stono.  I will  act  promptly  on  further  instructions. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  July  11,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith, 

Commanding  First  Military  District : 

General  : The  major-general  commanding  having  been  instructed 


584 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap. XXVI. 


by  the  adjutant  and  inspector  general,  by  the  direction  of  the  President 
of  the  Confederate  States,  to  occupy  Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands  and 
Georgetown,  and  to  construct  the  proper  works,  placiug  in  each  a suffi- 
cient number  of  heavy  guns  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  marauding  ves- 
sels, directs  you  to  designate  some  officer  to  carry  out  these  instructions* 
You  will  also  state  the  number  of  men  required,  the  kind  of  guns  to  be 
used,  their  caliber,  &c.,  and  from  what  points  the  guns  should  be  taken, 
selecting  your  guns  from  those  already  in  position  or  otherwise  within 
the  limits  of  your  military  district,  which  extends  from  the  North  Caro- 
lina boundary  to  the  Stono  River. 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  12,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Shall  I go  on  to  Richmond  at  once  ? Any  troops  to  be  moved  can 
follow  me. 

Yery  respectfully, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTOY, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville , July  12,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy: 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  request  a small  increase  of  the  infantry 
and  artillery  force  in  this  district.  I would  suggest  a section  of  a bat- 
tery and  two  companies  of  infantry  with  Major  Jeffords’  command  at 
Chisolm ville ; a section  of  artillery  and  two  companies  of  infantry  to 
Major  Stokes’  command  at  Graham  ville;  five  companies  of  infantry  at 
this  point.  This  is  the  smallest  force,  in  my  opinion,  compatible  with 
the  security  of  the  road.  ..... 

I have  felt  ever  since  I assumed  the  command  of  this  district  the  in- 
adequacy of  the  force  for  the  purpose  of  defending  the  railroad;  but 
for  the  time  I knew  that  every  garrison  must  be  reduced  to  the  mini- 
mum on  account  of  the  pressure  at  Charleston  and  Richmond. 

The  present  indications  are  that  when  the  enemy  next  commence 
operations  against  Charleston  they  will  first  try  and  cut  the  railroad, 
and  the  most  available  point  from  which  to  land  and  move  a.  strong 
column  is  Port  Royal  Ferry. 

The  re-enforcements  have  never  yet  arrived  in  time  to  have  prevented 
a column  of  3,000  men,  boldly  and  rapidly  led,  from  destroying  the  road. 

I beg  most  respectfully,  as  the  increase  asked  for  is  but  small,  that 
it  be  taken  from  corps  well  disciplined  and  commanded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' ’ [W.  S.  WALKER, 

Colonel.] 


585 


Chap. XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Richmond,  Va.,  July  13, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Do  not  proceed  to  this  place  until  you  receive  further  orders.  Gen- 
eral G.  W.  Smith  reports  himself  unfit  for  duty.  ^ C00PER 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generates  Office, 

Richmond , Pa.,  July  15  [13],  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding , &c.)  Charleston , 8.  C. : 

General  : It  is  deemed  necessary  for  ultimate  operations  in  this 
Quarter,  which  are  daily  becoming  more  and  more  important,  that  the 
army  for  the  defense  of  Richmond  should  be  speedily  re-enlorced.  The 
President  therefore  desires  that  you  hasten  forward  such  regiments  and 
brigades  of  your  command  as  you  may  be  enabled  to  spare.  In  con- 
sideration of  the  present  season,  when  sickness  most  prevails  on  the 
Southern  coast  and  when  the  enemy  would  be  least  likely  to  carry  on 
active  operations  in  that  quarter,  the  President,  after  due  reflection, 
has  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  you  might  safely  dispense  with  at 
least  more  than  one-half  of  your  effective  force.  In  sending  forward 
this  force  he  desires  that  you  will  place  it  under  the  command  of  Briga- 
dier-Generals Drayton  and  Evans,  and  retain  for  the  command  ot  the 
troops  on  James  Island  and  the  coa^t  of  South  Carolina  generally 
Brigadier-Generals  Gist  and  Hagood  at  such  positions  as  your  judg- 
ment  may  indicate.  I desire  to  impress  upon  you  the  importance  ot 
this  movement. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  „„„„„„ 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

. Charleston , July  15,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia : 

Major  : In  accordance  with  my  request  to  the  major-general  com- 
manding of  July  11,  1862,  for  the  detail  of  an  engineer  officer  of  experi- 
ence, who  might  reconnoiter  Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands,  Captain  Echols 
reported  to  me  on  the  13th  instant.  He  was  instructed  through  Special 
Orders,  No.  16,  from  these  headquarters,  of  date  July  12,  1862.  a copy 
of  which  is  herewith  inclosed.  I have  the  honor  to  forward  a copy  ot 
the  report  of  his  reconnaissance,  which  he  has  submitted.  Deeming 
that  this  report  may  change  or  modify  the  major-generaFs  directions 
to  me  of  July  11,  1862,  I await  further  instructions. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  servant, 

Brigadier -General^  Commanding. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

> Hdqrs.  First  Military  Dist.  of  S.  C., 

10.  | Charleston , July  12,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Echols,  Engineers,  C.  S.  Army,  having  reported  at  these 


Special  Orders, 


586 


COASTS  OP  S.  a,  GA.}  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

headquarters  by  department  orders  for  reconnoitering  duty,  will  imme- 
diately proceed  to  J ames  Island,  South  Carolina,  in  order  to  make  a re- 
connaissance from  there  of  Cole’s  and  Battery  Island,  for  the  purpose 
of  constructing  works  upon  those  islands  proper  for  preventing  the  en- 
trance of  marauding  vessels  into  Stono  and  Folly  Rivers.  He  will  as 
soon  as  possible  report  to  these  headquarters  the  character  of  works 
required  and  their  location,  the  number  and  kind  of  guns  to  be  used 
their  caliber,  &c.  He  will  apply  to  General  S.  R.  Gist,  commanding 
James  Island,  for  all  the  facilities  necessary  for  the  carrying  out  of  the 
above,  and  will  avail  himself  of  General  Gist’s  experience  and  knowl* 
edge  of  all  the  localities  designated. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  Duncan  Smith : 

MALLORY  P.  KING, 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


[Inclosure  2{o.  2.] 

Engineer’s  Office, 

_ Charleston.  8.  C.,  July  14,  1862. 

Capt.  Mallory  P.  King,  ’ 9 ’ 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  complied  with  instructions  in  Special  Orders,  No. 
16,  from  Headquarters  First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  July  12 
directing  me  immediately  to  “ proceed  to  James  Island,  South  Carolina; 
in  order  to  make  a reconnaissance  from  there  of  Cole’s  and  Battery 
Island,  for  the  purpose  of  constiyicting  works  upon  those  islands  proper 
for  preventing  the  entrance  of  marauding  vessels  into  Stono  and  Folly 
Rivers,  and  as  soon  as  possible  report  to  headquarters  the  character  of 
works  required  and  their  location,  the  number  of  men  required,  and  the 
number  and  kind  of  guns  to  be  used,  their  caliber,  &c.”  * * * 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  reoccupation  of  either  of  tl*e 
islands  is  impracticable;  that  the  communications  (bridges,  &c.)  to 
them  are  completely  destroyed  and  cannot  be  reconstructed,  as  they, 
as  well  as  the  islands  themselves,  are  perfectly  under  the  control  of  the 
enemy’s  gunboats  lying  immediately  at  the  islands. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  H.  ECHOLS, 

Captain  and  Engineer. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  17, 1862. 
Brigadier-General  Evans,  Adams  Run , 8.  C. : 

You  will  proceed  at  once  to  Richmond,  Ya.,  in  command  of  Means’ 
Regiment,  Seventeenth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Holcombe  Legion, 
Benbow’s  Twenty-third  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Gad- 
berry’s  Eighteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Leake’s  Vir- 
ginia Battery,  Boyce’s  South  Carolina  battery.  A portion  of  vour 
troops  will  move  via  Charlotte,  N.  C. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  17,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Drayton,  Hardeeville,  8.  C. : 

You  will  proceed  at  once  to  Richmond,  Va.,  in  command  of  Phillips’ 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


587 


Legion,  Slaughter’s  Fifty-first  Georgia  Regiment,  from  Charleston; 
Manning’s  Fiftieth  Georgia  Regiment,  from  Savannah ; De  Saussure’s 
Fifteenth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  from  Charleston; 
James’  Third  Battalion  South  Carolina  Infantry,  from  Summerville. 
Phillips’  Legion  and  Manning’s  regiment  will  go  by  Augusta. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  17, 1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond , Va.  : 

Letters  of  15th  received.  Troops  have  been  ordered  to  Richmond. 
Leaves  me  very  low  if  I am  to  remain. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  July  19,  1862. 
General  Pemberton,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

Have  you  received  my  letter  of  13th  ? Answer  by  telegraph  and  state 
what  arrangement  you  have  made  for  sending  troops  here  and  when 
they  may  be  expected. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  37.  J Charleston , S.  C.,  July  19,  1862. 

I.  Col.  Johnson  Hagood,  commanding  First  Regiment  South  Car- 
olina Volunteers,  is  hereby  relieved  from  duty  with  his  regiment  and 
will  assume  command  of  the  Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 

II.  Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  Provisional  Army  Confederate  States,  will 
assume  command  of  the  Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  in 
addition  to  his  present  command ; such  command  to  be  known  here- 
after as  the  Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  and  to  extend 
from  the  Ashepoo  to  the  Savannah  River. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Pemberton  : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  20,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

The  receipt  of  your  letter  of  July  13  was  acknowledged  on  17th  by 
telegraph. 

On  the  18th  De  Saussure’s  and  Gadberry’s  regiments  left  here. 

On  the  19th  Slaughter’s  and  Benbow’s  and  Boyce’s  field  battery. 

On  the  20th  Means’  regiment,  James’  battalion,  and  Leake’s  battery 

will  leave  here. 


588  COASTS  OPS.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

On  the  20th,  probably,  Phillips’  Legion  and  Manning’s  regiment,  via  i 
Savannah  and  Branchville. 

On  the  21st,  probably,  Holcombe  Legion  from  here. 

Major  Hampton’s  four  companies  of  cavalry  as  soon  as  their  places  j 
can  be  supplied  on  James  Island.  The  troops  are  pushed  on  as  fast  as 
transportation  can  be  furnished.  Have  ordered  no  others. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Bladen  Springs,  Ala.,  July  25, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Charleston , S.  C.  : 

My  Dear  General  : As  it  is  probable  the  enemy  will  ere  long  con- 
centrate all  their  available  means  for  the  attack  of  Charleston,  1 think 
it  would  be  well  to  make  timely  preparations  (if  not  already  made) 
against  the  plan  they  are  likely  to  adopt.  As  soon  as  their  monitors 
are  ready  they  will  endeavor  to  pass  with  them  Forts  Sumter  and  Moul- 
trie j hence  you  must  so  stop  up  with  piles,  rafts,  &c.,  the  channel  be- 
tween these  two  works  as  will  prevent  any  such  attempt.  Then  they 
will  endeavor  to  take  Cummings  Point  and  Fort  Johnston — to  establish 
batteries  of  heavy  rifled  guns  there  to  batter  down  the  gorge  of  Fort 
Sumter,  whose  large  magazine  is  directly  exposed  to  Fort  Johnston ; 
hence  you  must  guard  against  such  attempts  by  the  construction  of 
proper  works  on  said  points.  The  two  cuts  or  creeks  leading  into  Ash- 
ley River  from  the  Stono  must  be  thoroughly  obstructed  from  the  pas- 
sage of  light-draught  monitors  or  gunboats.  Those  obstructions  must 
be  properly  protected  by  a few  heavy  guns  in  position  and  some  rifle 
pits.  The  bridge  across  Ashley  River  must  be  protected  by  a strong 
tele  de-pont.  A little  in  advance  of  that  extremity  of  the  bridge  is  a fine 
position  for  a short  defensive  line.  Colonel  Hatch  will  show  you  the 
one  I thought  of  adopting.  I will  remark  here  that  where  said  lines 
are  long  I prefer  strong  detached  works,  such  as  redoubts  or  lunettes, 
with  closed  gorges.  A balloon  would  be  of  much  assistance  to  you  in 
the  defense  of  theline*from  Charleston  to  Savannah.  It  could  be  made 
to  travel  along  the  railroad. 

I hope  you  will  excuse  these  suggestions,  which  probably  have 
already  occurred  to  you,  but  I feel  such  an  interest  in  your  success  and 
the  defense  of  Charleston  and  its  vicinity  that  I could  not  resist  the 
desire  of  writing  to  you  on  the  subject. 

**#*### 

I remain,  sincerely,  yours, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  O.,  July  26,  1862. 

Hon.  James  Chesnut,  Jr., 

Chief  of  Department  of  Military  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  herewith  to  return  the  letter  of  Dr.  F.  L. 
Parker,  of  Georgetown,  to  Hon.  I.  W.  Hayne,*  which  letter  was  by  the 
Governor  and  Executive  Council  referred  to  me  and  by  me  submitted 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  589 

to  Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith,  commanding  First  Military  District  of  South 
Carolina.  You  will  perceive  that  General  Smith  concurs  with  me  in  the 
opinion  that  no  more  troops  can  be  spared  for  the  defense  of  George- 
town and  vicinity.  Heavy  guns  for  that  purpose  are  out  of  the  question. 
I want  at  least  100  more  for  the  defense  of  Charleston  in  the  contin- 
gency of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  passing  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie. 
There  are  persons  who  believe  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  batteries  from 
Georgetown  was  a wanton  exercise  of  power  on  my  part,  who  assert  that 
they  were  sufficient  to  have  prevented  the  entrance  of  the  enemy’s  fleets, 
&c.,  and  that  I should  even  now  be  compelled  to  replace  them.  I am 
content  to  let  these  individuals  enjoy  their  opinions,  but  I must,  never- 
theless, continue  to  act  on  my  own  judgment  unless  controlled  by  supe- 
rior authority.  It  would  afford  me  the  most  sincere  pleasure  to  protect 
all  the  private  interests  of  the  citizens  of  Georgetown  and  vicinity  and 
of  the  whole  coast  if  it  were  in  my  power  to  do  so.  I am  well  aware, 
too,  that  where  private  interests  are  so  large  that  of  the  public  is  also 
materially  affected;  but  if  I am  without  the  means  of  protecting  all,  I 
must,  to  the  best  of  my  judgment  and  ability,  apply  the  means  I have 
to  the  security  and  welfare  of  those  which  are  vital. 

I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  this  day  another  communication  from 
General  Harllee  and  yourself,  inclosing  a letter  from  the  Hon.  R.  F.  W. 
Allston,  in  relation  to  the  enemy’s  depredations  near  Georgetown,  that 
measures  be  taken  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  Major  Emanuel’s  com- 
mand. At  present  I have  few  or  no  arms  at  my  disposal.  I will,  how- 
ever, renew  my  exertions  to  obtain  them,  and  if  successful  devote  them 
to  this  special  purpose. 

On  Wednesday  next,  unless  absolutely  prevented  by  more  urgent 
business,  I propose  visiting  Major  Emanuel’s  position,  and  will  endeavor 
to  rectify  what  may  be  amiss  in  the  disposition  of  his  command.  I 
should  be  very  much  pleased  to  be  accompanied  by  yourself  or  General 

Harllee. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major - General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  July  26,  1862. 

Hon.  James  Ohesnut,  Jr., 

Chief  of  Department  of  Military 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  communication,  asking  an  official  statement  of 
the  amount  of  negro  labor  required  to  complete  the  defenses  of  Charles- 
ton and  the  State,  and  for  what  time  the  labor  will  be  wanted,  I have 
the  honor  to  inform  you  that  1,600  negroes  can  be  kept  constantly  and 
usefully  employed  for  two  months,  or  perhaps  longer,  at  the  obstruc- 
tions and  defensive  works  about  Charleston.  I do  not  know  that  labor 
for  military  purposes  is  needed  elsewhere  in  the  State  for  the  present. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  July  27,  1862. 


General  S.  Cooper,  t 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

General  : The  only  troops  I can  spare  for  the  protection  of  t}ie 


590 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

interests  in  the  neighborhood  of  Georgetown  consist  of  one  field  bat- 
tery of  six  pieces,  equipped,  and  five  companies  of  cavalry.  These 
cavalry  companies  are  very  poorly  armed — some  of  them  almost  with- 
out arms  which  can  be  relied  on.  I have  none  to  furnish  them  and 
have  no  means  of  getting  them.  No  inconsiderable  portion  of  the 
other  troops  in  this  department  are  in  the  same  condition.  I therefore 
respectfully  urge  upon  the  War  Department  the  necessity  of  directing 
that  at  least  1,000  stand  of  short  Enfield  or  Brunswick  rifles  be  placed  , 
at  my  disposal. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  July  27,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith, 

Commanding , Ac.,  Charleston,  8.  C.  : 

General:  I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say 
Captain  Walker  has  been  ordered  immediately  to  proceed  to  the  con- 
struction of  a work  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  that  he  has  already  re- 
ceived instructions  on  the  subject. 

R.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  C .,  July  28,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith, 

Commanding , Ac.,  Charleston , 8.  C.  : 

General  : The  major-general  commanding  desires  that  three  8-inch 
columbiads  on  the  east  face  of  Fort  Sumter  be  moved  to  the  northeast 
face  of  the  fort;  also  that  a traverse-circle  for  a 10-incli  columbiad  be 
constructed  on  the  parapet  of  the  northeast  face  of  the  fort.  I am 
further  directed  to  say  that  Major  Rhett  has  received  personal  instruc- 
tions as  to  the  above  changes.  It  is  desired  therefore  that  you  see 
that  such  changes  axe  carried  out. 

R.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Richmond,  July  31, 1862. 

Messrs.  Hiram  Roberts  and  others, 

Savannah , Ga. : 

Gentlemen  : Your  communication  of  the  22d  instant  has  been  re- 
ceived and  referred  to  the  Navy  Department  for  information. 

The  iron  seized  by  that  Department  was  taken  for  the  completion  of 
gunboats.  The  whole  amount  will  be  insufficient  for  the  boats  intended 
for  the  defense  of  Savannah  alone,  and  it  will  be  necessary  to  seek  else- 
where for  the  requisite  balance  of  material. 

Land  defenses  can  be  built  without  iron,  but  it  is  indispensable  for 
plated  boats ; and,  further  than  this,  it  is  hoped  that  the  boats,  when 


CHAr.  XXYI.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  591 

completed,  will  be  able  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  conducting  land 
operations  that  would  endanger  the  safety  of  the  city. 

Under  the  circumstances  it  appears  to  me  that  the  safety  of  Savannah 
is  best  insured  by  using  the  iron  as  at  present  intended  by  the  Navy 
Department. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Report  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  commanded 
by  Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  July,  1862. 


Present  for 
duty. 

4* 

S 

I 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Officers. 

* 

Men. 

P» 

© 

Sb 

S 

bfi 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith 

First  Military  District,  Ches- 
ter, S.  C. 

233 

3, 958 

5,323 

6,  560 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  E.  Gist 

James  Island 

277 

3,  648 

5,  201 

6,  661 

Col.  J.  Hagood 

Second  Military  District 
(formerly  Third). 

82 

1,  330 

1,  888 

2,  534 

Col.  W.  S.  Walker 

Third  Military  District  (for- 
merly Third  and  Fourth.) 

117 

1,  851 

2,  310 

2, 775 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer 

Military  District  of  Georgia . 

430 

6,763 

9,785 

12, 485 

Grand  total 

1,139 

17, 550 

24, 507 

31,  015 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia , 
commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton , July , 1862. 

FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  D.  Smith  commanding. 

46th  Georgia,  Col.  [P.  H.]  Colquitt. 

21st  South  Carolina,  Morris  Island,  Col.  R.  F.  Graham. 

Charleston  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard. 

2d  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry. 

Byrd’s  battalion  [South  Carolina.] 

Rebel  Troop,  Capt.  J.  Jenkins. 

Alston’s  battery  artillery  [South  Carolina.] 

Bonneau’s  company  artillery  [South  Carolina.] 

Ferguson’s  light  battery. 

German  Artillery,  Company  A (Santee  River). 

Palmetto  (South  Carolina)  Guards,  Captain  Buist. 

Nelson  (Virginia)  Light  Artillery. 

Emanuel’s  command  (near  Georgetown),  Major  Emanuel. 

Farley’s  command  (Castle  Pinckney),  Captain  Farley. 

Forces  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  Col.  L*  M.  Keitt. 

Provost-marshal’s  brigade. 

Rhett’s  command  (Fort  Sumter),  Major  Rhett. 

SECOND  MILITARY  DISTRICT  (formerly  the  Third). 

Col.  J.  Hagood  commanding. 

1st  Infantry  (six  companies),  Colonel  Dunovant. 

7th  Battalion  Infantry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Nelson. 

16th  South  Carolina,  Col.  J.  McCullough. 

1st  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Col.  [J.  L.]  Black, 

2d  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Company  C, 

Marion  Artillery,  Captain  Parker. 

Washington  Artillery,  Captain  Walter. 


592 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 
THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT  (formerly  Third  and  Fourth). 


Col.  W.  S.  Walker  commanding. 

JAMES  ISLAND. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist  commanding. 

22d  South  Carolina,  Col.  S.  D.  Goodlett. 

25th  South  Carolina  (Eutaw  regiment),  Col.  [C.  H.]  Simonton. 
Cavalry  forces,  Captain  Johnson. 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Col.  T.  G.  Lamar. 

Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery,  Lieutenant-Colonel  White. 
Kanapaux’s  company  light  artillery. 

Preston’s  company  light  artillery. 

Forces  at  Fort  Pemberton,  Maj.  [J.  J.]  Lucas. 

Forces  at  Secessionville,  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens. 


MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  GEORGIA. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer  commanding. 

8th  Georgia  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Keid. 

10th  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Rylander. 

25th  Georgia,  Company  I,  Captain  Smith. 

30th  Georgia,  Col.  D.  J.  Bailey. 

32d  Georgia,  Col.  G.  P.  Harrison,  jr. 

47th  Georgia,  Col.  [G.  W.  M.]  Williams. 

50th  Georgia. 

54th  Georgia,  Col.  C.  H.  Way. 

59th  Georgia,  Col.  [Jack]  Brown. 

Battalion  Savannah  (Georgia  Guards),  Major  Screven. 

4th  Louisiana  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  McEnery. 

De  Kalb  Rifles,  Captain  Hartridge. 

2d  Battalion  Cavalry  (Companies  D,  E,  and  B),  Lieutenant- Colonel  Bird. 
Cavalry  south  of  Altamaha,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clinch. 

Effingham  Hussars,  Captain  Strobhar. 

Hardwick  Mounted  Rifles,  Captain  McAllister. 

Lamar  Rangers,  Captain  Brailsford. 

Liberty  Independent  Troop,  Captain  Walthour. 

McIntosh  Cavalry,  Captain  Hopkins. 

Partisan  Rangers  (battalion),  Major  Millen. 

Partisan  Rangers  (company),  Captain  Anderson. 

Partisan  Rangers  (company),  Captain  Banks. 

9th  Battalion  Georgia  Artillery,  Major  Leyden. 

13th  Georgia  Battalion,  Maj.  [G.  A.]  Gordon. 

Chestatee  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Bomar. 

Columbus  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Croft. 

Echols’  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Tiller. 

Joe  Thompson  Artillery,  Captain  Hanleiter. 

Martin’s  light  artillery,  Captain  Martin. 

Terrell  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Dawson. 

Light  Battery  Georgia  Regulars,  Company  D,  Captain  Read. 

Savannah  River  batteries,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson. 

Fort  Jackson,  Captain  Anderson. 

Irish  Jasper  Greens,  Company  B,  Captain  O’Connor. 

Liberty  Guards,  Captain  Hughes. 

Tatnall  Guards,  Captain  Davenport. 

Troops  at  Carston’s  Bluff,  Colonel  Wilson. 


Dhap.XXVLJ  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  593 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  Department  of  East  and  Middle  Florida , Brig.  Gen, 
Joseph  Finegan  commanding,  for  July,  1862. 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

2 

8 

m 

o 

i 

a 

1st  Special  Battalion  Florida  Infantry* 

Three  independent  companies  of  infantry 

3 

10 

25 

9 

109 

169 

476 

248 

151 

192 

527 

288 

185 

238 

628 

323 

ivo  Daixenes oi  «ti nu-tu y 

47 

1, 002 

1, 158 

1, 374 

* No  report  from  Companies  A,  B,  C,  and  F.  t No  report  from  Blocker’s  company. 


Richmond,  Va.,  August  4,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Colonel  Hagood  has  been  appointed  brigadier-general,  and  tbe  ap- 
pointment will  be  sent  by  to-day’s  or  to-morrow’s  mail. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  August  4,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Is  martial  law  any  longer  necessary  outside  of  your  encampments 
and  on  the  islands  occupied  by  your  force  f If  not,  I would  be  glad  to 
restore  the  civil  authorities  to  their  uninterrupted  functions,  except  in 
the  places  named. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  C .,  August  4,  1862. 


D.  W.  Jordan,  Georgetown , 8,  C.  : 

Sir  : I am  directed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  to  say  to  you  that 
he  is  in  receipt  of  a letter*  addressed  by  you  to  Hon.  C.  G.  Memminger, 
and  by  him  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  by  the  Secretary 
of  War  referred  to  him ; also  a letter*  addressed  to  the  general  direct. 
In  answer  to  these  letters  the  general  directs  me  to  inform  you  that  he 
cannot,  he  regrets  to  say,  spare  any  more  troops  for  that  section  of 
country.  He  has  just  visited  Georgetown,  and  is  of  opinion  that  noth- 
ing more  can  be  done  with  the  troops  at  his  disposal  than  he  has  already 


ordered. 


J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  August  5,  1862. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , 8.  C. : 
Dear  Sir  : A press  of  occupations  has  delayed  reply  to  your  letters 


38  R r— vol  xiv 


Not  found. 


594  COASTS  OP  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [CuAr.  XXVI.  1 

of  the  19th  and  29th  ultimo,*  but  their  contents  have  received  the  care- 
ful attention  of  General  Lee  and  myself.  We  both  concur  with  you  in 
opinion  as  to  the  importance  of  the  preservation  of  the  Charleston  and 
Savannah  Railroad.  It  is  believed  that  the  cavalry  under  Colonel 
Walker,  and  such  infantry  force  as  is  available,  will  be,  as  you  intimate, 
sufficient  for  its  protection  against  the  present  force  of  the  enemy,  and 
that  the  troops  retained  in  and  near  Charleston  will  be  able  to  hold  the 
harbor  and  the  portion  of  the  road  near  it.  General  Lee  is  of  opinion 
that  experience  has  proved  it  to  be  easier  to  defend  a railroad  by  mass- 
ing troops  at  salient  and  commanding  points  to  repress  the  attack  of 
the  enemy  and  strike  him  if  he  advances  than  to  extend  the  force  along 
the  whole  line. 

With  respect  to  the  regiment  of  Colonel  Dunovant,  their  excellent 
condition  and  discipline  would  doubtless  have  rendered  their  services 
very  valuable  in  the  operations  here,  but  the  designation  of  the  troops 
to  be  sent  from  South  Carolina  was  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  general 
commanding  the  department,  and  for  the  reasons  given  above  as  mak- 
ing it  desirable  to  have  them  here  it  was  probably  deemed  important 
that  they  should  not  be  removed  from  your  coast. 

If  guns  can  be  procured  it  will  undoubtedly  be  advisable  to  reoccupy 
the  batteries  for  the  defense  of  the  Santee.  With  respect  to  the  reoc- 
cupation of  Cole’s  and  Battery  Islands,  the  opinions  of  military  men  are  : 
so  different  that  I should  be  unwilling,  while  at  a distance  from  the 
locality,  to  decide  the  question.  The  matter  may  be  left  open  for  further 
consideration  or  for  the  decision  of  a new  commander. 

Regarding  the  removal  of  the  present  commanding  general,  I am 
desirous  of  obliging  you  and  would  be  glad  also  to  secure  the  services 
of  General  Pemberton  elsewhere.  I have  found  that  it  would  be  easier 
to  relieve  him  from  his  present  command  than  to  replace  him.  I have 
tried  to  get  a competent  officer,  whose  assignment  to  the  position 
would  be  satisfactory,  and  will  not  relax  my  efforts  to  that  end.  My 
own  confidence,  however,  in  General  Pemberton  is  such  that  I would 
be  satisfied  to  have  him  in  finy  position  requiring  the  presence  of  an 
able  general. 

1 established  martial  law  in  South  Carolina  very  reluctantly,  after 
being  repeatedly  importuned  to  do  so.  I entirely  agree  with  you  that 
the  civil  authorities  should  be  restored  to  their  uninterrupted  functions 
as  soon  as  it  is  possible  to  do  so,  and  have  telegraphed  to  General  Pem- 
berton to  inquire  if  martial  law  cannot  now  be  suspended,  excepting  at 
military  camps  and  on  the  islands  occupied  by  troops. 

The  importance  of  accumulating  labor  during  the  present  season  for 
completing  the  defenses  of  Charleston  cannot  be  overestimated,  and  I 
am  glad  to  learn  that  it  has  received  your  attention  and  assistance. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


State  of  S.  C.,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

Charleston , August  11,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Bladen  Springs,  Ala: 

Dear  Sir:  Your  letter  of  1st  instant t did  not  reach  here  until  to- 
day, which  will  excuse,  I hope,  the  apparent  delay  in  the  reply. 

* Not  found,  but  see  Pickens  to  Pemberton,  August  18, p.  598. 
t Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


595 


To  carry  oat  your  wishes  in  the  manner  you  indicate  will  be  very 
difficult.  The  cadets  of  the  Military  Academies  are  under  the  direction 
of  a board  of  visitors  and  not  under  the  military  authorities  of  the  State, 
and  although  subject  while  in  the  academies  to  the  Army  Regulations, 
yet  no  provision  has  ever  been  made  for  voluntarily  leaving,  except 
expulsion.  Upon  joining  they  are  required  to  sign  a matriculation 
promise,  and  I have  submitted  for  the  consideration  of  the  chairman 
of  the  board  whether  this,  coupled  with  the  fact  of  their  being  by  law 
constituted  the  State  Arsenal  guards,  may  not  render  such  as  leave 
liable  as  deserters.  I have  taken  every  step  which  at  present  appears 
to  me  possible  to  reclaim  young  Proctor,  and  will  earnestly  endeavor  to 
return  him  to  the  Arsenal.  The  truth  is  that  many  of  these  lads  have 
been  seduced  away  by  an  officer  who  desired  to  raise  a battalion  or 
regimental  organization,  and  who  having  failed  in  all  other  ways  availed 
himself  of  an  excitement  among  the  cadets,  arising  out  of  their  appre- 
hension of  being  conscripted,  and,  inflaming  their  disordered  imagina- 
tions, has  succeeded  in  enlisting  a good  many.  His  course  meets  much 
disapprobation.  I have  written  him  relative  to  young  Proctor,  and  also 
to  Col.  James  Chesnut,  asking  the  aid  of  the  latter,  together  with  that  of 
Col.  John  S.  Preston,  commanding  Camp  of  Instruction  at  Columbia 
(where  Proctor  is).  Major  General  Pemberton,  who  commanded  this 
department,  has  been  absent  for  some  days,  but  is  expected  on  Wednes- 
day, 13th  instant.  Your  letter  to  him  has  been  received  at  his  office, 
and  upon  his  return  1 will  endeavor  to  get  Proctor  discharged  and  re- 
manded to  the  Arsenal.  I need  scarcely,  dear  sir,  assure  you  that  I 
will  use  every  exertion  to  meet  your  wishes,  and  will  keep  you  informed 
of  the  results. 

The  intelligence  of  your  impaired  health  was  very  sad,  not  only  to  my- 
self personally,  but  to  your  numerous  friends  throughout  the  State. 
With  Governor  Pickens  and  Colonel  Chesnut  it  has  been  a frequent 
subject  of  our  conversation.  Permit  me  to  express  my  cordial  congratu- 
lations upon  your  recuperation,  and  my  hope  that  in  entire  restoration 
to  health  you  may  speedily  be  enabled  to  rejoin  the  scene  of  your  valua- 
ble labors. 

I inclose  a hastily-drawn  sketch*  of  the  country  around  Charleston, 
with  the  lines  of  defensive  works.  Upon  Charleston  Neck,  just  above 
the  city  limits,  a bastioned  line  has  been  run  from  the  marshes  of  Ashley* 
to  those  of  Cooper  River.  These  lire  s have  a ditch  in  front  of  about  10 
feet  width  and  about  15  feet  from  the  bottom  of  the  ditch  to  crest  of  the 
parapet.  A few  siege  howitzers  are  in  position.  In  Saint  Andrew’s  there 
are  two  sets  of  lines,  one  being  about  2 miles  beyond  the  bridge  and  the 
other  about  6;  the  first  is  a continuous  line  of  breastworks,  with  some 
redans  for  guns,  but  none  are  mounted.  The  second  is  a couple  of  heavy 
redoubts  commanding  the  road,  and  covered  in  front  by  a heavy  wet 
ditch,  made  by  damming  the  waters  of  two  creeks,  one  of  which  runs  into 
Ashley  and  the  other  into  Stono  River;  in  the  greater  part  of  this  ditch 
the  water  is  permanently  left;  in  that  part  which  the  road  runs  through 
there  is  no  water,  but  twelve  hours  will  put  nearly  3 feet  of  water  over 
the  entire  road.  Upon  Western  James  Island  a redan  line  has  been 
run  from  Wappoo  Creek  to  James  Island  Creek,  and  a little  outside 
of  the  right  flank  of  the  line  two  bastioned  works  have  been  thrown 
up  to  protect  Stono  River;  one  is  inclosed,  the  other  open.  These  two 
works  are  mounted  with  heavy  guns  and  are  quite  substantial  works. 
On  Eastern  James  Island  a redan  line  runs  from  the  marsh  in  rear  of 


Not  found, 


596 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

Secessionville  to  James  Island  Creek,  and  inside  of  the  line  is  a system 
of  lunette  redoubts  flanking  each  other.  Secessionville,  from  its  posi- 
tion, constitutes  an  advanced  work  on  the  left  of  this  line,  and  being 
surrounded  by  marshes,  may  as  against  a land  attack  be  called  in- 
closed. A heavy  line  is  thrown  across  the  neck  leading  to  the  vil- 
lage and  heavy  guns  are  in  position.  The  full  credit  of  this  work 
at  Secessionville  is  due  to  Col.  L.  M.  Hatch,  as  he  adopted  it.  The 
lines  upon  James  Island  are  generally  considered  very  strong— impreg- 
nable, it  is  said.  It  may  be  presumption  in  one  to  express  a contrary 
opinion,  but  I cannot  regard  them  as  formidable  against  a strong  and 
brave  foe.  For  the  greater  part  they  are  little  more  than  heavy  breast- 
works, which  may  give  confidence  to  raw  troops,  but  as  they  coyer  a 
great  extent,  and  run  through  a country  nearly  the  whole  of  which  is 
a natural  road,  masses  may  be  thrown  upon  any  particular  point,  and 
the  works  are  not  strong  enough  to  resist  such  an  attack.  The  Seces- 
sionville work,  upon  the  contrary,  is  strong,  but  it  was  only  saved  by 
the  obstinate  courage  of  the  600  men  who  defended  it.  Had  Secession- 
ville been  taken  I believe  the  whole  eastern  line  would  have  fallen  in 
forty-eight  hours. 

Piles,  rafts,  and  booms  are  being  driven  and  stretched  across  the 
harbor  in  such  .positions  as  to  expose  the  attacking  fleet  to  a concen- 
trated fire.  Two  heavily  iron-clad  gunboats,  driven  by  steam,  will 
probably  be  completed  during  the  course  of  the  next  month. 

By  all  these  details  I have  trespassed,  dear  sir,  upon  your  time  and 
patience.  Your  question,  however,  invited  an  answer,  and  I have  en- 
tered into  details  which  your  familiarity  with  the  locations  will  prob- 
ably make  interesting  to  you. 

I had  hoped  to  be  in  the  field  defending  these  works;  for  long  antici- 
pating a war,  I had  endeavored  to  familiarize  myself  with  the  features 
of  the  country.  My  brigade,  however,  being  only  a militia  one — but  I 
do  not  fear  to  say  fully  as  well  drilled  and  equipped  as  most  of  those 
in  service — was  pulled  to  pieces  and  I am  left  to  chafe  in  a bureau. 

With  the  expression  of  my  high  respect  and  regard,  I am,  dear  sir, 
very  sincerely,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILMOT  G.  DE  SAUSStTRE, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  South  Carolina. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  <7.,  August  15,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Dayis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Mr.  President  : I respectfully  recommend  that  martial  law  be  dis- 
pensed with  in  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  except  on  the  islands  ad- 
jacent to  the  city  of  Charleston  and  for  a distance  of  1 mile  around 
the  military  encampments  without  the  limits  of  said  city. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General.  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  August  15,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Francis  W.  Pickens  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  I have  this  day  recom- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


597 


mended  to  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States  that  martial  law  be 
dispensed  with  in  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  except  on  the  islands 
adjacent  to  the  city  of  Charleston  and  for  1 mile  around  the  military 
camps  without  the  limits  of  said  city.  1 have  requested  the  President 
to  issue  his  orders  accordingly  as  soon  as  practicable. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  August  16,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood, 

Commanding , c fee.,  Adams  Run , 8.  C. : 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say 
he  desires  you  should  make  a reconnaissance  (using  the  Rebel  Troop) 
up  the  country  around  Summerville,  S.  C.  He  has  been  informed  that 
much  disturbance  and  alarm  are  caused  by  gangs  of  runaway  negroes, 
leagued  with  deserters  in  that  neighborhood.  The  report  of  such  re- 
connaissance will  be  made  to  these  headquarters. 

R.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.. 


Executive  Office, 
Richmond , August  16,  1862. 
Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Columbia , S.  C.  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  10th  instant*  has  been  received. 
I have  recently  had  a long  interview  with  General  Pemberton,  and  re- 
ceived a full  exposition  of  his  views  relative  to  the  defense  of  the  coast 
of  South  Carolina.  I find  that  his  determination  to  hold  the  city  of 
Charleston  is  as  fixed  as  you  could  desire  it  to  be,  and  that  the  meas- 
ures he  has  adopted  to  that  end  are  in  a good  state  of  progress  and 
promise  to  be  effective.  The  obstructions  to  the  harbor,  so  far  as  com- 
pleted, have  been  tested  with  favorable  results,  and  when  finished 
would  seem  to  be  sufficient,  in  connection  with  proposed  batteries  and 
the  forts,  to  prevent  vessels  from  entering. 

With  respect  to  the  questions  concerning  which  there  has  been  a 
difference  of  opinion,  I have  determined,  as  they  are  high  problems  of 
engineering,  to  send,  at  the  earliest  possible  day,  an  officer  of  engineers, 
in  whose  experience  and  knowledge  you  will,  I am  sure,  confide,  to  ex- 
amine and  report  upon  the  points  at  issue.  Meanwhile  I have  re- 
quested General  Pemberton  to  have  a conference  with  yourself,  and, 
if  it  be  desired,  with  the  council,  in  order  that  he  may  communicate  to 
you,  as  he  has  to  me,  the  defensive  arrangements  that  have  been  pre- 
pared and  projected. 

With  every  desire  to  gratify  your  wish  for  a change  in  the  commander 
of  the  department  the  matter  has  been  attended  with  much  difficulty. 
General  G.  W.  Smith,  who  was  indicated,  might  have  been  spared  for 
that  command,  but  his  physicians  have  pronounced  that  the  climate 
would  unfit  him  in  his  present  state  of  health  for  duty  on  the  coast  of 
South  Carolina.  The  general  who  would  fulfill  the  requirements  of  the 


Not  found. 


598  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  FAST  FLA.  [Chap.  NXVL 

position  must  be  an  officer  not  only  experienced  in  infantry  and  artillery 
service,  but  also  generally  acquainted  with  engineering.  The  educa- 
tion, elementary  and  practical,  of  General  Pemberton  in  the  old  Army 
and  our  own  service  lias  given  him  this  requisite  knowledge.  I do  not 
now  find  it  practicable  to  send  in  his  place  another  general  who  would 
equally  well  answer  for  the  command.  He  is,  besides,  thoroughly  ac- 
quainted with  the  condition  of  the  department,  and  feels  an  interest 
in  the  works  that  are  in  progress  for  its  defense,  which  would  have  to 
be  acquired  by  a new  commander. 

I hope,  after  a conference  with  General  Pemberton  and  when  you 
are  more  fully  acquainted  with  his  plans,  that  you  may  have  the  same 
confidence  in  his  ability  and  good  judgment  that  has  made  me  willing 
to  intrust  him  with  so  important  a command,  and  feel  secure  that  all 
the  aid  you  may  give  him  will  be  well  and  zealously  applied  to  the  de- 
fense of  a harbor  of  great  and  increasing  value  to  the  Confederacy , and 
of  a city  for  the  successful  resistance  of  which  we  have  a desire  height- 
ened by  the  malignity  which  makes  it  the  special  object  of  attack  and 
would  doom  it  to  destruction. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  your  friend  and  fellow-citizen, 

JEFFEESOY  DAVIS. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  August  18,  1862. 

Major-General  Pemberton  : 

Suspend  martial  law  to  the  extent  you  recommend  and  issue  orders  to 
that  effect  in  my  name. 

JEFFEESOE  DAVIS. 


State  of  South  Carolina, 
Headquat  ter s,  Columbia,  August  18,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  Commanding : 

Sir  : I received  yours  in  relation  to  the  restoration  of  civil  authority 
where  martial  law  has  been  declared.  I am  glad  to  hear  of  it.  I had 
written  the  President  on  the  29tli  of  last  mouth  urging  him  to  restore 
the  civil  authority,  and  particularly  in  the  country  parishes.  You  re- 
collect 1,  as  Governor,  proclaimed  martial  law  over  Chaileston  and  10 
miles  beyond  the  corporate  limits,  and  afterward  you  got  the  Presi- 
dent to  enlarge  it  from  the  Santee  to  the  Edisto,  including  parishes 
that  run  50  miles  up  in  the  interior,  where  there  are  not  even  military 
companies  stationed  to  execute  the  law,  and  as  all  civil  authority  was 
suspended,  of  course  there  has  been  no  law  during  the  operation  of 
martial  law.  I take  great  pleasure  in  saying  that  we  have  divided  oft' 
the  State  into  sections  in  order  to  supply  you  with  negro  labor,  and 
there  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  measure  will  be  ample  for  all  you  want; 
but  I most  respectfully  suggest  that  it  you  were  to  assign  some  officer 
like  Colonel  Lamar,  who  is  a practical  manager  of  negroes  and  en- 
tirely identified  with  the  country,  specially  to  take  charge  of  all  labor 
to  be  sent  down  and  to  direct  and  control  it  under  the  plans  and 
requisitions  of  your  engineers,  the  owners  of  the  negroes  would  feel 
satisfied,  and  in  addition  to  tliis  he  would,  as  an  energetic,  practical 
man,  get  far  more  work  done  for  you.  When  I first  occupied  Morris 
Island  to  erect  the  channel  batteries  there  and  the  batteries  on  Cum- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


599 


111 


mings  Point  I found  that  there  was  no  management  of  the  negroes  i 
the  practical  execution  of  the  works,  and  I appointed  Colonel  Lamar 
and  Colonel  Dealing  (now  on  General  Gist’s  staft)  for  the  special  pur 
pose  of  superintending  the  working  of  the  negroes,  &c.  1 know  of  no 

two  men  in  the  State  who  are  their  equals  in  the  business,  and  it  you 
were  to  publish  au  order  assigning  them  to  the  same  position  again  1 
most  respectfully  suggest  that  you  would  derive  great  aid  from  them, 
and  the  public  service  in  this  particular  would  be  advanced  to  your 
entire  satisfaction. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  48.  S Charleston , 8.  (7.,  August  19,  1802. 

Bv  direction  of  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States  martial  law 
will  be  suspended  on  and  af  ter  this  date  in  that  part  of  the  State  of 
South  Carolina  over  which  it  was  established  by  virtue  of  his  procla- 
mation, as  embodied  in  General  Orders,  No.  33,  from  the  Adjutant  and 
Inspector  General’s  Office,  dated  May  1,  1802,  except  on  the  islands 
adjacent  to  the  city  of  Charleston  and  in  military  camps  without  the 
limits  of  said  city  and  1 mile  around  said  camps,  where  it  continues  to 
exist  as  established  in  the  aforesaid  proclamation^^^^^^^^^ 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


General  Orders, 
No.*  60. 


War  Dept.,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Off., 
Richmond , August  21,  1862. 


Whereas  Major-General  Hunter,  recently  in  command  of  the  en- 
’s  forces  on  the  coast  of  South  Carolina,  and  Brigadier-G*  neial 
Phelps,  a military  commander  of  the  enemy  in  the  State  of  Louisiana, 
- ' ’ " 1 military  service  — 


I. 

emy  s 


against 


have  organized  and  armed  negro  slaves  for  m 
their  masters,  citizens  of  this  Confederacy;  and  whereas  the  Govern 
merit  of  the  United  States  has  refused  to  answer  an  inquiry  whether 
said  conduct  of  its  officers  meets  its  sanction,  and  has  thus  left  to  this 
Government  no  other  means  of  repressing  said  crimes  and  outrages 
than  the  adoption  of  such  measures  of  retaliation  as  shall  serve  to 
prevent  their  repetition  : 

Ordered , That  Major  General  Hunter  and  Brigadier-General  I helps 
be  no  longer  held  and  treated  as  public  enemies  of  the  Confederate 
States,  but  as  outlaw's  ; and  that  in  the  event  of  the  capture  of  either 
of  them,  or  that  of  any  other  commissioned  officer  employed  in  drilling, 
organizing,  or  instructing  slaves,  with  a view  to  their  armed  service  in 
this  war,  he  shall  not  be  regarded  as  a prisoner  of  war,  but  held  in  close 
confinement  for  execution  as  a felon  at  such  time  and  place  as  the  1 lesi- 
dent  shall  order. 

By  °rder:  S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


600 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ohap.  XXVI. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Savannah , Ga.,  August  25,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General:  Brigadier- General  Mercer,  commanding  this  military  dis- 
trict, informs  me  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War  has  instructed  him  to  send 
Colonel  Brown’s  Fifty-ninth  Begiment  Georgia  Volunteers  to  Virginia 
so  soon  as  its  services  as  a guard  over  the  prisoners  of  war  in  confine- 
ment at  Macon  are  no  longer  needed.  I beg  respectfully  to  call  the 
attention  of  the  Secretary  to  the  fact  that  I have  not  been  notified  of 
this  contemplated  movement,  and  that  I only  incidentally  learned  it  in  \ 
conversation  with  General  Mercer.  In  a department  constituted  like 
this  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  where  the  important  cities  of  each 
State  are  mutually  dependent  for  support  and  assistance,  it  ceases  to  be 
a question  of  mere  etiquette  and  military  usage,  but  may  be  of  vital  in- 
terest that  orders  affecting  the  disposition  of  troops  be  passed  through 
my  headquarters.  In  the  case  referred  to  I trust  the  movement  will 
not  be  required  unless  it  be  considered  an  absolute  necessity.  It  is  not 
improbable,  and  by  no  means  impossible,  that  the  enemy,  aware  of  the 
small  force  at  my  disposal,  may  endeavor  to  retrieve  his  ill -fortune  on 
this  coast  by  a sudden  movement  with  all  his  troops  upon  one  of  the 
two  cities.  Colonel  Brown’s*  regiment  and  Major  Bylander’s  battalion, 
although  guarding  prisoners  at  Macon,  are  as  much  relied  upon  for  the 
defense  of  Savannah  as  if  on  duty  on  the  line  of  intrenchments  about 
this  city. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C .,  August  28,  1862. 

Alfred  F.  Bavenel, 

President  of  the  Northeastern  Railroad  Company : 

Dear  Sir:  You  must  be  fully  aware  of  the  importance  of  completing 
the  obstructions  between  Fort  Sumter  and  Sullivan’s  Island  before  the 
enemy  is  prepared  with  his  iron-clad  boats  to  attempt  to  force  a pas- 
sage. I have  good  reason  to  believe  that  if  I succeed  in  laying  these 
obstructions,  covered  as  they  will  be  by  my  heavy  batteries,  he  will 
either  be  deterred  from  making  the  attempt  or  be  foiled  should  he  make 
it.  Without  these  obstructions  I have  little  doubt  he  will  at  least  try 
to  run  the  gauntlet  of  our  batteries,  and  it  is  by  no  means  improbable 
he  will  succeed.  We  have  now  in  readiness  nearly,  if  not  quite,  suffi- 
cient chain  to  cross  the  channel  twice.  Heretofore  the  progress  of  the 
work  has  been  delayed — almost  defeated — for  want  of  the  necessary 
labor,  which  I have  in  vain  endeavored  to  procure.  There  is  now,  how- 
ever, a reasonable  prospect  that  it  will  be  furnished. 

I now,  sir,  come  to  the  point  with  you.  Equally  necessary  to  the  com- 
pletion of  this  iudispensable  work  is  the  supply  of  timber  for  the  con- 
struction of  the  floats.  This  cannot  be  delivered  in  time  without  the  full 
and  cordial  co-operation  of  your  road.  It  is  mainly  on  your  route  that 
the  proper  timber  is  to  be  obtained.  Large  quantities,  I am  officially  in- 
formed, are  now  cut  and  lying  by  the  road-side  awaiting  transportation. 
Much  larger  quantities  still  will  be  required.  I therefore  ask  you,  sir, 
to  give  your  country  all  the  assistance  in  your  power.  You  cannot 


Chai'.XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  bUl 

more  effectually  do  it  at  this  time  than  by  the  influence  of  your  official 
position  and  authority  to  facilitate  the  rapid  completion  of  this  work. 

^ J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 
Richmond,  Ya .,  August  29,  1862. 

# * * * * 

XY.  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  is  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

*****  * * 


Special  Orders, 
No.  202. 

* * 


By  command  of  Secretary  of  War: 


ED.  A.  PALFREY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  (7.,  August  31,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General:  I have  just  received  Special  Orders,  No.  202,  of  August 
29  from  your  office.  I most  earnestly  entreat  that  I may  be  ordered 
into  the  field  for  active  service.  I have  done  everything  in  my  power 
for  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  and  my  arrangements  for  the  defense 
of  Charleston  and  Savannah  have  been  made,  whether  judiciously  or 
not,  at  least  uncontrolled  by  the  interference  of  others.  Having  occu- 
pied this  position  since  the  early  part  of  March  last,  it  will  be  humiliat- 
ing in  the  extreme  to  me  to  be  now — almost  at  the  moment  of  antici- 
pated attack  by  the  enemy — reduced  to  a subordinate  position  in  this 
command.  I beg  \hat  it  may  be  understood  that  I do  not  even  intend 
to  express  a wish  not  to  be  superseded  by  General  Beauregard,  who  I 
doubt  not  is  far  more  capable  .of  filling  satisfactorily  the  responsible 
position  I have  so  long  held.  I only  ask  that  I may  be  transferred 
myself  to  some  other  point  where  I may  not  be  useless;  and  if  I may 
be  allowed  a perference,  I would  say  to  Virginia. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  DepI  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C .,  August  31,  1862. 

Col.  J.  S.  Preston, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Commanding  Camp  of  Instruction : 

Colonel:  In  a note  of  this  date  Brigadier-General  Gist  informs  me 
that  he  has  been  unofficially  informed  that  some  of  the  prisoners  re* 
cently  taken  on  Pinckney  Islind  (the  last  sent  up)  assert  the  enemy  to 
have’a  small  iron  gunboat  in  t\e  Stono.  You  are  respectfully  requested 
to  examine  them  upon  the  suhect  and  report  to  this  office. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


602 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  fCiiAi',  XXVI. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  Department of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  commander 
oy  Maj.  Gen.  J.  t.  Pemberton,  fur  August,  18(32. 


Commanding  officer. 


Brig.  Gen . J.  Hagood 

Col.  W.  S.  Walk,  r 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer. 


Grand  total. 


Troops. 


First  Military  District 

James  Island 

Second  Military  District 
Third  Military  District 
Military  District  of  Georgia 


Present  for 
duty. 

a 

© 

03 

a 

+3 

© 

' fa  a ’ 

j Officers. 

[ 

Men. 

ft 

© 

It 

tr 

© 

i- 

ti 

ti 

<1 

^ © 

CD 

fl 

fci” 

tc 

<1 

1 

212  ! 

3,  500 

4,  8G8 

6,227 

1 73 

2.  791 

3,920  1 

5,  3^5 

87 

1,  239 

1,745  ! 

2,  579 

117 

1.  86:5 

2,  459 

3,  154 

4ul 

5.  842 

8.  501 

11.490 

990 

15,  238 

21,563 

28,  835 

Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  Department  of  East  and  Middle  Florida,  Brio.  Gen 
Joseph  Inn  eg  an  commanding,  for  August,  1882. 


j Present  for 


Command. 

Officers. 

j ft 

! © 

1 « 

tc 

. ; £ 

S3 

£ 1 

<■=  I 

I ! 

T. 

j 

trs 
£ 5 

ti 

be 

<5 

1st  Special  Battalion  Florida  Infantry  * 

Three  independent  companies  of  infantrv 

Eight  companies  of  cavalry  t . 

19 

10 

19 

251  354  1 473 
161  V01  | 245 
439  522  1 625 
202  273  329 

Two  batteries  of  artillery  ...  

Total 

55  | 1,  053  | 1,  350  j 1,  672 

* No  report  from  Company  F.  tNo  report  from  Clambers’  company. 


Hdqrs.  Sixth  Battalion  Cavalry,  South  Carolina, 

Cliisolmsville , September  4,  18G2. 

Lieut.  E.  H.  Barnwell, 

Asst-  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Military  District , Pocotaligo , S.  G.  : 

Lieutenant:  I beg  to  report  the  enemy  advanced  in  one  gunboat 
up  to  Field  Point  about  2 o’clock  yesterday.  The  pickets  secreted 
themselves  on  margin  of  bluff  and  waited  until  the  steamer  came  up 
dropped  anchor,  and  was  swinging  around  with  the  tide— distant  some 
90  yards  from  them— when,  upon  collection  of  crew  on  deck,  they  de- 
liberately fired  into  them  with  rifles,  creating  much  confusion  amlsud- 
tlen  dispersion.  They  (the  pickets)  are  perfectly  confident  some  were 
kd  Cki  *5ei^tea?ier  then  opening  with  her  guns  so  rapidly  they  were 
ob hged  to  fall  back  amid  a shower  of  balls,  shells,  &c.,  through  an  open 
held;  all  escaped  unhurt.  Subsequently  three  boat  loads  landed,  but 
before  two  could  reach  the  point,  although  I moved  rapidly,  the  steamer 
had  retired  down  river.  Considerable  friug  occurred  yesterday  a m 
m vicinity  of  Hutchinson  Island.  I beg  to  inclose  roster  of  battalion  • 
also  petition  for  Private  Bicbardson  to  he  forwarded. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Major  Sixth  Battalion  Cavalry  South  Carolina , Commanding. 


HAP.  XXVI.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 


603 


Hdoes  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , IS.  C .,  September  10,  1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General:  Special  Orders,  No.  209,  current  series,  from  your  office, 
equires  partisan  corps  raised  without  authority  in  the  Department  of 
South  Carolina  and  Georgia  to  be  disbanded,  and  the  men  composing 
he  same  within  the  conscript  law  to  be  ordered  to  report  at  camps  ol 
ustruction.  It  was  distinctly  understood  by  all  applicants  for  authority 

0 raise  corps  of  partisans  within  the  limits  of  South  Ca  olina  that  my 
ipproval  was  given  with  the  express  proviso  and  understanding  that 
io  men  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five  years  were  to  be 
alien ’into  these  corps.  I h ve  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  copy  ol  a 
etter*  from  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War  to  Mr.  H.  K.  Aiken,  which 
y.'ou  will  observe  gives  no  authority  to  raise  his  corps  except  under  the 

restrictions  imposed  by  me.  T • + n i t q 

On  the  6th  of  this  mouth  I received  through  Lieut.  Col.  J.  b.  Hes- 
ton, assistant  adjutant- general,  commanding  Camp  of  Instruction  near 
Columbia,  the  accompanying  copy  of  a telegram.  This  was  the  hist 
intimation  from  any  official  source  that  the  restrictions  imposed  by  me 
and  sanctioned  by  the  War  Department  had  been  subsequently  an- 
nulled; nor  do  I now  believe  that  such  interpretation  as  has  been  given 
to  this  telegram  was  intended  by  the  Department.  I am  very  conn- 
dent  that  so  important  a change  in  its  views  would  have  been  duly  com- 
municated to  me.  Until  very  recently  1 had  no  reason  to  believe  that 
any  of  the  corps  of  Partisans,  raised,  as  I supposed,  with  my  approval 
and  by  authority  of  the  War  Department,  contained  within  its  ranks  a 
single  individual  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-fave  years. 
How  entirely  I was  mistaken  in  this  belief  is  evidenced  by  the  accom- 
panying report,*  furnished  me  on  my  call  by  Colonel  Preston  on  the 
6th  mstant.  It  appears  that  no  less  than  601  men  have  thus  been 
brought  into  these  new  and  comparatively  useless  organizations  to  the 
prejudice  of  the  old  regiments,  many  of  which  are  reduced  to  mere 
skeletons.  I do  not  consider  these  corps  to  have  been  raised  by 
authority,  nor  were  they  ever  reported  to  me  for  duty,  as  required  by 
the  instructions  of  the  Secretary  in  his  letter*  (herewith)  of  May  16 

1 respectfully  request  to  be  informed  in  what  light  the  Department 
regards  them.  With  respect  to  partisan  corps  raised  within  the  limits 
of  the  military  district  of  Georgia,  no  individual  has  applied  fonor 
received  my  approval,  as  required  by  Article  V,  General  Orders,  No.  30. 
If  authority  has  been  obtained  for  such  organizations  m that  State  it 
must  either  have  been  on  the  approval  of  Brigadier- General  Lawton, 
without  reference  to  myself  as  department  commander,  or  by  authority 
granted  directly  from  the  Department  of  War.  It  is  very  certain  that 
these  troops  ought  to  be  disbanded,  but  I desire  to  be  infoimed  as  to 
the  wishes  of  the  Secretary,  and  to  what  extent  he  regards  my  approval 

as  necessary  to  their  authorized  organization.  „„,.T)17,I>rrr.1.T 

J.  C.  PLiVIDilirtlUN , 
Major-General , Commanding. 


. and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 
Richmond , Pa.,  September  17,  1862. 

# # * * 

XVI.  Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  on  being  relieved  in  command  of 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt 
No.  218.  f 

# * * 


*Not  found. 


604 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXi 

the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  by  General  Beaureaar 
will  repair  to  this  city  and  report  for  furthe?  orders.  8 1 

# *****  # 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War  : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, I 


Hdqes.  Dept,  op  South  Oaeolina  and  Geoegta 
Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  Heston,  S.  O,  September  IS, .1802. ; 


Commanding  First  Military  District : 

Geneeal  : I desire  you  to  suspend  for  the  present  the  work  upon  tl 
hue  known  as  the  inner  obstructions,  at  least  until  General  Beauregar 
shall  determine  whether  they  shall  be  prosecuted  further. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Ool.  J.  Goeoas,  Charleston,  S.  O,  September  19, 1862. 

N Chief  of  Ordnance , Richmond , Va. : 

Colonel:  I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  in  cloa 
to  you  the  accompanying  letter  from  Lieutenant  Smith,  and  to  say  tha 

tl  ^Cr0mpl^ment  of  h®ayy  £uns  Promised  for  this  department  canno 
be  had  fiom  Rome,  you  have  the  goodness  of  providing  them  from  Eicfc 
mond,  over  and  above  the  10-inch  columbiads  which  are  to  come  froc 
there.  I have  the  honor  further  to  state  that  it  is  the  wish  of  Genera 
Beauregard,  who  has  not  yet  assumed  command,  that  the  guns  you  sup 
ply  from  Richmond  m lieu  of  those  expected  from  Rome,  Ga.,  be  10  me] 
instead  of  8-mch  columbiads,  in  view  of  the  formidable  character  of  th 
iron-clad  ships  preparing  for  the  attack  of  Charleston. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

„ 1 7 . m ^ a AMBEOSIO  JOSE  GONZALES, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery,  Dept . South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 


General  S.  Coopee,  Charleston,  S.  C,  September  20, 1862. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

The  removal  of  Colonel  Black’s  cavalry  regiment  from  this  depart 
ment  deprives  Charleston  of  two-thirds  of  the  cavalry  for  its  defense 
and  leaves  the  entire  coast  in  the  Second  Military  District  without  j 
single  cavalryman. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


,T  . _ , ^ Ricdmond,  Va.,  September  22, 1 862.  j 

Major-General  Pemberton:  ’ * 

Colonel  Calhoun’s  death  in  a duel  being  announced  in  the  papers,  I 


UAr.  XXVI.] 


605 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


esire  to  call  your  attention  to  the  25th  and  26th  articles  of  war  and  to 
equest  an  immediate  execution  of  them.  ^ ^ RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of 


South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  September  22,  1862. 


5rig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia  : 

General  : The  rapid  completion  of  the  gunboat  at  Savannah  is  of 
he  greatest  importance.  You  will  therefore  furnish  every  assistance 
a the  way  of  mechanics  which  the  authorized  agent  of  the  Navy  De- 
partment may  call  for.  If  necessary  ordinary  routine  must  he  tempo- 
arily  dispensed  with  to  facilitate  this  object.  ^ PEMKEj,ton, 

Major- Genera l , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  <7.,  September  22,  1862. 

Eon.  S.  R.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

Sir  : General  Beauregard  not  having  yet  assumed  the  command  of 
this  department,  I have  this  day  acted  on  your  letter  of  the  19th  instant, 
addressed  to  General  Beauregard,  and  have  directed  Brigadier-General 
Mercer,  commanding  at  Savannah,  to  furnish  all  the  aid  (in  mechanics) 
from  enlisted  men  which  the  authorized  agent  of  the  Navy  Department 
may  call  for  to  hasten  the  completion  of  the  gunboats.  ^ 

J.  C.  R BMBiiiTClUJN, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Guns  bearing  on  Charleston  Harbor 
[About  September  22,  1862.] 

PORT  SUMTER. 


Kind  of  ordnance. 

. i 

Caliber. 

Number  of  guns. 

Barbette  carri- 
ages. 

Casemate  carri- 
ages. 

Field  carriages. 

Seige  carriages. 

Naval  carriages. 

10-inch. .. ... 

3 

12 

2 

5 

3 

7 

6 

31 

4 

6 

4 

3 

8 

8-inch 

8-inch 

4 

g.juch 

8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer 

9-inch 

3 

42-pounder. . 
42-pounder.. 
32-pounder.. 
32-pounder. . 
24-pounder.  . 
10-inch 

10 

21 

4 



606 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV] 
Guns  leaving  on  Charleston  Harlor— Continued. 


FORT  BEAUREGARD. 


Kind  of  ordnance. 

Caliber. 

Number  of  gun  s. 

Barbette  carri- 

ages. 

Casemate  carri- 

ages. 

Field  carriages. 

Siege  carriages.  J 

Naval  carriages. 

8-inch  columbiad '. . . . 

Q.i  r»  nL 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer 

O-IIILiIl ...... 

8-inch 

32-pounder. . 
32-pounder.. 
24-pounder. . 

32-pounder 

32-pounder  rifled 

24-pounder 

i 

j 

FORT  MOULTRIE. 

8-inch  columbiad 

8-inch 

8-inch 

9 

3 

1 

6 

4 
11 

3 

1 

9 

3 

1 

6 

4 
11 

3 

8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer 

42-pounder  rifled 

32-pounder 

42-pounder. . 
32-pounder. . 
32-pounder.,  j 
24-pounder. . ' 
24-pounder. . 
6-pounder.,  l 

32-pounder  rifled 



24-pounder 

24-pounder  howitzer 







6-pounder 

1 

ENFILADE  BATTERY.  ' 


10-inch  columbiad ! 10  inch 

3 

3 

1 

CASTLE  PINCKNEY. 


24-pounder 

J 

J | 

— 

24-pounder  rifled 

^ 1 

1 | 

0 

1 

3 1 1 

1 1 

BATTERY  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND  AND  FLOATING  BATTERY. 


8-inch  colurabiad 

32-pounder 

32-pounder  rifled  . 


8-inch j 1 i 

32-pounder..  2 2 

32-pounder..  J 1 I l 


BATTERY  AT  LAWTON’S. 


32-pounder 

4 

4 ! 

6-pounder  rifled 

1 

1 

1 1 

1 

;hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE, 


607 


Guns  in  vicinity  of  Charleston  not  hearing  on  harbor. 

BREACH  INLET  BATTERY. 


Kind  of  ordnance. 


8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer 

S2-pounder 

>4-pounder 

IgZaeJriiea:::::::::::::::::::::::::::: j 


Caliber. 

Number  of  guns. 

’fH 

cS 

© <j5 

s % 
% 
s 

M 

Casemate  carri- 

ages. 

Field  carriages. 

Seige  carriages. 

Naval  carriages. 

1 

1 

O-IIICD. 

32-pouuder . . 
24-pounder.. 
12-pounder.. 
i2-pounder. . 

2 

2 

1 

I 

3 

3 

1 

1 

1 

EORT  LAMAR,  SECESSIONVILLE. 


8-inch  columbiad 

32-pounder 

32-pounder  rifled  . 

18-pounder 

10-inch  mortar 

8-inch  mortar 
24-pounder  rifled  . 


8 inch 

I 

2 

1 

1 

32-pounder. . 

<? 

3 

3 

u 

1 

1 

32-pounder . . 
18-pounder.. 

1 A ificli 

1 

x 

1 

±U-1  Lldl  ------ 

\ 

24-pounder. . 

2 

2 

i 

EAST  LINES,  JAMES  ISLAND. 


WEST  LINES,  JAMES  ISLAND. 


8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer . 

42-pounder  

32-pounder 

24-pounder 

12-pounder  .. 

12-pounder  rifled 


8-inch 

42-pounder. . 
32-pounder. . 
24-pounder . . 
12-pounder. 
12-pounder. . 


FORT  PEMBERTON. 


10-inch  columbiad  ... 

8-inch  columbiad  . . - 

42-pounder  

32-pounder 

32-pounder  rifled 

24-pounder  rifled 

18-pounder 

12-|.ounder 

12- pounder  rifled 

32-pounder  howitzer 


10-inch 

8-inch  . . - 
42-pounder. 
32-pounder. 
32-pounder. 
24-pounder. 
] 8-pounder. 
12-p.iuuder 
12-pounder. 
32-pounder. 


8-inch 

1 

4 

14 

1 

2 

1 

1 

2 

10 

1 

2 

1 

32-pounder. 

24-pnunder. 

2 

4 

32-pounder  . — ....... ......  ........ 

lb-pounder . 
18-pouuder. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , Va .,  September  23,  1862. 

Vlaj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton,  Charleston , S.  C.  : 

Suspend  the  march  of  Aiken’s  battalion  Partisan  Rangers  from  Coluin- 
iia  and  order  them  to  the  coast. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : ^ COOPER 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General ♦ 


608  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Richmond,  Ya.,  September  23,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Send  Capt.  J.  H.  Brooks’  company  of  Bangers  to  Richmond,  Ya.  ! 
unless  it  is  required  on  the  coast. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  September  23, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Colonel  Anderson  thinks  it  important  to  have  a permanent  artillery 
organization  for  the  defense  of  Savannah.  If  you  concur  with  him 
you  may  convert  unattached  infantry  companies,  with  their  consent 
into  heavy  artillery,  or  unattached  companies  may  with  their  own  con-  ! 
sent  and  that  of  their  colonels  be  detached  and  converted  into  artillery 
and  their  places  in  the  infantry  regiment  supplied  by  new  companies  ! 
or  by  conscripts,  or  you  may  organize  the  existing  heavy  artillery  com- 
panies into  a battalion,  fill  the  companies  to  their  maximum,  and  organ-  I 
lze  new  companies  from  the  excess  above  the  minimum.  The  minimum  1 
of  an  artillery  company  is  70  and  the  maximum  150  privates.  Nomi- 
nate field  officers  for  the  battalion  when  organized.  A regimental 
organization  for  heavy  artillery  is  not  convenient ; two  battalions  will 
be  better. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  23, 1862. 

General  Pemberton  : 

In  view  of  your  exact  knowledge  of  the  requirements  of  the  depart-  j 
ment  I have  to  request  that  you  will  furnish  me  before  leaving  with 
an  estimate  of  the  minimum  forces  of  all  arms  which  you  may  regard 
as  essential  for  a successful  defense  of: 

1st.  Charleston  and  its  dependencies : 

2d.  The  District  of  South  Carolina ; 

3d.  Savannah  and  its  dependencies  ; 

4th.  The  District  of  Georgia. 

You  will  also  oblige  me  by  having  prepared  a statement  showing  the 
present  location  of  all  the  troops  of  different  arms  in  the  whole  depart- 
ment. 

Respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

[G.  T.  BEAUREGARD.] 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , September  24,  1862. 

I assume  command  of  the  department  pursuant  to  paragraph  XY, 
Special  Orders,  No.  202,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  Rich- 
mond, August  29,  1862. 

Alt  existing  orders  will  remain  in  force  until  otherwise  directed  from 
these  headquarters. 


0 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  CONFEDERATE. 


609 


In  entering  upon  my  duties,  winch  may  involve  at  an  early  day  the 
defense  of  two  of  the  most  important  cities  in  the  Confederate  States 
against  the  most  formidable  efforts  of  our  powerful  enemy,  I shall  rely 
upon  the  ardent  patriotism,  the  intelligence,  and  unconquerable  sp.rit 
of  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command  to  sustain  me  successfully. 
But  to  maintain  our  posts  with  credit  to  our  country  and  our  own  honor 
and  avoid  irremediable  disaster  it  is  essential  that  all  shall  yield  mi- 
olicit  obedience  to  any  orders  emanating  from  superior  authority. 

P Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan  is  announced  as  adjutant  and  inspector 
general  and  chief  of  staff  of  the  department.  BEAUREG ABD) 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

September  24,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  in  answer  to  your  inquiry,  that 
in  my  opinion  this  department  can  be  successfully  defended  against 
any  reasonable  force  which  it  is  probable  the  enemy  may  bring  against 

^’jameis  Island:  10,000  infantry,  1,000  heavy  artillery,  500  cavalry, 

5 Morris  Island  : 1,000  infantry,  250  heavy  artillery,  50  cavalry. 

Sullivan’s  Island:  1,500  infantry,  800  heavy  artillery,  50  cavalry, 

1 Cffirist  Church  : 1,000  infantry,  100  heavy  artillery,  200  cavalry,  1 

^Sainf1  Andrew’s : 2,000  infantry  (movable  column),  200  heavy  artil- 

lerv,  200  cavalry,  2 field  batteries.  7 9 

Second  District:  5,000  infantry,  800  cavalry,  200  heavy  artillery,  2 

field  batteries.  . .. 

Third  Military  District : 5,000  troops  of  all  arms.  o 

Savannah  : 10,000  infantry,  1,200  heavy  artillery,  2,000  cavalry,  8 

field  batteries.  * ^ 

Fort  Sumter:  500  heavy  artillery,  100  riflemen. 

Georgetown  (merely  for  purposes  of  preventing  marauding,  the  de- 
fense of  Winy  aw  Bay  requiring  obstructions  and  a numerous  heavy 
artillery,  both  of  which  are  entirely  out  of  the  question) : i companies 
of  cavalry,  3 batteries  of  artillery,  3 companies  of  in^ntry. 

The  above  estimate  is  based  upon  the  supposition  that  attacks  may 
be  made  simultaneously  upon  different  points. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  0^e^|n^|eERaTOK, 

Major-General , Provisional  Army. 


[Indorsement.  ] 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  24, 1862. 

Approved  as  the  minimum  force  required,  as  above  stated,  to  guard 
with  security  the  Department  of  South  Carolina^md  ^eGaBD 

General , Commanding , 


39  R R— VOL  XIV 


610 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  24,  1862.  i 
September  16. — I inspected,  with  General  Commanding  Pemberton 
and  Brigadier-General  Jordan,  my  chief  of  staff,  and  Colonels  Gonzales,! 
chief  ot  artillery,  and  Lay,  Confederate  States  inspector-general,  fouri 
new  sand  batteries  en  barbette  near  the  west  end  of  Sullivan’s  Island  li 
bearing  on  the  floating  boom  which  is  being  laid  across  the  channel  to 
Tort  Sumter.  These  batteries  are  not  yet  finished  and  only  two  10-inch 
coin  in  bi  ads  are  in  position,  one  not  being  serviceable  yet.  The  maga-l 
zines  are  not-  yet  constructed.  The  boom  is  composed  of  railroad  iron  |i 
strongly  linked  together  with  heavy  iron  bands,  and  is  protected  and 
buoyed  up  by  pieces  of  timber  of  the  length  of  the  bars,  bound  to- 1 
Set  her  by  iron  rings.  The  bars  are  4 feet  under  water  and  the  whole  is  i 
anchored  every  sixth  section  with  an  anchor.  About  one-fourth  of  this  ! 
boom  is  laid.  It  has  been  tested,  I am  informed,  by  running  against 
it  a loaded  vessel  towed  by  a steamboat,,  but  it  resisted  well,  parting 
the  tow-line,  a 2-inch  hawser.  I am  told  it  will  all  be  completed  in 
a ^eek  1or.ten  day®;  Tt  is  Proposed  also  to  lay  another  one  about 
100  yards  in  rear  ot  this  one  if  sufficient  chains  and  anchors  can  be 
had ; also  a rope  obstruction  about  the  same  distance  in  front  of  the  il 
other,  the  object  of  which  is  to  entangle  the  propellers  of  the  enemy’s  '' 
steamers  while  under  the  fire  of  the  heavy  guns  of  the  fort.  The  arina- 
ment  of  the  four  sand  batteries  is  to  consist  of  seven  10-inch  columbiads 
one  8-inch  columbiad,  and  two  42  pounder  rifled  guns.  Fort  Sumter  - 
has  forty-six  heavy  guns  (above  32-pounders)  and  Fort  Moultrie  nine 
IrniU  y guns,  bearing  at  once  on  these  obstructions.  There  will,  besides.  L 
be  two  strong  gunboats,  armed  each  with  four  guns,  to  assist  in  their 
defense.  I am  informed  they  will  be  finished  in  one  month.  Thev  are 
considered  by  me  perfectly  indispensable  in  the  defense  of  this  harbor. 

We  then  visited  the  Neck  Battery,  ou  Morris  Island,  erected  to  de-  < 
lend  the  approach  to  Fort  Sumter.  It  is  not  yet  entirely  completed  'j 
requiring  about  two  weeks  longer  to  finish  it.  Its  gorge  ought  to  be 
entirely  closed  to  prevent  surprise.  A few  rifled  guns  ought  also  to  be 
put  to  bear  on  the  Main  Channel. 

On  returning  I inspected  tlie  small  work  (Fort  Eipley)  now  being 
built  on  cribs  m the  bay  about  halfway  between  Castle  Pinckney  and 
Fort  Johnson.  It  is  intended  for  live  heavy  guns  en  barbette,  and  is 
nearly  ready  for  its  armament.  Its  foundation  ought  to  be  protected 
outside  to  the  high-water  mark  with  debris.  A series  of  these  small 
works  in  shallow  water  nearer  to  the  entrance  of  the  harbor  would  be 
very  advantageous. 

I did  not  visit  Castle  Pinckney,  the  armament  of  which  is  nine  24-  , 
pounders  and  one  24-pounder  rifled,  as  I am  acquainted  already  with 
this  work,  and  considered  it  nearly  worthless,  capable  of  exerting  but 
little  influence  ou  the  defenses  of  Charleston.  I 

September  17. — 1 inspected  this  day,  with  General  Pemberton  and 
Colonels  Gonzales  and  Lajr,  the  defensive  lines  on  James  Island  from 
the  YYappoo  to  near  Secessionville,  a distance  of  about  3 miles.  They 
They  consist  of  a system  of  forts,  redoubts,  redans,  and  cremailleres  not 
very  properly  arranged  and  located,  with  the  exception  of  Fort  Pern-  i 
berton,  on  the  Stono,  and  of  some  of  the  redoubts  A simple  system 
might,  I think,  have  been  originally  devised  requiring  a smaller  number 
ot  men  to  defend  it.  However,  the  present  one  ought  to  answer  our 
purpose  with  a proper  force  of  about  one  and  a half  men  to  the  running 
yard  ot  development.  Each  redoubt  and  redan  has  at  least  one  heavy 
gun  now  in  position.  The  lines  between  Dill’s  Creek  and  the  Wappoo 
are  not  yet  entirely  completed,  requiring  about  fifteen  days  more.  Fort  1 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


611 


Pemberton  is  a strong  work,  and  has  an  armament  of  twenty  gnns  of 
various  calibers.  There  are  two  batteries  on  the  Ashley  River  to  defend 
it  and  the  entrance  into  Dill’s  Creek  and  the  Wappoo.  For  want  of 
guns  they  are  still  unprovided  with  their  armament,  except  the  one  at 
Lawton’s,  which  has  four  guns  (32-pounders)  of  little  use. 

Siptember  18.— I inspected  this  day,  accompanied  by  the  same  officers 
as  on  the  17th  instant,  Forts  Moultrie  and  Sumter,  which  were  found 
to  be  in  fine  order  and  condition,  considering  the  repairs  in  progress  at 
the  latter.  The  armament  of  the  first  consists  of  thirty-eight  guns,  of 
various  calibers  from  24-pounders  to  8-inch  columbiads,  and  the  gar- 
rison of  about  300  effective  men.  The  armament  of  the  second  work 
consists  of  seventy-nine  guns,  of  various  calibers  from  32-pounders  to 
10-inch  columbiads  and  seven  10-inch  mortars,  and  the  garrison  of  about 
352  effective  men.  The  barracks  in  the  latter  work  are  being  reduced 
in  height  to  protect  them  from  the  enemy’s  shots.  The  small  steam  en- 
gine lor  making  fresh  water  is  in  rather  an  exposed  position.  It  ought 
to  be  removed  to  a safer  place  or  be  properly  protected.  Battery  Beaure- 
gard, across  Sullivan’s  Island,  in  advance  of  Fort  Moultrie,  to  defend 
the  approach  from  the  east,  is  armed  with  five  guns. 

The  work  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  island,  to  defend  the  inte- 
rior approach  by  water  to  the  rear  and  west  of  Long  Island,  is  a redoubt, 
armed  with  eight-  guns,  two  32-pounders,  the  rest  small  guns. 

I am  informed  by  Major-General  Pemberton  that  all  the  above  works 
are  sufficiently  garrisoned.  My  conclusion  is,  that  wheu  the  above  works 
contemplated  for  the  defense  of  this  harbor,  especially  the  obstructions 
and  gunboats,  are  completed  and  those  works  are  properly  armed  with 
the  heaviest  guns,  the  enemy’s  vessels  and  gunboats  will  find  it  very 
difficult,  if  not  next  to  impossible,  to  penetrate  far  enough  to  injure  or 
take  Charleston.  Until  then  the  city  will  not  be  properly  protected. 

September  10.— I inspected  this  day,  with  the  same  officers,  the  works 
at  Secession vi lie,  which  are  irregular  and  but  poorly  constructed.  A 
force  of  about  200  men  is  still  at  work  upon  them,  increasing  and  strength- 
ening them.  The  position  is  naturally  a strong  one,  being  surrounded 
with  low  marshes  and  a wide  creek,  except  on  one  side,  where  there  is 
a very  narrow  strip  of  level  ground,  along  which  the  Abolitionists  made 
their  attack,  which  amounted  to  a surprise,  and  yet  they  were  defeated 
by  one-fifth  their  number.  I do  not,  however,  see  the  necessity  or  ad- 
vantage of  holding  in  force  this  advanced  position.  A strong  picket 
would  be  sufficient.  The  armament  of  this  work  consists  of  two  8 inch 
naval  guns,  one  18-pounder  howitzer,  six  32  pounders,  one  32-pounder 
rifle,  two  24-pounder  rifles,  and  two  10-inch  mortars. 

September  20.— I left  this  day  at  0.30  a.  m.  for  Savannah  on  a tour  of 
inspection  with  General  Pemberton  and  Colonel  Gonzales.  Stopped 
at  Rantowles  Station  to  inspect  works  there — an  open  battery  with 
four  guns  (two  24-pounders  and  two  12-pounders) ; a strong  and  good 
position,  commanding  roads  from  Savannah  and  Church  Flats,  on 
Stono,  3 miles  off,  where  there  is  also  a battery  of  three  guns  (two  32- 
pounders  and  one  rifle  12-pounder)  to  command  an  obstruction  and 
prevent  a landing  from  John’s  Island  and  the  passage  by  water  up 
Church  Flats,  in  which  case  troops  at  Adams  Run  0 or  10  miles  off,  a 
central  and  healthy  point,  would  have  to  support  that  battery  or  fall 
back  on  the  one  at  Rantowles.  The  right  flank  of  the  latter  should  be 
extended,  or  a detached  redan  constructed  toward  the  prairie  or  marshes 
in  the  direction  of  Wallace’s — where  there  is  also  a battery  of  two  guns 
(one  32  pounder  and  one  rifled  6-pounder),  occupying  a strong  isolated 
position — to  flank  battery  at  the  station  and  two  bridges  across  Ran- 


612 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  DAST  FLA.  [Chap,  xxvl 

towles  Creek,  a branch  of  the  Stono.  below  Church  Flats.  This  river 
must  be  examined  from  the  latter  point  to  the  Wappoo  Cut  to  deter- 
mme  if  there  are  any  landing  jilaces  by  which  the  works  at  the  overflow  > 

could  be  turned.  There  are  two  inclosed  field  works miles  from 

Charleston,  commanding  the  road  from  Savannah  to  the  long  or  new  ■ 
bridge  across  the  Ashley.  They  appear  to  be  well  located,  provided  i 
they  cannot  be  turned  on  the  right  or  left  toward  the  Wappoo,  which  S 
must  be  inquired  into  if  they  are  unarmed. 

September  21.— I inspected  this  day  the  defenses  of  Savannah  with 
the  same  officers  aud  General  Mercer,  commanding.  They  are  not  yet 
completed,  but  are  progressing  rapidly.  Those  on  the  river,  I am  in- 
humed, are  finished,  Fort  Boggs  excepted,  which  has,  however,  its 
armament,  sixteen  guns,  in  position.  The  line  of  lunettes  and  redans  | 
around  the  city  are  about  half  finished,  I should  judge.  These  works  1 
are  rather  too  close  to  each  other  aud  unnecessarily  strong  in  profile,  i 
There  are  about  1,400  men  (negroes)  at  work  upon  them.  The  ob- 
structions, piling  and  crib  work,  filled  in  with  stones  and  bricks,  about 
1 lode  below  Fort  Jackson  and  its  batteries,  are  nearly  completed,  re-  I 
q Hiring  about  ten  or  fifteen  days  longer  to  finis'll  them.  ‘ They  will  then 
obstruct  very  thoroughly,  I think,  the  navigation  of  the  river.  They  I 
wdl,  however,  require  to  be  watched  and  repaired  constantly,  owing  to  9 
the  effect  of  the  current  on  the  bottom  between  the  cribs. 

The  outer  line  of  defenses,  consisting  of  detached  works  or  batteries  I 
at  thunderbolt  and  other  points,  armed  with  heavy  guns,  were  not  I 
visited  for  want  of  time,  but  1 am  informed  by  General  Pemberton  that  I 
they  are  completed,  well  armed,  and  with  a proper  garrison  could  not  1 
be  taken  by  the  enemy  if  well  defended.  By  their  advantageous  posi-  I 
tion  they  cannot  be  turned.  He  places  great  reliance  on  them.  An  : 
additional  work  at  Coffee  Bluff*,  on  the  Ogeechee,  ought  to  be  con-  * 
structed,  in  the  opinion  of  the  chief  of  engineers  of  the  Georgia  Dis-  3 
tnct,  Captain  MeCrady.  This  must  be  looked  into. 

Upon  the  w*hole  I consider  Savannah  thoroughly  defended  from  a ; 
nav;.l  attack,  and  when  its  line  of  laud  defenses  will  be  completed 
with  a proper  garrison  of  about  15,000  men,  may  be  considered  im- 
pregnable until  the  enemy  shall  bring  against  it  an  overwhelming  force, 
which  it  is  not  probable  they  will  ever  attempt,  as  the  result,  if  favor- 
able,  will  not  compensate  them  for  the  expense  and  trouble. 

September  24. — I inspected  this  day  with  Colonel  Gonzales  the  line 
of  works  on  the  Neck  to  defend  the  city  of  Charleston  from  land  attack 
from  the  north.  It  is  a continuous  bastion  line  of  strong  profile  and  I 
elaborately  constructed,  but  badly  located,  I believe,  not  being  well 
adapted  to  the  ground.  It  is  commanded  ty  a certain  extent  by  woods 
in  front,  and  can  be  enfiladed  and  taken  in  reverse  by  gunboats  on  the 
Cooper  and  Ashley  Fivers,  particularly  from  the  last.  No  traverses 
have  been  constructed.  They  are  absolutely  required.  Even  then  this  j 
line  could  hardly  be  held  successfully  against  a fleet  of  gunboats  in 
each  of  said  rivers.  The  two  batteries  at  the  Half-Moon  Battery  are 
not  finished.  They  are  intended  for  five  and  three  guns  each,  to  com- 
mand the  Cooper  Fiver  and  Town  Creek.  The  distance  to  the  former  i 
is  too  great.  A much  better  position  could  be  found,  I think,  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  river  at  Hobcaw  Bluffs,  but  obstructions  would  also 
be  required.  The  profile  of  the  parapet  of  those  batteries  is  too  great, 
especially  of  the  first  one.  Adaptation  of  “means  to  an  end”  lias  not  ! 
always  been  consulted  in  the  works  around  this  city  and  Savannah. 
Much  unnecessary  work  has  been  bestowed  upon  many  of  them. 

G.  T.  BEAUFEGAFD,  General , Commanding, 


Chap.  XXVI  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


613 


Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  0.  and  Ga., 

No.  173.  f Charleston , S.  <7.,  September  24,  1862. 

I.  Maj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton  is  relieved  from  duty  in  this  depart- 
ment, and  will  proceed  to  obey  paragraph  XVI,  Special  Orders,  No. 
218,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  Richmond,  Va.,  Septem- 
ber 12,  1862. 

####*** 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  State  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , September  29,  1862. 

General  Beauregard,  Commanding : 

Dear  General  : I inclose  the  within  to  you,  being  a letter  from 
myself  to  General  Lee,  dated  May  23,  and  one  from  him  in  reply,  dated 
29th  May,  containing  an  order  to  General  Pemberton  relating  to  the 
defense  of  Charleston.  I most  respectfully  call  your  attention  to  these 
letters.* 

It  strikes  me  that  the  defense  of  Charleston  is  now  of  the  last  im- 
portance to  the  Confederacy,  and  in  our  very  full  interview  yesterday 
I took  the  liberty  of  urging  that  Fort  Sumter  was  the  key  to  the  har- 
bor, and  in  tact  was  almost  absolutely  essential  to  enable  the  South  to 
have  any  communication  with  the  foreign  world.  I called  your  atten- 
tion most  respectfully  to  the  state  of  the  garrison  and  the  great  im- 
portance of  securing  an  able  and  experienced  commander  for  it. 

The  recent  difficulties  amongst  the  held  officers  and  the  death  of  the 
two  senior  ones  in  command,  and  the  probable  suspension,  at  least  for 
a time,  of  the  other  field  officer  from  actual  command,  makes  it  of  the 
deepest  interest  to  the  State  and  to  the  country  at  large  to  have  an 
artillery  officer  of  high  rank  immediately  appointed  to  the  command  of 
that  fortress.  You  will  see  by  miue,  inclosed,  of  the  23d  of  May,  that 
I called  the  attention  of  General  Lee  to  the  situation  of  the  garrison  then, 
and  I trust  you  will  excuse  me  now  for  again  urging  upon  your  atten- 
tion at  this  time  the  same  views.  The  State  feels  a deep  interest  in  it, 
and  the  Executive  Council  recently  unanimously  passed  a resolution 
requesting  me  to  address  you  on  this  subject.  In  addition  to  all  I said 
yesterday  I now  desire  to  state  these  views  more  specifically  in  writing. 

I am  rejoiced  to  see  you  here  again,  as  there  is  no  general  who  could 
have  been  selected  to  whom  South  Carolina  would  look  with  more  con- 
fidence for  her  defense  than  to  yourself.  Our  whole  coast  involves  the 
most  complicated  difficulties  in  defense,  and  all  the  highest  range  of 
science  in  war  is  required  to  make  that  defense  successful. 

Feeling  the  greatest  confidence  in  your  abilities,  and  well  knowing 
that  this  position  is  eminently  suited  to  your  peculiar  talents  and  scien- 
tific knowledge,  it  affords  me  the  greatest  pleasure  to  co-operate  with 
you  in  anything  that  you  may  suggest,  and  to  offer  you  all  the  resources 
of  the  State  that  I may  be  able  to  command. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  the  highest  consideration  of  esteem,  your 
most  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


* See  pp.  515,  524. 


614 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL  . 

Hdqrs.  Proy.  Forces,  Dept,  of  East  and  Mid.  Fla., 

Tallahassee , "September  29,  18C2. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  : As  the  winter  approaches  more  troops  will  be  required  ini 
this  department.  I have  now  but  nice  companies  of  infantry,  five  com-i 
panies  of  Partisan  Dangers,  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  two  companies! 
of  light  artillery  in  service. 

The  troops  are  stationed  from  Tampa  Bay  to  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay  on< 
the  Gulf,  and  from  Fernandina  to  Saint  John’s  Diver  on  the  Atlantic,' 
covering  exposed  points  on  the  coast. 

There  are  not  enough  of  troops  at  any  one  point  to  prevent  invasion 
by  even  a moderate  force.  During  the  summer  months  no  apprehen- 
sion of  invasion  was  entertained ; but  as  the  winter  approaches  we  may  I 
expect  incursions  upon  our  coasts,  and  perhaps  a penetration  into  the 
country  for  purposes  of  plunder,  if  not  to  make  a permanent  lodgment 
for  purposes  of  subjugation. 

More  troops  will  be  needed  in  this  neighborhood  to  prevent  a sudden! 
raid  upon  the  capital,  and  more  will  be  needed  on  the  Saint  John’s] 
Diver  to  support  the  batteries  now  holding  the  enemy  in  check. 

We  have  recovered  within  two'  or  three  weeks  a river  navigable  fori 
som6  200  miles,  which  has  heretofore  been  in  full  possession  of  the  f 
enemy. 

I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  request  that  two  regiments  of  infantry  | 
be  ordered  to  report  for  duty  in  this  department  as  soon  as  they  can  i] 
possibly  be  spared  from  other  points. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  { 
servant, 

JOS.  FINE  GAFT, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  <7.,  September  30,  1862. 
Capt.  W.  H.  Echols,  Chief  Engineer: 

Captain  : The  general  commanding  directs  that  you  take  immediate 
measures  to  have  the  following  works  constructed,  namely  : Such  trav- 
erses in  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie  as  the  commanding  officers  thereof.^ 
may  severally  determine  after  consultation  with  the  chief  engineer  and 
chief  of  artillery. 

Brick  traverse  and  closing  of  the  necessary  embrasure  for  the  thor- 
ough protection  of  the  condenser  at  Fort  Sumter. 

Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie  will  be  supplied  with  sufficient  palmetto 
logs  and  sand  bags  for  possible  contingent  purposes. 

Despectfully,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JODDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  SouTn  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  (7.,  September  30, 1862. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : In  view  of  the  probable  inefficiency  of  the  boom  to  prevent 


Swap.  XXVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


615 


a fleet  of  steamers  from  passing  the  works  defending  the  entrance  of 
this  harbor,  it  becomes  as  urgent  as  it  is  indispensable  to  increase  the 
heavy  armament  of  the  works  intended  to  command  the  anchorage  in 
the  harbor  and  the  entrances  into  the  Ashley  and  Cooper  Rivers  to  the 
utmost  possible  extent ; hence  I have  the  honor  to  request  that  I may 
be  furnished  as  soon  as  practicable,  in  addition  to  calls  tor  ordnance 
already  made  on  the  Department,  with  twenty  10-inch  Columbians,  five 
handed  rifled  42-pounders,  and  five  banded  rifled  32-pounders,  or  tit  teen 
of  the  first  quality,  ten  of  the  second,  and  five  or  more  of  the  third.  A 
greater  number  of  each  quality  could  be  advantageously  located  it  they 

could  be  obtained.  P 

1 shall  submit  within  a day  or  two,  for  the  information  of  the  War 
Department,  a detailed  report  showing  the  exact  defensive  condition  ot 
this  harbor  at  present  and  the  extreme  necessity  lor  the  additional 
heaw  ordnance  now  called  for. 

' Very  reS1,eCtM,y’  y°Ur  0bediCnt  a' T." WuBEGABD. 

General , Commanding. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  forces  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beaim yard,  for  September,  1862. 


Command. 


Military  District  of  Georgia 

First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 


Grand  total 644 


Present  for  duty. 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

i Officers. 

Men. 

226 

328 

57 

33 

3,  226 
5, 240 
838 
516 

78 

19 

5 

62 

1,308 

414 

132 

990 

51 

52 

6 

7 

.884 

683 

156 

125 

644 

9,  820 

164 

2, 844 

116 

1,848 

8,  371 
8,  8j7 

1,  535 

2,  182 


© -ij 

©j§ 

tt-3 

® a 

ir.  a 


1ft,  828 
11,  383 
1,998 
2,  884 


20,915  27,093 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  District  of  East  and  Middle  Florida,  Brig.  Gen. 
Joseph  Finegan,  commanding,  for  September,  18o2. 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Officers. 

Men. 

18 

269 

383 

10 

170 

212 

15 

293 

422 

20 

422 

. 544 

4 

151 

165 

Command. 


First  Special  Battalion  Florida  Infantry.. 
Three  independent  companies  of  infantry 
Three  companies  of  Partisan  Hangers 


comp 

Ten  companies  of  cavalry 
Two  batteries  of  artillery 


Total 


587 

261 

509 

681 

330 


67 


1,305  i 1,726  I 2,368 


*No  reports  from  Harrison’s,  Rou’s,  and  Dickison’s  companies. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  October  1,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Echols,  Chief  Engineer  : 

1 am  instructed  to  furnish  you  with  the  following  extract  from  a com- 


616 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  M[D.  AND  EAST  FLA.  (Chap.  XXVI. 


mnnication  of  date  of  30th  ultimo  from  Dr.  J.  R.  Chevcs,  iu  charge  of 
outer  obstructions : 

In  consequence  of  the  great  deficiency  of  iron,  and  the  large  demand  for  iron  in 
mooring  the  boom,  itisproposed,  at  the  suggestion  of  His  Excellency  Governor  Pickens, 'j 
to  use  granite  rocks  of  three  or  four  tons’  weight,  there  being  much  of  this  at  Colum-  i: 
bia,  and  the  transportation  of  the  same  being  represented  to  me  as  quite  practicable. 

It  is  the  wish  of  the  general  commanding  to  be  informed  of  your 
views  as  to  the  feasibility  at  this  time  of  getting  the  granite  here  and 
in  position. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston,  8.  C.,  October  2,  1862. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant' and  Inspector  General  C.  8.  Army , Richmond , Va. : 


General:  Should  the  Ordnance  Department  be  otherwise  unable  to  i 
furnish  me  with  the  heavy  guns  essential  for  the  proper  armament  of } 
the  defensive  works  in  Charleston  Harbor,  I beg  leave  to  suggest  that 
some  of  those  now  in  position  at  Oven  Bluff,  on  the  Tombigbee  River, 
and  at  Choctaw  Bluff,  on  the  Alabama  River,  may  be  prudently  re- 
moved and  sent  here,  unless  they  shall  be  necessary  for  the  immediate  j 
defense  of  Mobile  Bay.  They  cannot  be  required  in  their  present  posi- 
tions until  those  rivers  shall  have  been  again  swollen — that  is,  in  the  ! 
latter  part  of  the  coming  winter  or  early  part  of  the  following  spring, 
by  which  time  other  guns  may  be  provided  in  their  stead. 

I cannot  place  before  the  War  Department  in  too  strong  language  • 
the  vital  importance — if  this  harbor  is  to  be  retained  to  us — of  increas- 
ing the  armament  of  heavy  guns  to  the  greatest  possible  extent  as  soon  j 
as  practicable  in  all  possible  ways. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  2,  1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant-  General : 

I would  be  pleased  to  have  General  Ripley  assigned  to  my  command 
for  defense  of  Charleston. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding: 


Richmond,  Va.,  October  3,  1862. 
General  Beauregard,  Charleston,  8.  C. : 

General  Finegan  telegraphs  from  Lake  City,  Fla.,  that  3,000  Federals 
are  landing  at  Mayport  Mills,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Saint  John’s  River. 
He  has  repulsed  three  naval  attacks  on  the  batteries  at  Saint  John’s 
Bluff,  18  or  20  miles  from  Mayport,  but  is  not  strong  enough  to  resist 
the  threatened  land  attack.  He  says  that  two  regiments  of  infantry 
from  the  coast  of  Georgia  sent  to  him  for  a few  days  will  save  the  Saint 


Chat.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


617 


John’s  River  and  perhaps  East  Florida.  Send  the  assistance  required 
as  speedily  as  possible. 

Answer  by  telegraph.  G w.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  3,  1862. 
Hon.  George  W.  Randolph: 

Two  regiments  ordered  to  General  Finegau  will  be  sent  from  Georgia, 
the  War  Department  assuming  the  responsibility  of  detaching  them  at 
this  time  from  Georgia,  where  the  troops  are  already  prostrated  by  dis- 
ease,  as  General  Mercer  reports.  & T BE^jjREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C\,  October  3,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Echols, 

Chief  Engineer,  &c.,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Sir:  You  will  order  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee,  of  the  Engineers,  to  advise  with 
Dr.  Cheves  as  to  the  best  method  of  modifying  the  construction  of  the 
floating  boom,  so  as  to  dispense  with  the  railroad  iron  bars  suspended 
from  the  timber  floats,  and  to  connect  the  latter  directly  with  the  iron 
links  or  chain.  This  system  of  construction  to  be  used  as  soon  as  found 

practicable.  , „ , , 

It  would  be  of  great  advantage  to  have  the  wooden  sections  of  the 
boom  to  present  their  side  angle  to  the  force  of  the  current.  You  will 
continue  to  throw  debris  around  Fort  Ripley  until  its  foundations  shall 
be  covered  to  about  1 foot  above  high-water  mark,  with  a boom  of  20 
feet  alongside  of  that  work,  and  from  thence  with  a natural  slope  to 
the  bottom  of  the  bay.  You  will  ha  ve  laid  a telegraphic  wire  from  the 
battery  on  the  Stono  near  Church  Flats  to  Rantowles  Station,  where  an 
operator  will  have  to  be  located. 

I am  informed  that  a part  of  the  telegraphic  wire  required  can  be 
obtained  from  James  Island,  where  it  is  not  now  in  use. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1 G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  October  3,  1862. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  South  Carolina: 

Dear  Sir:  To  be  properly  prepared  for  any  emergency  it  is  my 
opinion  that  there  should  be  a timely,  that  is  immediate,  preparation, 
at  one  or  more  places  outside  of  the  limits  of  this  city,  of  buildings 
and  sheds  and  of  provision  depots  for  the  reception  of  the  women  and 
children  in  the  event  of  a bombardment. 

As  I understand  it  is  the  wish  of  all,  people  and  Government,  that 
the  city  shall  be  defended  to  the  last  extremity;  hence  I desire  to  be  m 
all  respects  ready  to  make  its  defense  equal  to  that  ol  Saragossa'.  To 
that  end  I ask  your  co-operation  in  providing  proper  and  ample  places 


618 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 


of  refuge  for  all  non-combatants  when  it  shall  be  necessary  for  that  class 
to  leave  their  homes;  otherwise  my  embarrassments  must  be  great. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  3,  1802. 

Capt.  W.  IT.  Echols,  Chief  Engineer : 

The  commanding  general  instructs  me  to  direct  as  follows: 

You  will  examine  Ilobcaw  Bluffs,  on  Cooper  River,  in  vicinity  of 
Mount  Pleasant,  to  determine  whether  or  not  it  will  afford  a good  posi- 
tion for  a battery  of  five  or  six  guns  to  command  the  channel  of  the 
river.  It  must  also  be  ascertained  whether  that  channel  can  be  effect- 
ively obstructed  with  the  means  and  appliances  at  our  disposition.  You 
will  likewise  make  a thorough  examination  of  both  sides  of  Stono  River, 
from  Church  Flats  to  Wappoo  Cut,  to  ascertain  whether  the  enemy  can 
effect  a passage  of  the  Stono  between  those  two  points  to  turn  the  works 
in  that  vicinity. 

Resxiectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  3,  18G2. 

Hon.  W.  Porcher  Miles, 

Member  of  Congress , Richmond , Va. : 

My  Dear  Colonel  : Your  favor  of  the  30th  instant  has  just  been 
received.  I thank  you  for  your  exertions  relative  to  those  heavy  guns 
ordered  or  called  for  for  the  new  batteries  on  west  end  of  Sullivan's 
Island.  I have  lately  made  another  call  on  the  War  Department  for 
thirty  or  more  heavy  guns  (10-iueh  and  rifled  42-pounders  and  32- 
pounders)  as  u urgent  and  indispensable,”  having  reasons  to  believe 
that  the  boom  now  being  laid  might  not  answer  in  checking  the  pas- 
sage of  three  or  four  iron-clads  moving  in  echelon  rapidly  against  it; 
hence  the  necessity  of  more  heavy  guns. 

I will  mail  to-day  or  to-morrow  my  report  of  inspection  of  the  harbor 
defenses  of  Charleston  and  Savannah,  the  “conclusions”  of  a board  of 
officers  (naval  and  army)  relative  to  the  present  condition  of  those  de- 
fenses of  Charleston  Harbor,  and  the  estimate  of  Major-General  Pem- 
berton of  the  forces  required  for  the  defense  of  the  Department  of  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia,  which  I have  approved  as  the  minimum  which 
might  be  required,  in  my  opinion,  without  having  yet  visited,  however, 
all  the  districts  of  this  department.  I would  be  much  pleased  if  the 
Department  could  show  you  those  reports.  Coming  here  so  late  in  the 
season  I have  thought  it  advisable  to  have  on  record  all  the  facts  therein 
contained.  General  Pemberton  seems  to  have  done  a great  deal  of 
work  here,  and  he  appears  to  have  been  very  active,  zealous,  and  intel- 
ligent. I regretted  his  leaving  here,  for  with  his  knowledge  of  the 
country  he  could  have  been  of  much  use  to  me,  but  he  did  not  wish  to 
remain  with  a restricted  command. 

I shall  be  pleased  to  have  Brigadier-General  Ripley  for  the  command 


619 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

of  the  harbor  defenses  of  this  city;  his  presence  is  the  more  necessary, 
I believe,  since  the  lamented  death  of  Col.  W.  Iiansom  Calhoun. 

I am  endeavoring  to  introduce  gradually  my  system  of  managing 
men  and  things,  and  hope,  if  the  enemy  will  give  me  time,  to  be  pre- 
pared to  give  him  a very  warm  reception  whenever  he  will  come  here. 
With  my  kind  regards  to  all  inquiring  friends,  I remain,  in  haste, 

yours,  very  truly,  G T_  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  October  3,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army , Richmond,  Va.  : 

General  : I have  to  submit,  for  the  information  of  the  War  Depart- 
ment, the  following  report  of  my  inspection  of  the  works  for  the  de- 
fense of  the  position  of  Charleston : 

Accompanied  by  Major-General  Pemberton,  Brigadier-General  Jor- 
dan, my  chief  of  staff,  Colonel  Gonzales,  chief  of  artillery,  and  Lieut. 
Col.  George  Lay,  on  a -tour  of  inspection,  under  orders  of  the  War  De- 
partment, on  the  16th  of  September  I proceeded  to  inspect  the  harbor 
defenses,  beginning  with  four  new  sand  batteries  in  barbette,  near  the 
west  end  of  Sullivan’s  Island,  bearing  ou  and  commanding  the  floating 
boom  under  construction  across  the  channel  thence  to  Fort  Sumter. 
Those  batteries  are  not  finished,  but  two  guns,  10-inch  columbiads,  were 
in  position,  one  of  which  only  being  ready  for  service  and  the  maga- 
zines not  yet  built.  The  boom  is  composed  of  railroad  iron,  strongly 
linked  together  with  heavy  iron  links  aud  bands,  protected  and  buoyed 
by  spars  of  timber  of  the  same  length  with  the  bars  of  iron  and  banded 
ciosely  together  with  iron.  The  bars  are  suspended  4 feet  under  water, 
and  tiie  whole  structure  is  anchored  every  sixth  section  with  an  anchor. 
About  one-fourth  of  this  boom  is  laid.  I am  informed  that  it  has  been 
tested  by  running  against  it  a heavily  loaded  vessel  towed  by  a steam- 
boat; this  test  it  resisted,  parting  the  tow-line,  a 10-inch  hawser.  It 
was  also  proposed  to  lay  another  line  about  100  yards  in  rear  ot  the  one 
under  construction  if  sufficient  time  is  allowed  arid  enough  chains  and 
anchors  can  be  procured.  In  addition  a rope  obstruction  has  been  pre- 
pared to  place  in  advance  of  the  wooden  and  iron  boom  for  the  pui  pose 
of  entangling  the  enemy’s  propellers  while  under  fire  of  our  heavy  guns 
in  the  adjacent  forts  and  batteries. 

It  is  proper  for  me  to  notice  that  since  my  inspection  the  plan  ot  the 
boom  was  found  to  be  defective  in  at  least  one  particular:  The  great 
length  of  it  made  it  unable  to  bear  the  pressure  of  the  tide,  and  the  boom 
parted  in  several  places.  This,  it  is  hoped  by  the  projector,  may  be 
remedied  by  breaking  the  continuous  character  of  the  barrier  and  lay- 
ing it  by  sections,  and  on  that  plan  it  is  now  being  carried  on.  Further 
modifications  will  probably  be  made,  in  which  connection  see  so  much 
of  the  paper  herewith,  marked  A,  as  relates  to  this  boom. 

The  armament  of  ihe  four  new  sand  batteries  is  to  consist,  as  planned, 
of  seven  10  and  one  8 inch  columbaidS  and  two  42-pounder  rifled  guns. 
Fort  Sumter  has  thirty-eight  heavy  guns  above  the  caliber  ot  32-pound- 
ers  and  Fort  Moultrie  nine  bearing  at  once  on  the  obstructions.  There 
will  be  also  two  strong  iron-clad  gunboats,  each  armed  with  four  guns* 
to  give  important,  indeed  vital,  assistance.  These  I am  advised  will  be 


620 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  DA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XxVt 


completed  before  the  15th  instant,  and  could  even  now  yield  some  aid  i 
in  an  emergency.  1 regard  them  as  absolutely  indispensable  to  the  sue-  1 
cessful  defense  of  the  harbor. 

The  Neck  Battery  on  Morris  Island  was  then  visited,  which  was  found  j 
incomplete,  wanting  at  least  two  weeks’  work  to  finish  it  according  to  1 
plan,  and  needing  a closed  gorge  to  secure  against  surprise.  It  was  i 
erected  to  defend  that  approach  to  Fort  Sumter.  In  addition  a few  rifled  i] 
guns  ought  to  be  placed  to  bear  on  the  Main  Channel. 

Subsequently  1 inspected  a small  work,  Fort  Ripley,  now  under  con- 
struction on  cribs  in  the  bay,  about  midway  between  Fort  Johnson  and 
Castle  Pinckney.  It  is  nearly  ready  for  its  armanent,  five  heavy  guns 
in  barbette,  but  must  be  protected  outside  to  the  high-water  mark  by  j| 
rubbish  before  it  can  be  relied  on.  A series  of  similar  smaller  works 
erected  in  the  shallow  water  nearer  to  the  mouth  of  the  harbor  would 
materially  add  to  the  strength  of  our  defenses. 

I did  not  visit  Castle  Pinckney,  the  armament  of  which  is  nine  24-  !l 
pounders  and  one  24-pounder  rifled  guns.  I am  well  acquainted  with 
this  work  and  regard  it  as  nearly  worthless  at  this  juncture. 

On  the  17th  of  September,  in  company  with  Major-General  Pember- 
ton, Colonel  Gonzales,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lay,  I inspected  the  de-  i 
fensive  lines  on  James  Island  from  the  Wappoo  to  Mellichamp’s,  a dis-  H 
tauce  of  about  3 miles.  These  lines  consist  of  a system  of  forts,  redoubts,  i 
redans,  cremailleres , not  very  properly  arranged  and  located,  with  the 
exception  of  Fort  Pemberton,  on  the  Stono,  and  some  of  the  redoubts;  j 
and  in  my  opinion  a simpler  system,  one  requiring  a smaller  force  to  i 
hold  and  defend,  might  have  been  originally  devised  with  advantage.  j 
However,  this  line  ought  to  serve  our  purpose  with  a proper  force  of 
about  3 men  for  every  2 yards  of  development.  Each  redoubt  and 
redan  has  at  least  one  heavy  gun  in  position.  That  part  of  the  lines  be-  | 
tween  Dill’s  Creek  and  the  Wappoo  will  be  completed  in  two  weeks. 

Fort  Pemberton  is  a strong  work,  and  has  an  armament  of  twenty 
guns  of  various  calibers.  There  are  two  batteries  on  the  Ashley  River 
and  the  entrances  of  Dill’s  and  Wappoo  Creeks,  but  for  want  of  guns  the  i 
works  are  without  armaments,  except  the  battery  at  Lawton’s,  which 
has  four  32-pounders  in  position,  which,  however,  are  of  little  use  against 
any  probable  attack. 

On  the  18th  of  September,  accompanied  as  on  the  previous  day,  I 
inspected  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  which  were  found* in  fine  order 
and  condition,  considering  the  repairs  in  progress  at  the  latter  work. 
The  armament  of  Moultrie  consists  of  thirty-eight  guns  of  various  cali- 
bers from  24-pounders  to  8-inch  columbiads,  with  a garrison  of  some  300 
effective  men.  The  armament  of  Sumter  consists  of  seventy-nine  guns 
of  all  calibers  from  32-pounders  10-inch  columbiads  and  seven  10-inch 
mortars.  It  has  a garrison  of  about  350  effective  men.  The  barracks 
are  being  cut  down  to  protect  them  from  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 

The  small  steam-engine  for  making  fresh  water  is  in  an  exposed  con- 
dition, and  should  either  be  removed  to  a safer  place  or  be  properly  pro- 
tected; the  latter  will  probably  be  most  convenient. 

Battery  Beauregard,  across  Sullivan’s  Island,  in  advance  of  Fort 
Moultrie,  to  defend  the  approach  from  the  east,  is  armed  with  five 
guns.  The  worii  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  island,  placed  to  defend 
the  interior  approach  by  water  to  the  rear  and  west  of  Long  Island,  is 
a redoubt  armed  with  eight  guns  (two  32-pounders  and  six  small  guns). 

I am  informed  by  General  Pemberton  that  all  these  works  are  suffi- 
ciently garrisoned. 

My  conclusions  are  as  follows:  That  when  the  works  contemplated 


621 


Chap.  XXVI  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


aU(l  iu  progress  for  the  defense  of  this  harbor,  especially  when  the  obstruc- 
tions and  iron  - clacTgunboats  shall  have  been  completed  and  are  prop- 
erly armed  with  gnus  of  the  heaviest  caliber,  the  enemy’s  fleet  will  find 
it  extremely  difficult  to  penetrate  sufficiently  within  the  harbor  to  in- 
jure or  reduce  the  city ; but  until  these  works  are  finished,  armed  as 
indicated  and  properly  garrisoned,  the  city  cannot  be  regarded  as 

Accompanied  as  on  the  previous  day,  on  the  19th  of  September  I 
examined  the  works  at  Secessiouville,  which  are  irregular  and  ol  poor 
construction.  A force  of  some  200  men  was  still  at  work  increasing 
and  strengthening  them.  The  position  is  naturally  strong,  being  sur- 
rounded by  low  marshes  and  a wide  creek,  except  on  one  side,  where 
there  is  a very  narrow  strip  of  level  ground,  along  which  the  Aboli- 
tionists made  their  attack,  which  was  a surprise,  when  they  were  de- 
feated by  one-fifth  of  their  numbers.  I do  not  see  the  necessity  or 
advantage  of  holding  in  force  this  advanced  position.  A strong  picket 
would  be  sufficient.  The  armament  of  this  work  cousists  of  t wo  S-inch 
naval  guns,  one  18-pounder  howitzer,  six  32-pounders,  one  32-pounder 
rifled  gun,  two  24-pounder  rifled  guns,  and  two  10-inch  mortars. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted  with  the  following  papers, 


namely:  T to 

Minutes  of  a conference  with  Captain  Ingraham,  commanding  Con- 
federate States  naval  forces,  Charleston  Station,  marked  A. 

Estimate  of  the  forces  regarded  by  Major-General  Pemberton,  my 
predecessor  in  command,  as  essential  for  the  effective  defense  ot  the 
most  important  points  in  the  department,  marked  B.# 

Tabular  statement  of  the  troops  in  the  department  and  their  several 
positions,  marked  C. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure  A.l 

Charleston,  September  29,  1862. 

In  the  office  of  the  general  commanding  the  department,  Charleston, 
September  29,  1862,  at  a conference  to  which  General  Beauregard  had 
invited  the  following  officers  : Commodore  D.  jN.  Ingraham,  and  Capt. 
J.  R.  Tucker,  C.  S.  Navy,  Brig.  Gens.  S.  R.  Gist  and  Thomas  Jordan, 
Cols.  G.  W.  Lay,  inspector-general,  and  A.  J.  Gonzales,  chief  of  artillery, 
and  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee,  Engineers,  Capt.  W.  H.  Echols,  chief  engineer, 

being  absent  from  the  city.  ’ 

The  general  commanding  proposed  for.  discussion  a number  ot  queries 
prepared  by  himself  in  relation  to  the  problem  of  the  defense  of  the  har- 
bor, forts,  and  city  of  Charleston  against  the  impending  naval  attack 
by  a formidable  iron-clad  fleet. 

It  was  agreed  to  separate  the  consideration  of  these  questions  so  as 

to  discuss : „ _ . 

1st.  The  entrance,  i.  e.,  all  outside  of  a line  drawn  from  Fort  Moultrie 
to  Fort  Sumter,  thence  to  Cummings  Point,  including  also  outside  of 
this  line  Battery  Beauregard,  at  the  entrance  of  the ‘Maffit  Channel. 

2d.  The  gorge,  i.  e .,  the  section  included  between  that  line  and  the 
line  of  a floating  boom  from  Fort  Sumter  to  the  west  end  of  Sullivan’s 
Island. 


Copy  of  Pemberton  to  Beauregard,  September  24,  see  p.  609, 


622 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


3d.  Tlie  harbor,  comprising  all  of  the  bay  within  the  second  line. 

4tli.  The  city,  its  flanks  and  rear. 

In  the  discussion  no  guns  were  classed  as  heavy  if  not  above  the 
caliber  of  32  except  rifled  12-pounders. 

The  following  conclusions  were  arrived  at : 

1st.  The  existing  defenses  of  the  entrance  are  Beauregard  Battery  , 
with  two  heavy  guns,  Fort  Moultrie  with  nine,  the  sand  batteries  on 
the  west  end  of  Sullivan’s  Island  with  but  four  yet  mounted,  and  Fort  . 
Sumter  with  thirty  eight.  Of  the  gorge  say  nine  guns  in  Fort  Moul- 
trie, thirty-two  in  Fort  Sumter  (not  including  seven  10-inch  mortars),  i 
and  as  yet  but  four  in  the  sand  batteries.  Of  the  harbor  say  fourteen 
guns  of  Fort  Sumter  and  the  four  guns  in  the  new  sand  batteries,  j 
Fort  Johnson  has  one  rifled  32-pounder,  but  it  is  not  banded  and  is 
unsafe. 

For  the  city  defense  some  batteries  have  been  arranged  and  com- 
menced, but  heavy  guns  are  neither  mounted  nor  disposable. 

2d.  The  floating  boom  is  incomplete. 

3d.  It  is  no  barrier  now. 

4th.  The  boom,  even  if  complete  on  the  present  plan,  might  be  forced,  !' 
although  it  would  serve  as  a check,  but  it  cannot  be  depended  upon  if 
attacked  by  the  enemy  on  a scale  commensurate  with  his  means.  It  has  Ij 
already  been  broken  in  parts  by  the  force  of  tides  and  currents.  On  ac-  j 
count  of  its  having  to  bear  this  strain  of  the  depth  of  water  (up  to  70  feet)  i! 
and  the  difficulties  of  the  anchorage  ground,  of  the  limited  means  at  dispo-  . 
sal  in  anchors  and  chains,  the  indifferent  qualit3T  of  the  iron,  and  the  defi- 
cient buoyancy  of  the  whole  (the  pine  being  green  and  sappy  and  get- 
ting  heavier  with  time),  a modification  of  the  construction  is  required. 

5th.  We  have  no  means  or  material  at  hand  for  the  construction  of  a 
better  boom.  It  is  thought,  however,  that  the  one  now  under  construc- 
tion will  be  materially  improved  by  discarding  the  continuous  chain  of 
bar  and  railroad  iron  and  links  and  by  linking  together  the  logs,  as  they 
are  now  arranged,  by  short  chains,  so  as  to  make  a continuous  chain  of 
each  section  of  the  spars.  There  will  be  a saving  of  iron  and  greater 
buoyancy  attained  by  this. 

6th.  A rope  barrier  has  been  devised  and  constructed  to  place  in  ad- 
vance of  the  spar  boom,  but  has  not  been  placed  in  position,  as  the  rope  I 
will  rot  in  the  water,  and.  some  anchors  are  still  wanting.  They  are  being 
searched  for. 

7th.  Iron-clads  in  forcing  the  harbor  must  pass  the  gorge,  or  throat, 
everywhere  within  point- blank  range  of  our  batteries,  and  must  conse- 
quently be  in  great  danger  of  damage  from  the  concentration  of  the 
metal  that  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  them,  especially  from  the  ele- 
vation of  Fort  Sumter. 

Note. — Distance  between  Sumter  and  Moultrie  1,775  yards;  air  line 
of  obstructions  1,550  yards. 

8th.  The  plan  of  naval  attack  apparently  best  for  the  enemy  would  be 
to  dash  with  as  many  iron  clads  as  he  can  command,  say  fifteen  or 
twenty,  past  the  batteries  and  forts,  without  halting  to  eugage  or  reduce 
them.  Commodore  Ingraham  thinks  they  will  make  an  attack  in  that 
way  by  daylight. 

9th.  Iron-clad  vessels  cannot  approach  or  pass  so  close  to  the  walls  of 
Fort  Sumter  as  not  to  be  within  the  reach  of  the  barbette  guns.  Those 
guns  may  be  depressed  to  strike  the  water  at  a distance  of  154  yards  of 
the  walls.  Vessels  of  the  probable  draught  of  gunboats  cannot  be 
brought  closer  than  100  yards. 

10th.  After  forcing  the  passage  of  the  forts  and  barriers  and  reaching 


623 


CHAr.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

tbe  inner  harbor  gunboats  may  lay  within  COO  yards  of  city  face  of 
Fort  Sumter  exposed  to  fire  of  about  fifteen  guns.  The  magazines  would 
be  unsafe  as  now  situated,  or  until  counter-lbrt  shall  have  been  extended 
sufficiently  along  city  face. 

1 ltli.  If  iron-clads  pass  the  forts  and  batteries  at  the  gorge,  orthroat, 
of  harbor  then  the  guns  at  Forts  Ripley  and  Johnson  and  Castle  Pinck- 
ney would  be  of  no  avail  to  check  them.  In  consequence  of  the  exposed 
condition  of  the  foundations, of  Fort  Ripley  and  the  general  weakness  . 
of  Castle  Pinckney  it  would  not  be  advisable  to  diminish  the  armament 
of  the  exterior  works  to  arm  them,  and  this  necessarily  decides  that  Fort 
Johnson  cannot  be  armed  at  the  expense  of  the  works  covering  throat 
of  harbor.  Fort  Johnson  must  be  held,  however,  to  prevent  the  pos- 
sibility of  being  carried  by  the  enemy  by  land  attack  and  the  establish- 
ment there  of  breaching  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter.  The  batteries 
at  White  Point  Garden,  Half  Moon,  and  Lawton’s  and  McLeod’s  Bat- 
teries for  the  same  reasons  cannot  be  prudently  armed  at  present  with 

heavy  guns.  , . , . 

12th.  The  line  of  pilings  near  Fort  Ripley  is  of  no  service  and  is  rap- 
idly falling  to  pieces.  , , 

13th.  The  city  could  not  be  saved  from  bombardment  by  any  number 
of  batteries  along  the  city  fronts  if  the  enemy  reach  the  interior  harbor 
with  iron-clads.  It  can  then  only  be  defended  by  infantry  against  land- 
ing of  troops. 

14th.  We  have  no  resources  at  present  for  the  construction  of  efficient 
obstructions  at  the  mouths  of  or  in  the  Ashley  and  Cooper  Rivers,  and 
we  have  no  guns  disposable  for  the  armament  of  interior  harbor  de- 
fenses. 

15th.  Should  gunboats  effect  a lodgment  in  the  harbor  and  in  the  Stono 
the  troops  and  armament  on  James  Island  may  be  withdrawn,  espe- 
cially af» er  the  construction  of  a bridge  and  road  across  James  Island 
Creek,  about  midway  the  island,  near  Holmes’  house.  From  the  west- 
ern, part  can  be  withdrawn  under  cover  of  Fort  Pemberton.  McLeod’s 
Battery  is  intended  to  protect  the  mouth  of  Wappoo  Creek,  and  Law- 
ton’s Battery  the  mouth  of  James  Island  Creek,  when  armed. 

16th.  With  the  harbor  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  the  city  could  still  be 
held  by  an  infantry  force  by  the  erection  of  strong  barricades  and  with 
an  arrangement  of  traverses  in  the  streets.  The  line  of  works  on  the 
Reck  could  also  be  held  against  a naval  and  land  attack  by  the  con- 
struction of  frequent  and  long  traverses.  The  approaches  thereto  are 
covered  by  woods  in  fron£  Possibly  a more  advanced  position  might 
have  been  better,  though  also  protected  by  the  woods,  but  so  much  has 
been  done  that  it  were  best  to  retain  the  line,  remedying  the  detects  by 
long  and  numerous  traverses. 

Two  iron-clad  gunboats,  carrying  four  guns  each,  will  be  ready  for 
service  in  two  weeks  as  an  important  auxiliary  to  the  works  defending 
all  parts  of  the  harbor,  and  in  that  connection  it  will  be  important  to 
secure  for  them  a harbor  of  refuge  and  a general  depot  up  the  Cooper 
River  as  soon  as  the  guns  for  its  protection  can  be  secured. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 

D.  N.  INGRAHAM, 

Commodore , Comdg.  C.  S.  Naval  Forces , Charleston  Harbor. 


624 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  LOhai*.  XXVI 


[Inclosure  C.] 


Position  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  commanded  by  Genera 
G.  T.  Beauregard , September  25,  1862. 


FIRST  DISTRICT,  COMMANDED  BY  BRIG.  GEN.  S.  R.  GIST. 


Station. 


Charleston . 


Charleston  Harbor 

Morris  Island 

Sullivan’s  Island  . 


James  Island 


Command. 


Charleston  Battalion 

Alston’s  artillery  battalion 

46th  Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers 

Palmetto  Guards  and  siege  guns 
Nelson  (Virginia)  Light  Artillery,  battery 

2d  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry 

Garrison  Castle  Pinckney 

Fort  Sumter,  1st  South  Ca  olina  Artillerv  - 
21st  Regiment  South  Cai  olina  Volunteers 
Matthewes  Artillerv,  Captain  Bonneau . . 
20th  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers 
Garrison  Fort  Moultrie,  1st  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers. 


1st  South  Carolina  Artillery 


13th  Georgia  Battalion 

24tb  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 
1st  South  Carolina  Artillery . 


Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery 

25th  South  Carolina  Volunteers 

Lucas’  battalion  and  one  company  regulars . 

La  Fayette  Artillery  

Preston’s  light  artillery 


McClellanville 

Near  Georgetown . . 


Summerville . . . 
De  wees ’Inlet.. 
Pee  Dee  Bridge 


One  company  Second  Battalion  Georgia 
Cavaliy. 

Two  companies  South  Carolina  Cavalry  . . . 

Major  Byrd’s  command,  infantry 

Field  battery 

Two  cavalry  companies 

Major  Emanuel’s  cavalry 

One  field  battery 

Two  24-pounders  in  position 

Captain  Ferguson’s  artillery 

20th  South  Carolina  Volunteers 

21st  South  Carolina  Volunteers 


§2 


Remarks. 


Infantry. 


Beach  Inlet. 

New  batteries. 
Beauregard  and  Eh 
filado  Battery. 
Secessionviile. 

Do. 

Fort  Johnson  am 
lines. 

Lines. 

Near  Fort  Pemberton 
Fort  Pemberton. 


Belonging  to  1st  Soutl 
Carolina  Artillery. 
Legare’s  place. 


Do. 


McClellanville. 

Do. 


SECOND  DISTRICT,  COMMANDED  BY  BRIG.  GEN.  J.  HAGOOD. 


Adams  Run 


Washington  Artillery $ 

1 

Marion  Artillery 

1 

Marion  Cavalry 

2 

Stono  Scouts,  aggregate  19 

1 

Smith’s  battalion  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers ordered  to  be  consolidated  with 
three  companies  of  Major  Byrd’s  bat- 
talion to  form  a regiment. 

7 

7th  South  Carolina  Battalion  

7 

16th  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

10 

THIRD  DISTRICT,  COMMANDED  BY  COL.  W.  S.  WALKER. 


Grahamville  &Hardeeville. 


McPhersonville . 


Hardeeville 11th  South  Carolina  Volunteers 

2d  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry 

Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Aitillery 

1st  Battalion  Sharpshooters 

2d  South  Carolina  Cavalry 

2d  Battalion  Sharpshooters 

Beaufort  Light  Artillery 

1st  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry 

Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen 

Charleston  Light  Dragoons 

Partisan  Rangers 

6th  Battalion  South  Carolina  Cavalry 


Green  Pond 


Ctur.  XXVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


625 


Position  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Oarolina  and  Georgia— Continued. 

DISTRICT  OF  GEORGIA,  COMMANDED  BY  BRIG.  GEN.  H.  W.  MERCER. 


Station. 

\ 


Skidaway  Shell  road 

No.  3,  Central  Railroad 

Charleston  and  Savannah 
Railroad  Bridge. 

Near  city  of  Savannah 

Savannah  


White  Bluff  and  on  White 
Bluff  road. 

Coffee  Bluff 


Near  Thunderbolt . - - 

Rict  borough 

Oglethorpe  B trraeks. 
Genesis  Point 


Altamaha  Bridge  

Savannah  River  batteries. 


On  Middle  Ground  road, 
near  Battery  Harrison. 
Near  Beaulieu 


South  Newport 


Darien . 

Soulh  of  Altamaha 

Near  Little  Ogeechee River, 

12  miles  from  city 

Carston’s  Bluff 


Macon,  Ga. 


Command. 


Terrell  Light  Artillery — 

Major  Milieu’s  Partisans 

Chestatee  Light  Artillery 

Company  E,  47th  Georgia  Regiment. 


If 


Battalion  Savannah  Volunteers  Guard 

White’s  Partisans 

Effingham  Hussars 

47th  Georgia  Volunteers 

Company  A,  2d  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry. 

Chatham  Artillery  

4th  Louisiana  Battalion 

Randolph  Mounted  Rangers 

Company  D,  Light  Battery  Georgia  Regu- 
lars. 

30th  Georgia  Volunteers 

Liberty  Independent  Troop... 

Tatnall  Guards 

Martin's  light  battery  

Hardwick  Mounted  Rifles 

Garrison  at  Genesis  Point  x 

Company  I,  25th  Georgia  Regiment 

Companies  A.  G,  and  I,  29tli  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers; Compaby  E,  25th  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers; Company  K,  32d  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers; Company  B,  47th  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers, and  five  unattached  companies. 
32d  Georgia  Regiment  


Banks’  Partisans 

54th  Georgia  Volunteers 

Joe  Thompson  artillery 

Liberty  Guards 

Lamar  Rangers 

McIntosh  Cavalry 

Battalion  cavalry 

( Battalion  Sharpshooters 

5 Columbus  Artillery 

Eight  companies  25th  Georgia  Regiment ; 
seven  companies  29th  Georgia  Regment; 
three  unattached  companies. 

10th  Georgia  Battalion 


59th  Georgia  Regiment. 


10 


Remarks. 


Guarding  stores 
prisoners. 


end 


RECAPITULATION. 

Number  of  companies  First  District,  Brigadier-General  Gist 

Number  of  companies  Second  District,  Brigadier-General  Hagood  . . . 

Number  of  companies  Third  District,  Colonel  Walker 

Number  of  companies  District  of  Georgia,  Brigadier-General  Mercer 

Total  number  of  companies 


133 

29 

40 

124 

326 


Hdqrs.  Third  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

McPhersonville , October  3,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan.: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a letter*  written  to  Major-General 
Pemberton  on  the  subject  of  an  increase  of  force  in  this  district,  which  is 


40  R R— VOL  XIV 


Not  fouud. 


626  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  IChak  XXVL 

as  applicable  now  as  then.  In  consequence  of  the  evident  weakness  of 
the  points  to  which  I deferred  General  Pemberton  ordered  one  battalion 
of  sharpshooters  to  Graham  ville  and  one  to  this  post.  He  informed  me 
that  this  was  the  only  re-enforcement  he  could  spare. 

Since  then  my  force  has  been  reduced  by  two  pieces  of  artillery  taken 
from  Hardeeville  and  the  battalion  of  sharpshooters  from  this  post. 
The  battery  of  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott  has  consisted  of  only  four  effective 
pieces,  all  of  which  I considered  necessary  at  this  point.  The  seven 
companies  infantry  posted  at  Hardeeville  are  part  of  the  flank  and 
rear  defense  of  Savannah,  and  could  not  with  safety  be  diminished, 
especially  as  the  companies  are  much  reduced.  When  the  enemy  make 
the  attempt  to  cut  the  railroad  in  my  opinion  it  will  be  at  some  point 
between  Grakamville  and  the  bridge  over  the  Combakee  River. 

It  is  the  line  most  accessible  and  farthest  removed  from  succor. 
There  is  reported  by  my  pickets  an  increase  of  the  force  of  the  enemy 
on  the  south  side  of  Coosaw  River.  On  account  of  the  peculiar  topog- 
raphy of  the  country  between  the  Coosa whatchie  and  Combakee 
Rivers  the  cavalry  will  have  to  operate  on  foot  to  avail  themselves  of 
the  natural  and  artificial  positions  of  defense.  There  are  very  few 
points  at  which  it  would  be  practicable  or  advisable  to  operate  mounted. 
1 should  have  bayonets  for  a stubborn  resistance.  I would  inform  the 
general  commanding  that  I have  had  a secure  boat  bridge  built  over 
the  Salkehatckie'River  5 miles  north  of  where  the  railroad  crosses. 
This  gives  me  a safe  line  of  retreat  and  concentration  toward  Waiter- 
borough  should  the  railroad  be  taken. 

I judge  that  the  force  west  of  Broad  River  should  serve  for  the  flank 
defense  of  Savannah.  I am  informed  that  the  only  practicable  point 
for  crossing  the  Coosawhatchie.  River  north  of  the  railroad  is  18  miles 
north,  at  Hickory  Hill  post-office.  There  is  a crossing  practicable  for 
cavalry  and  infantry  at  the  point  where  the  Coosawhatchie  and  Tuli- 
finy  separate  ; a crossing  lower  down  practicable  for  infantry  only. 

i will  send  you  in  a short  time  a connected  sketch  of  the  lines  of  de- 
fense and  the  detached  works  thrown  up  in  this  district.  I would  ob- 
serve, however,  that  these  works  were  made  for  the  occupation  of  10,000 
men,  which  was  the  force  assembled  in  this  district  during  last  winter, 
with  artillery  in  proportion. 

The  chauge  of  the  policy  of  the  Government  in  abandoning  the  de- 
fense of  the  coast  by  heaxy  artillery  and  reducing  the  force  to  a corps 
of  observation  (composed  largely  of  cavalry)  rather  than  defense  ren- 
ders a large  part  of  these  works  comparatively  useless.  They  can  be 
used  for  retarding  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  but  the  final  stand  should 
• be  nearer  the  line  of  the  railroad,  to  give  time  for  re-enforcements  to 
arrive.  In  that  connection  I need  not  call  your  attention  to  my  de- 
pendence upon  the  rapid  transmission  of  troops  in  case  of  an  attack  in 
force. 

My  desire  is  to  inform  the  general  commanding  fully  on  all  matters 
of  interest  to  the  defense  of  this  district.  I shall  take  pleasure  in  carry- 
ing out  any  instructions  he  may  think  proper  to  send. 

I respectfully  forward  the  instructions  furnished  to  the  pickets  and 
to  the  commanding  officer  at  Hardeeville. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Tabular  statement  of  works  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  October  4,  1862. 


Chat.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


62? 


CD  09 

o o 


-C  £ 


i-t  m <n 


«a 

a3 
© 8 
8* 


. T— I 


! r-i  !f^  ! 

* ! ! ! 

© ® ® ® • 

2^ 2a  • 

© g © : : 

■*-?  rP  -+3 

) © © © © © 

; ■a 

> a.'5'la^  ^ 

a,  3 a,  3^ 

a©:  ©«a  ; 

§ a a a • 

a 3 a 

83  8 • • 

opop  : 

0 P 0 : : 

A 

oo» 

•ey  a 


•■jnoniRnuB 

popuajai 


.P  M ® 
o-o  s-  +a  D » 

.2  2 .2 

<S  |.g 5 

© o c-a-a  a 
s J j ■.  ® a 

>5  © © *T  '£  © 

■**  02^00  ^ * 

. C ® X _T 

® p = ©”<§ 

00 '54^  |'3 

_ --p  a 

« ® S s .5! 

ft  oa  2 .2  * ~ 

oo  -noco 


<3 

? © a*  3 


S p I;  g <m  2 

£ so  (M  03  © a*  H 


•?  | 
oo 

© <*r 
§M  . 
•§  S| 

.2  ® o 

oo5  rH 
>-  © 
© vi  a 
O co  o 
O P 


© ? -a 
e,a  2 
os  g 


'© 


■■s** 


•P 
■ to 


■ off-j  © 

:§3  £ a 
: ©S  a 

„ U f- 


If  S^l 

•a  -1  n a © 
o ® * 4 

o c-  »— t o 
©tjoaaaj  ■ ® a T3  © P ^ 

•Sj-?3?  ;rf«Slg|S 

• £ © 05  ^ © 53  © 

• c a a <m  o fee  a 

:^oo  o o 


CO 


<*>  © 

K ©So 
© o ? ^ © 
£j=3  £5  fl 
H H O 


OC  Jp 

© co 
£ M 


C ^ 


CV4<» 

eo  ^ 
o O 
£ £ 


•a  o 
oo  ^ 

o^ 

£ of  • 


. CO 


'g  ©rJ 

.2  g 5 .„..._ 
'aS  -?* 
'S-a 


.2 'a  « s 

o 


..  'd  3 g 

co  © a. a 
oa  9 ft 

■© 
«a 


o r:  « 
H 


*35  * 2° 
H HH 


© OJ 

‘p.® 

2 8 
'©  - 
<P-? 
PM 
© o 

t * 

mB 


,r3  rs  rd 

•a  a a 
'C  a a a 


® a a a 

c C3  C5  C5 

§ .5;  ± .t 
3 3 
ft;  a a 

*a«5  05  cc 

05  _ 

£!.®!|J 

r©  ^ ^ ^ gi 

Ssiwlfi 

BbS^h' 

C O _C  ©A  _o 
"a  a O a:  ® a 


M 

B? 

© 3® 

-at*'-' 


f-  fcn  ^ t-  a 

% ? ii  * 

a a - a an 


a a a a 
22-22^ 
a a x a 
© © © © 


a 
s s 


^ 1 ~ r_l  =-  ^ 

a a a a a 
aaasaaa:  a 
OOOOH 


ra2a.®a?;t 

o 

3 


pqpj  ®as 

OO  o o 


© © 

a a 


9s 


O a 
: V 


Sa 

® a 


PR  02 


-c 
a 

a a^ 

© © *3 

a a. a 


® tJD 
a © 

-*3  © 


■ a a * 

■ co® 

■ 2 ® a 

IS|g 

.1-3  <3  a 


| 

g§ 

© 

3 

H 

05 

€ 

tts 

c3 

.O 

A 

0 

e3 

© 

.2 

►2p  gga 

3^22  2 

P 

0 0 
PP 

© 

© 

« 

0 0 a a S 
PPPMtd 

P p3 
(3  5 

®’£ 
rrt  bJD 

111 


II 

M 3 
W 


'd  2 
o ; ® 

P?  :g 

OC  , 

§ : fc* 

a . *“ 

o :-© 


a a 

WM 


® J ^ ® a' 

«P3W 


Tabular  statement  of  works  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  October  4,  1862— Continued. 


628 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CnAP.  XXVI 


«8 

© o 


rE  . 
t-  ® 

CM  .3  . 

■ © ® 

Ss-I 

'C  5 , 


§S 


c c ® 

^ -3, 


•^aonnnn.nj 

])jpae|ax 


■%>%£  .2 
^ w~ . +-> 

•3 

* 


Hi* 

® S S 5 
°.3  3l 

fc  fr> 

O © -M 
^ CC  .3 

"st! 

-5  >>3 


sisS-a 

3 5 cii 

S-  ^ 5 '3  - *S  a. 

© ©•Pi-S’Tr  ° - 

Vi  Mi  ob  ^ P 
o~12 

r->  M -"S  rr  . 


?!  g-sstf 


is, 

pi 


g tea 
t’S  © 
<1  © 


a 

Ef 

o 

3 -3  2 

3 3 
> 


o _ 

© © S’ 

v e.*.s  j " t 

2 a > £ a 

x c 05  e3  St 


S3  O 


- fcX) 

3 a 
.52 

>V  O 


g § ?!  o'| 

«*««  gjjr  § 


M 03 

S a 
S.3 

a:  © 
© a 

^ si 

33 
o © 
£ 

•~S 


© © 
© i- 

CO  o 


■§  a 
S Ef 
jS 
.12  a 

-3  .. 

II 


gt 

o-s 
W 8 

C a 


03  _* 

ji  1 

l£  © 'S 

►©  Irt  "Pi 

fctvr  M 
P a®  .2 


^SPe3®ra.5i’S^2?a  -«je® 
■g  2 p/s  .-©+^irJS'§3,aS:^ 

.2 s^+2  « ant;  ? sh  a cu _ — i, 


■33  a a a P3  t*i  ■?  ©UP'  Sv  ..I 
os  « 


3 © ,T 

3 00  O 


a © s 


r-  © 


a a ^ 

4M* 


ufis 


S-  © 

©■5 


W'-S 

s ® 

a M 

Si 

3=9 

g o 


* I 

a a 
© t“S 
tc  tc 

.2  .a 

t a o 

e-§  a 
a*  a 
cM  o 

u u 


- 

Ef 

8 - 

ri-© 

*3 


P3 
S ir-3 

5 ©r— 

”®  5 2 
>. 
g 

I'si 

ja  § a 
= r 8 
CCfcO 


Sc  M 


'S  a:  3 

3 Pi* 

& s >» 

c3  ^ "d 

5 Si 

8 U 

Pt  « * 

S* 

£ i 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


629 


IIdqrs.  Dept,  of  Soutii  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  6’.,  October  4,  1802. 

Capt.  W.  II.  EcnoLS,  Chief  Engineer : 

Captain:  The  commanding  general  directs  the  construction  ol  the 
following  works  with  as  little  delay  as  practicable,  namely : 

1st.  Extend  the  right  dank  of  battery  at  Rautowles  Station  to  the 
marsh  cut,  and  place  an  abatis  in  the  woods  on  the  left  dank  of  that 
work. 

2d.  Construct  a tete-de-pont  and  battery  at  the  new  bridge. 

Prepare,  in  connection  with  Captain  Lee,  and  submit  a plan  and  re- 
port of  the  best  manner  of  defending  the  streets  and  squares  oi  the  city 
of  Charleston  (city  proper)  from  an  attack  by  the  enemy  under  cover 
of  his  gunboats  which  may  have  reached  the  inner  harbor;  also  for  the 
erection  of  bomb-proof  shelters  in  the  center  of  city  and  near  its  upper 
limits  for  a garrison  of  about  8,000  men. 

An  ample  provision  must  he  made  of  crowbars,  spades,  pick-axes, 
and  blasting  powder,  to  be  held  available  for  an  extreme  defense  ot  this 
city. 

Respectfully,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  October  6,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston,  8.  C. : 

If  you  think  Savannah  endangered  by  detaching  two  regiments  to 
General  Fiuegan  you  will  retain  them.  It  was  not  intended  to  deprive 


you  of  discretion  in  the  matter. 


G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 


‘ Secretary  of  War . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  6,  1802. 

H.  W.  Mercer, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding , Savannah,  Ga. : 

The  two  regiments  ordered  to  Florida  must  be  recalled  at  once. 

Answer. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  October  6,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Milton, 

Tallahassee,  Fla. : 

I have  telegraphed  to  General  Beauregard  to  send  assistance  from 
Georgia  if  it  can  be  done,  and  l will  telegraph  to  General  Lee  about 
the  Florida  regiments.  They  now  constitute  a brigade,  under  General 
Perry,  and  I am  afraid  that  General  Lee  cannot  spare  the  n. 

^ G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


630 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Tallahassee,  Fla.,  October  7,  1862. 

(Received  at  Richmond  October  8,  18G2.) 

Secretary  of  War: 

If  the  return  of  the  Florida  regiments  will  interfere  at  all  injuriously 
to  the  army  under  General  Lee  let  them  remain  with  him.  My  appli- 
cation was  based  upon  information  that  they  were  prostrated  from 
sickness  incident  to  the  climate;  not  efficient  where  they  are.  We 
need  forces  here  and  on  side  of  Apalachicola  River,  and  it  they  shall 
come  from  Georgia  and  Alabama  these  States  will  be  thus  defended. 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor  of  Florida. 


Richmond,  October  7,  1862. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston: 

Communicate  with  General  Forney,  commanding  Department  of 
Alabama.  If  the  guns  you  ask  for  are  not  deemed  essential  in  their 
present  positions  you  may  remove  them. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  October  7,  1862. 
General  Beauregard,  Charleston , IS.  C.: 

Your  command  this  day  extended  in  order  to  embrace  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  that  part  of  Florida  east  of  the  Apalachicola  River.  The 
camps  of  instruction  for  conscripts  in  the  several  States  are  under  the 
special  control  of  the  Secretary  of  War. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Special  Orders,  | Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  234.  S Richmond , Fa.,  October  7,  1862. 

# * * # * * * 

XXXY.  The  States  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  that  part  of 
Florida  east  of  the  Apalachicola  River  will  constitute  the  department 
under  the  command  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

XXXVI.  The  Department  of  East  and  Middle  Florida  is  hereby  con- 
stituted a district,  and  will  form  a part  of  the  department  under  Gen- 
eral G.  T.  Beauregard. 

« * * # * * * 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  0.,  October  8,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  A.,  Richmond , Va.  : 

I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  this  day  of  your  tele- 
gram of  the  7th  instant,  communicating  information  of  the  extension  of 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


631 


Chap.  XX VI.] 

the  limits  of  this  department  to  include  all  of  the  State  of  Georgia  and 
so  much  of  Florida  as  is  situated  east  of  the  Apalachicola  Ki\ei.  I 
beg  to  say  that  1 trust  this  extension  of  the  territory  of  the  department 
wifi  be  followed  at  an  early  day  by  a commensurate  increase  of  the 
forces  to  guard  it.  It  is  proper  for  me  to  say  that  the  more  urgent 
importance  of  the  defense  of  the  ports  of  Charleston  and  Savannah 
must  necessarily  occupy  so  much  ot  my  time  that  1 cannot  be  abse t 
long  enough  to  visit  and  make  myself  acquainted  personally  with  the 
defensive  resources  and  capabilities  of  Florida,  and  hence  must  rely 
entirelv  on  the  local  commander. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  BEATJREGAED) 

General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  October  8,  1862. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens,  Columbia , 8.  C. : 

My  Dear  Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo  has  been  received  and 
duly  considered.  Your  request  for  General  Ripley  will  be  complied 
with  if  General  Lee  can  -spare  him.  I am  expecting  daily  to  hear  from 
General  Lee  upon  the  subject. 

I will  communicate  your  wishes  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  with 
regard  to  the  commanding  officers  of  the  gunboats  and  will  endeavor 
to  have  satisfactory  details  made  for  that  service.  „ w 

The  main  advantage  of  the  obstructions  across  the  harbor  ot  Ghailes- 
ton  is  that  they  may  prevent  the  enemy’s  gunboats  from  running  rap- 
idly by  during  the  darkness  or  at  other  times.  It  they  are  sufficiently 
strong  to  detain  the  vessels  for  a cousiderable  time  under  the  hre  of 
our  forts  and  batteries,  and  the  guns  are  well  served,  we  should  be 
able  to  sink  or  drive  away  any  boats  that  might  attempt  to  pass. 

Very  respectfully  aud  truly,  yours,  jjjpj'jjusON  DAVIS. 


TIdors  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  October  8,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Columbia , S.  C.: 

Dear  Sir:  I have  delayed  acknowledging  your  letter  of  the  29th 
ultimo  and  its  accompanying  papers  in  order  to  inclose  you  a copy  ot 
the  report  of  a board  of  army  and  naval  officers  relative  to  the  present 
condition  of  the  defenses  of  this  harbor,  which  I sincerely  wish  were  in 
a more  forward  state  of  completion.  I have  applied  for  fifty-one  addi- 
tional pieces  of  ordnance  of  the  heaviest  calibers  to  arm  the  inner  line 
of  forts  and  batteries.  I consider  them  indispensable,  tor  my  reliance 
in  the  boom  and  other  obstructions  now  being  laid  across  the  channel 
between  Fort  Sumter  and  the  new  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  is  but 
very  li mited , except  for  their  moral  effect.  The  two  gunboats  now  under 
construction  are  nearly  ready,  and  I believe  will  be  of  material  assist- 
ance to  the  forts  at  the  entrance  ot  and  within  the  harbor.  Gapt.  T . 
D.  Lee  submitted  to  me  yesterday  a plan  for  a torpedo  ram,  which  I 
believe  would  be  worth  several  gunboats.  I can  only  express  my  regret 
it  was  not  adopted  at  ouce  by  the  Naval  Department  at  Richmond  when 
submitted  to  it  several  months  ago,  as  he  informs  me.  I wdl  endeavor 


632  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cuxv.  XXVI.  j 

to  have  one  constructed  (with  the  authority  of  the  War  Department)  as 
soon  as  materials,  labor,  &c.,  can  be  collected  for  that  object.  1 lear 
not  to  put  on  record  now  that  half  a dozen  of  these  torpedo  rams,  of  > 
small  comparative  cost,  would  keep  this  harbor  clear  of  four  times  the  1 
number  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  gunboats.  With  regard  to  the  condi-  1 
tion  of  the  garrison  of  Fort  Sumter,  referred  to  by  you,  after  the  tlior-  I 
ough  investigation  of  the  matter  lately  made  by  a military  board,  I can 
find  no  cause  for  fearing  the  disloyalty  or  evil  designs  of  the  men  com-  ;l 
posing  it;  they  appear  to  be  well  disciplined  and  zealous,  but  I agree 
with  you  in  the  necessity  of  having  an  able  and  old  artillerist  in  com- 
mand of  the  fort  at  the  entrance  of  this  harbor ; hence  I have  made 
already  two  applications  for  the  services  of  Brigadier- General  Ripley,  J 
which  have  been  promised  me. 

I have  already  given  instructions  for  the  construction  of  a battery  of  i 
five  or  six  pieces  (32-pounders  and  rifled  guns)  at  Mayrant’s,  for  the  de-  | 
fense  of  Winyaw  Bay.  My  very  limited  forces  will,  however,  permit 
me  to  detach  for  its  garrison  only  a very  small  number  of  men,  probably  I 
not  over  350  of  all  arms. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  October  8, 1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

(Care  of  General  George  H.  Steuart,  Winchester,  Ya.) : 

General  W.  D.  Smith  is  dead,  and  General  Beauregard  is  pressing 
for  General  Ripley.  Have  you  any  objection  to  his  transfer  to  Charles- 
ton 1 Answer  by  telegraph. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  0.,  October  8,  1862. 

Col.  W.  S.  Walker, 

Colonely  Comdg.  Third  Mil.  Dist .,  McPhersonville , S.  C. : 

Colonel  : Your  letter  of  the  3d  instant,  with  its  inclosures,  has  been 
received.  Your  instructions  to  the  commanding  officer  at  Hardeeville 
and  to  your  pickets  are  approved  of;  none  more  in  detail  can  be  fur- 
nished you  from  here.  Our  means  are  so  limited  at  present  that  it  is 
impossible  to  guard  effectually  the  whole  country  and  line  of  railroad 
from  here  to  Savannah  against  a determined  attack  of  the  enemy ; 
but  we  must  endeavor  to  make  up  in  zeal  and  activity  what  we  lack  in 
numbers.  I shall,  however,  send  you  a light  battery  of  artillery,  to  be 
posted  by  you  wherever  most  advantageous.  Being  still  unacquainted 
with  the  district  of  country  under  your  command,  I must  rely  greatly 
in  ihis  and  other  corresponding  matters  on  your  judgment  and  thorough 
knowledge  of  its  topography.  My  intention  is  to  consolidate  the  cav- 
alry as  soon  as  practicable. 

The  two  battalions  referred  to  by  you  will  be  organize^  into  one  regi- 
ment, with  Major  Jeffords  as  lieutenant  colonel  and  Lieut.  Col.  S.  W. 
Ferguson,  formerly  of  the  U.  S.  Dragoons,  as  colonel,  if  his  services  can 
be  obtained  for  that  position.  I am  happy  to  hear  that  the  troops  have 


633 


U»>.r.'xXTI.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC CONFEDERATE. 

recommenced  their  drilling,  which  is  so  essential  to  their  discipline  and 

SUYour  recommendation  of  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott  to  succeed  Colonel 
Ellis,  Eleventh  Infantry  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  has  just  been  re- 
ceived and  will  be  forwarded  to  the  War  Department,  approved  of  by 
me,  but  the  result  is  quite  doubtlul. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ EEAEREGARD,  . 

General , Commanding . 


Camp  near  Jacksonville,  Fla., 

October  9,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

The  enemy  have  embarked  on  their  transports  and  gunboats,  and  are, 
I understand,  going  down  the  river  this  evening.  They  have  taken  all 
the  negroes,  free  and  slaves,  they  could  find  in  the  phice^^ 

Brigadier - General , Commanding . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  9, 1862. 

John  H.  Forney, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding , Mobile , Ala.  : 

Heaviest  guns  are  much  needed  here.  Can  you  spare  some  from  Oven 
and  Choctaw  Bluffs  until  rivers  rise  ? This  is  authorized  by  W ar  De- 
partment, provided  not  required  by  you.  Send  them  or  concentrate 
them  about  Mobile.  G T BEAUEEGAEi). 


Richmond,  Va.,  October  10, 1862. 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

Florida  east  of  the  Apalachicola  River  has  been  attached  to  your 
department,  and  General  Finegan  has  been  ordered  to  report  to  you. 
General  Ripley  has  been  ordered  to  Charleston. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


HDqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  10,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  A.,  Richmond , X a. : 

General  : In  continuation  of  my  report  of  the  inspections  made  by 
me  before  taking  command  I have  to  submit  the  following. 

On  the  20th  September,  accompanied  by  Major-General  Pemberton 
and  Colonel  Gonzales,  I lelt  Charleston  by  special  train  in  the  morn- 
ing lor  Savannah.  Stopping  by  the  wayside  at  Rantowles  Station  1 
inspected  the  works  at  that  point— an  open  battery  for  four  guus,  two 


634 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


12-pounders  and  two  24  pounders.  The  position  is  strong,  command- 
ing the  roads  from  Savannah  and  Church  Flats,  on  the  Stono  River,  3 
miles  distant,  where  there  is  another  battery,  one  of  three  guns — two  :i 
32-pounders  and  one  1 2-pounder  rifled — to  command  an  obstruction 
and  prevent  a landing  from  John’s  Island,  as  well  as  the  passage  by 
water  up  Church  Flats ; in  which  case  the  troops  at  Adams  Run  (9  or 
10  miles  distant),  a central  and  healthy  point,  would  have  to  support  to 
that  battery  or  fall  back  on  the  one  at  Rantowles  Station.  The  right  ;l 
flank  of  the  latter  should  be  extended  or  a detached  redan  constructed  3 
toward  the  marshes  in  the  direction  of  Wallace’s,  where  there  is  another 
battery  of  one  32-pounder  and  one  rifled  (3-pounder,  occupying  a strong  i 
isolated  position,  to  flank  Rantowles  Battery  and  to  cover  the  two 
bridges  across  Rantowles  Creek,  a branch  of  the  Stono,  below  Church 
Flats. 

The  Stono  River  must,  however,  be  examined  from  the  latter  point 
to  the  Wappoo  Cut  to  determine  if  there  are  any  landing  places  whence  3 
the  works  at  the  Overflow  can  be  turned. 

At  the  Overflow  are  two  inclosed  field  works,  about  5 miles  distant 
from  Charleston,  which  command  the  road  from  Savannah  to  Long  or 
New  Bridge  across  the  Ashley  River.  These  works  are  well  located,  a 
provided  they  cannot  be  turned  on  the  right  or  left  from  the  direction 
of  the  Wappoo,  which  will  be  investigated.  They  are  as  yet  unarmed, 
it  is  to  be  noted. 

On  the  21st  September,  accompanied  as  just  stated,  and  by  Brigadier- 
General  Mercer,  district  commander,  I inspected  the  defenses  of  Savan-  i 
nah.  Those  works  are  incomplete,  but  are  under  rapid  progress.  The 
works  on  the  river,  I am  informed,  Fort  Boggs  excepted,  are  finished  ; i 
the  battery  of  that  work,  sixteen  guns,  is  however  in  position. 

The  line  of  lunettes  and  the  redans  around  the  city  may  be  said  to  be  11 
about  half  finished. 

These  works  are  rather  close  to  each  other  and  of  an  unnecessarily  ] 
strong  profile.  Some  1,400  negroes  are  now  employed  on  them.  The  i 
obstructions— piling  and  crib  work,  filled  in  with  stone  and  brick — 
about  1 mile  below  Fort  Jackson  and  its  batteries,  were  to  be  com-  i 
pleted  within  a fortnight  from  the  time  of  my  inspection.  These  ob-  j 
structions,  I think,  must  form  a thorough  barrier  to  navigation;  they  j 
should,  however,  be  closely  guarded  and  kept  in  careful  repair  in  view 
of  the  effect  of  the  current  on  the  river  bottom  between  the  cribs.  The  1 
outer  line  of  defenses,  consisting  of  detached  works  or  batteries  at  j 
Thunderbolt  and  other  points,  I did  not  visit  for  want  of  time,  but 
I am  informed  by  General  Pemberton  that  they  are  fin  shed,  well 
armed  with  heavy  guns,  and  with  proper  garrisons  cannot  be  taken  by  j 
the  enemy  if  obstinately  defended.  From  their  advantageous  position 
they  cannot  be  turned ; and  my  predecessor  in  command  places  great 
reliance  on  them.  An  additional  work  at  Coflee  Bluff,  on  the  Ogeechee  j 
River,  in  the  opinion  of  the  chief  engineer  of  the  Georgia  District, 
Captain  McCrady,  ought  to  be  constructed.  This  must  be  determined 
hereafter.  Upon  the  whole*,  I consider  Savannah  thoroughly  defended 
from  any  naval  attack,  and  when  its  lines  of  land  defenses  shall  be  fin-  J 
ished,  with  a garrison  of  about  15,000  men,  may  be  regarded  as  impreg-  I 
nable,  unless  the  enemy  shall  mass  against  it  an  overwhelming  force, 
which  it  is  not  probable  they  will  ever  attempt,  as  the  results,  if  favor-  j 
able,  would  not  compensate  for  the  expense  and  trouble.  Having  j 
returned  to  this  city  and  assumed  command  of  the  department  on  the  j 
24th  ultimo,  accompanied  by  Colonel  Gonzales,  I inspected  the  line  of  , 
works  on  the  Neck,  constructed  to  defeud  the  city  of  Charleston  from  i 


G35 


Chap.  XXVI.  | CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

a land  attack  from  the  north.  It  is  a continuous  bastion  line,  of  strong 
profile,  and  elaborately  built  but  badly  located,  not  being,  lii  niy  opinion, 
well  adapted  to  the  ground.  It  is  commanded  to  a certain  extent  by 
woods  in  front,  and  can  be  enfiladed  and  taken  in  reverse  by  gunboats 
in  the  Cooperand  Ashley,  particularly  the  latter.  No  traverses  have 
been  made;  these  are  absolutely  necessary,  but  even  then  this  line 
could  scarely  be  held  successfully  against  a fleet  of  gunboats  in  the 

The  two  batteries  at  the  Half  Moon  Battery,  as  yet  incomplete,  are 
intended,  one  for  five  and  the  other  for  three  guns,  each  to  command 
Cooper  River  and  Town  Creek,  but  the  distance  to  the  former  is  too 
great.  A much  better  position  could  have  been  found,  in  my  opinion, 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  at  Hobcaw  Bluffs,  but  obstructions 
most  difficult  to  be  made,  if  not  impracticable,  are  also  necessary  for  an 
effective  defense.  The  profiles  of  .the  parapet  of  these  batteries  is  too 
great,  especially  that  of  the  former.  Adaptation  of  means  to  the  end 
has  not  always  been  consulted  in  the  works  around  this  city  and  Sa- 
vannah, and  much  unnecessary  work  has  been  bestowed  on  many  ot 
them.  They  show,  however,  great  energy  and  industry  in  the  officers 
who  have  executed  them. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ be^UREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


Special  Otidees,  ) IIdqes.  Dept,  of  East  and  Middle  Ela., 
No.  1250.  ] " Lake  City , October  10,  1802. 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Mitchell  will  move  with  the  Twenty-ninth  and 
Thirtieth  Georgia  Regiments  under  his  command  with  all  possible  dis- 
patch to  Savannah  and  report  to  Brigadier-General  Mercer  for  duty. 
The  quartermaster  will  furnish  transportation  via  Montieello.  In  con- 
sequence of  the  limited  transportation  on.  the  Central  Railroad  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Mitchell  will  move  part  of  his  command  by  this  atter- 
noon’s  train  to  Lake  City  and  the  balance  by  to-morrow’s  tram,  when 
a train  will  be  ready  from  Tallahassee  toeonvey  the  whole  command  to 


Montieello. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan : 

W.  CALL, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  237.  ( Richmond , Fa.,  October  10,  1802. 

* * * # * * * 

XH.  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley  will  proceed  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and 
report  for  duty  to  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  commanding. 

# * # * * * * 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


636 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai'.  XXVL 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , October  12,  1802. 

Mr.  J.  K.  Sass, 

Chairman  of  State  Gunboat  Commission , Charleston , S,  C. : • ]i 

Dear  Sir  : In  view  of  tlie  necessity  of  getting-  ready  as  soon  as  posl 
sible  the  proposed  torpedo  ram  of  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee,  and  the  difficulty  J 
if  not  impossibility,  of  procuring  the  materials  and  machinery  for  its 
construction,  I have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  materials,  &c.,  col-t 
lected  for  the  State’s  new  gunboats  should  be  applied  to  the  torpedo 
ram,  which  I am  informed  can  be  got  ready  sooner  (in  less  than  two!) 
months),  will  cost  less,  and  will  be  more  efficacious  in  my  opinion.  In 
other  words,  1 think  the  State  and  the  country  would  be  the  gainers  by 
constructing  one  of  these  new  engines  of  destruction  in  place  of  the 
intended  gunboat  now  just  commencing  to  be  built. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  October  13,  1802. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah , Ga. : 

General  : The  commanding  general  wishes  you  to  send  your  chief 
engineer,  or  some  officer  regarded  by  you  as  unquestionably  competent, 
to  make  a reconnaissance  of  the  Ocmulgee  Eiver,  with  a view  to  its 
effectual  obstruction  and  fortification  against  the  ascent  of  that  river 
by  light-draught  gunboats  to  Macon.  Please  direct  a detailed  report 
of  the  reconnaissance  to  be  made,  with  plans  for  the  projected  work 
commensurate  with  the  ends  in  view. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JOE  DAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  October  13,  1802. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  A.,  Richmond,  Va.: 

General  : The  bearer,  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee,  Provisional  Engineers,  has 
submitted  to  me  a plan  of  a torpedo  ram  for  the  defense  of  this  harbor 
which  meets  my  hearty  approbation,  as  offering  altogether  the  most 
practicable  means  of  a successful  encounter  with  the  formidable  iron-  : 
clad  gunboats  of  the  enemy  I have  yet  seen.  This  plan  having  been 
brought  to  the  notice  of  the  authorities  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina 
they,  with  their  characteristic  promptness,  have  placed  at  my  disposi-  . 
tion  the  sum  of  $50,000  for  the  immediate  construction  of  such  a ram  \ 
as  Captain  Lee  proposes.  Practical  builders  express  the  belief  that 
they  c m build  it  for  the  sum  appropriated,  but  as  1 am  aware  of  the 
difficulty  of  estimating  with  the  least  accuracy  the  cost  of  such  work 
at  i his  juncture,  I have  concluded  to  sead  Captain  Lee  to  submit  the 
details  of  his  plan  to  the  War  Department,  or,  if  necessary,  to  the  Navy 
Dejjartiuent,  with  the  hope  that  the  co-operation  of  the  Confederate 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


637 


Government  may  be  secured,  if  necessary,  in  the  construction  of  the 
one  about  to  be  begun  by  the  State,  and  also  that'  the  plan  will  meet 
with  such  favor  as  to  lead  to  the  construction  of  similar  rams  for  other 
scenes  of  operation.  1 cannot  doubt  that  rams,  properly  built,  accord- 
ing to  the  plan  of  Captain  Lee  would  be  far  more  effective  than  gun- 
boats of  the  present  construction,  three  times  as  large  and  costly,  with 
the  other  important  advantage  of  being  built  in  one-third  of  the  time 
required  for  rams  of  the  present  models.  Time,  indeed,  is  now  of  vital 
importance  in  preparing  for  the  safety  of  this  city  and  port,  and  should 
the  plan  which  Captain  Lee  will  submit  be  approved  by  the  depart- 
ment and  authority  be  given  to  use  the  materials  already  collected 
here  I feel  assured  I can  have  the  work  done  with  such  vigor  as  to 
have  a ram  ready  for  service  in  time  to  render  signal  aid  in  holding 
this  fort  for  the  Confederate  States. 

Were  some  of  these  rams  built  at  the  same  time  in  the  Yazoo  River 
they  could  dash  out  and  clear  the  Mississippi  River  and  aid  materially 
in  the  recapture  of  New  Orleans ; and  if  effective  here  others  would  be 
equally  efficient  at  Port  Royal  and  Savannah  and  in  James  River.  Let 
me  bespeak  for  Captain  Lee  the  consideration  due  to  his  zeal,  intelli- 
gence, and  capacity  as  a practical  engineer. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General , Commanding. 


ETdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , IS.  0.,  October  13, 1802, 


Col.  W.  S.  Walker, 

Commanding  C.  8.  Forces , McPhersonville , S.  C. : 

Hold  your  command  ready  for  emergency,  supplied  with  provisions 
and  ammunition.  Heavy  baggage  and  stores  might  be  sent  to  the 
rear ; some  re-enforcements  will  be  held  ready  to  support  you ; keep 
pickets  alert  and  spies  active— pay  latter  well.  Mitchel  more  fussy  than 
dangerous. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  6’.,  October  13,  18G2. 

W.  S.  Walker, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Third  Mil.  Dist.,  McPhersonville , 8.  C. : 

Colonel  : Your  letter  of  the  12th  instant  has  been  received,  and  I 
am  instructed  to  say  that  every  effort  will  be  made  to  enable  you  to 
hold  your  position  against  any  effort  of  the  enemy  to  dislodge  you. 
Nevertheless  the  commanding  general  regards  it  as  but  prudent  for  you 
to  send  to  the  rear  all  surplus  stores  and  supplies  and  unnecessary  bag- 
gage, making  at  the  same  time  preparations  to  move  back  the  remain- 
der at  a moment’s  warning.  You  will  also  hold  your  entire  command 
ready  to  be  concentrated  and  act  wheresoever  required,  provided  with 
three  days’  cooked  rations  in  haversacks  and  two  days’  provisions  in 
wagons;  40  rounds  of  ammunition  in  cartridge  boxes  kept  untouched 
except  in  action,  and  a reserve  supply  of  00  rounds  in  wagons.  As  a 
measure  of  precaution  against  waste,  let  me  suggest  that  it  were  well 


638 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


to  explain  to  your  officers  that  cooked  provisions  must  not  be  allowed 
to  become  stale,  but  consumed  from  day  to  day  and  replaced  by  freshly 
cooked  rations. 

The  pickets  will  be  charged  to  use  redoubled  vigilance.  Spies  should 
be  actively  employed  to  procure  information,  and  you  are  authorize® 
to  pay  them  well.  Re-enforcements,  if  required,  will  be  thrown  forward 
if  practicable,  say  2,000  from  this  place,  1,000  from  General  Hagood’s 
command,  and  2,000  from  Savannah.  And  in  this  connection  the  gen- 
eral desires  to  be  informed  of  the  point  upon  which  you  think  re-en- 
forcements should  be  concentrated.  It  is  more  than  probable  that 
Mitcliel’s  immediate  object  will  be  either  to  cut  the  Charleston  and  Sa- 
vannah Railroad  at  its  most  vulnerable  point  or  a raid  to  collect  cotton 
and  negroes  wheresoever  most  accessible. 

He  is  known  to  be  more  fussy  than  dangerous  and  addicted  to  pre- 
datory excursions. 

Respectfully,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Proy.  Forces,  Dist.  of  East  and  Mid.  Fla., 

Tallahassee , October  14,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding,  that  I have  in  service  in  this  district  but  ten  companies  of 
cavalry  (not  yet  organized  into  a regiment),  five  companies  of  Partisan 
Rangers,  nine  companies  of  infantry,  and  tvo  companies  of  light  artil- 
lery, a force  wholly  inadequate  for  the  proper  defense  of  the  State. 
During  the  summer  months  no  apprehension  of  invasion  was  enter-] 
tained,  and  I consequently,  when  called  on  by  the  department,  sent  out 
of  the  State  in  less  than  ninety  days  one  regjmeut  of  cavalry,  six  regi- 
ments of  infantry,  two  independent  companies  of  cavalry,  and  one  in- 
dependent company  of  artillery,  all  Florida  troops.  Three  of  the  com- : 
panics  enumerated  above  are  still  serving  west  of  the  Apalachicola 
River,  General  Forney  having  made  no  provision  to  supply  their  place 
since  that  portion  of  the  State  has  been  attached  to  his  department. 

The  troops  in  this  district  are  stationed  from  Tampa  Bay  to  the  Apa- 
lachicola River  on  the  Gulf,  and  from  Fernandina  to  Jacksonville  and 
Pal  at  k a on  the  Saint  John’s,  covering  exposed  points.  At  no  place  have 
I sufficient  force  to  resist  invasion  even  by  a moderate  force.  Recently 
an  important  position  on  the  Saint  John’s  River  was  evacuated  by.  the 
officer  in  command  because  he  did  not  consider  he  had  sufficient  force 
to  resist  what  he  considered  an  overwhelming  force  ot  the  enemy.  I 
asked  for  a regiment  to  sustain  the  battery  on  the  river  immediately 
after  it  was  erected,  which  was  not  furnished.  The  two  Georgia  regi- 
ments did  not  arrive  in  time  to  prevent  the  disaster.  The  officer  had 
700  men,  and  I consider  it  a great  error  of  judgment  in  his  abandoning 
the  position.  I would  have  been  present  myself  if  he  had  held  the 
place  five  hours  longer.  The  enemy  did  not  approach  the  battery  by 
land  for  twenty  hours  after  the  evacuation. 

I respectfully  request  that  at  least  two  or  three  regiments  be  ordered 
to  this  district  at  the  earliest  day  practicable. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  &c., 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC CONFEDERATE. 


639 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  14, 18G2. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  &c .,  Richmond , Va.: 

President  Young  refused  to  give  up  the  coin;*  forcible  possession 
taken;  guard  placed  over  it;  where  shall  it  be  sent?  Enemy  appears 
to  be  prepariug  for  a movement  near  Port  Royal  Ferry.  My  forces 
there  are  very  weak.  Could  they  not  be  increased  from  sources  beyond 
my  reach  1 G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C .,  October  14, 18G2. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah , Ga. : 

General  : There  are  indications  that  the  Abolition  commander  at 
Port  Royal  may  undertake  some  raid  into  the  Third  Military  District. 
In  view  of  the  possibility  of  such  an  event  the  commanding-general 
has  arranged  to  re-enforce  Colonel  Walker  sufficiently  to  repel  and 
punish  the  attempt  if  made.  I am  instructed  therefore  to  direct  you 
to  hold  in  readiness  about  2,000  infantry  of  your  command  for  detached 
service  at  a moment’s  notice  ; to  which  end  they  will  keep  three  da\s’ 
cooked  rations  in  haversacks,  40  rounds  of  ammunition  in  cartridge 
boxes,  and  a reserve  supply  of  GO  rounds  of  ammunition  and  two  days’ 
subsistence  ready  for  transportation. 

1.  These  troops  will  be  expected  to  move  in  light  marching  order, 
unencumbered  with  unnecessary  baggage. 

2.  The  general  commanding  regards  it  as  prudent  that  the  officers 
should  be  cautioned  not  to  permit  the  cooked  rations  to  grow  stale. 
They  must  be  consumed  and  replaced  by  fresh  provisions  from  day  to 
day" 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  October  14,  1802. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist, 

Commanding  First  Military  District : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  direct  you 
to  hold  in  readiness  about  2,000  infantry  of  your  command  for  detached 
service  at  a moment’s  notice;  to  which  end  they  will  keep  three  days’ 
cooked  rations  in  haversacks,  40  roundsof  ammunition  in  cartridge  boxes, 
and  a reserve  supply  of  GO  rounds  of  ammunition  and  two  days’  subsist- 
ence ready  for  transportation.  These  troops  will  be  expected  to  move 
in  light  marching  order,  unencumbered  with  unnecessary  baggage. 

The  general  commanding  regards  it  as  prudent  that  the  officers  should 
be  cautioned  not  to  permit  the  cooked  rations  to  grow  stale.  They  must 
be  consumed  and  replaced  by  fresh  provisions  from  day  to  day. 

The  service  anticipated  will  be  in  the  Third  Military  District,  and 
hence  the  movement  will  be  by  rail  as  far  as  McPhersonville. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Belonging  to  Bank  of  Louisiana.  See  Series  IV. 


640 


COASTS  OE  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  Ml D.  AND  EAST  ELA.  [6axv.  XXVt 


Richmond,  Va.,  October  15, 18G2. 
Governor  JonN  Milton,  Tallahassee,  Fla.: 

General  Lee  reports  the  Florida  regiments  to  be  in  pretty  good  state 
of  drill  and  discipline  and  constantly  improving,  but  says  that  so  lar 
from  being  able  to  spare  them  he  wishes  men  sent  to  till  them  up. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  October  15, 1802. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  desires  to  have  the  coin  turned  over 
to  T.  S.  Metcalf,  the  Government  depositary  at  Augusta.  You  will 
dispose  of  it  accordingly. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , October  10,  1802. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia , Charleston , S.  C. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  your 
orders,  on  the  14th  instant,  in  company  with  Capt.  A.  T.  Beauregard,  I 
proceeded  to  McPhersonville,  the  headquarters  of  Col.  W.  S.  Walker, 
commanding  Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  arriving  there 
at  3 p.  m.  I delivered  your  dispatch.  The  colonel  expressed  himself 
very  much  gratified  to  hear  of  the  re-enforcements  you  contemplated 
sending  him  in  case  of  an  attack  on  the  Charleston  aud  Savannah  Rail- 
road within  the  limits  of  his  military  district,  stating  at  the  same  time 
that  with  the  force  now  under  his  command  he  could  only  make  a re- 
tiring tight,  his  numbers  being  so  small  (as  stated  in  his  letter  which  I 
handed  to  ycu). 

Iiis  force,  although  small,  he  regards  as  very  reliable.  The  colonel 
desired  me  to  say  to  you  that  he  was  much  in  want  of  a good  officer  to 
assist  him  in  disciplining  the  cavalry,  and  as,  owing  to  the  nature  of 
the  country,  they  would  have  to  fight  mostly  on  foot,  he  was  very  anx- 
ious to  have  his  requisition  for  rifles  filled. 

He  designated  the  following  places  as  points  for  concentrating  his 
troops,  viz:  Pocotaligo,  Graham ville,  and  Hardeeville,  at  which  places 
he  now  has  his  encampments. 

Should  the  enemy  attempt  to  force  their  way  to  the  railroad  at  Poco- 
taligo he  calculated  to  hold  them  in  check  in  rear  of  Screven’s  rice 
fields,  protecting  his  command  behind  a small  work,  ditch  aud  hedge, 
with  rice  fields  overflowed  on  each  flank.  Should  they  attempt  to  ad- 
vance to  the  bridge  across  the  Combahee  River  at  Salkehatchie  by  the 
road  parallel  to  the  river  and  another  small  road  known  as  Seller’s 
road,  he  would  then  hold  them  in  check  at  the  junction  of  two  roads 
near  the  bridge,  the  country  at  that  point  being  swampy  and  densely 
wooded.  Both  these  roads  of  approach  he  intends  having  obstructed 
and  the  bridges  taken  up.  In  case  of  a landing  being  made  at  Hu- 
gueniu’s,  on  Broad  River,  he  would  hold  them  in  check  at  the  causeway 
and  bridge  across  Bee’s  Creek,  on  the  old  mail  road,  at  the  junction  of 
the  Euhaw  and  Grahamville  roads. 


64i 


Chap.  XXVl.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

For  the  protection  of  the  approaches  to  Graliamville  works  have  been 
erected  on  the  different  roads,  the  nearest  landing  place  being  on  Boyd’s 
Keck.  Should  they  land  at  Bluftton,  he  has  selected  a position  at  Kew 
River  Bridge*  on  the  old  mail  road,  where  he  has  an  embrasure  battery 
to  protect  the  bridge.  If  they  land  at  Red  Bluff,  which  he  does  not 
think  probable,  he  has  selected  a position  near  Kew  River,  where  he 
has  two  small  works  erected. 

Colonel  Walker  has  written  to  General  Mercer,  commanding  at  Sa- 
vannah, to  inquire  of  him  what  force  he  has  on  this  side  of  the  Savan- 
nah River,  in  order  that  he  might  act  in  concert  with  him.  He  has 
pickets  posted  at  all  the  available  points  between  the  Ashepoo  and  Sa- 
vannah Rivers.  The  force  between  Ashepoo  and  Combahee  Rivers  is 
composed  of  but  one  small  battalion  of  cavalry,  commanded  by  Major 
Jeffords.  Chapman’s  Fort,  on  the  Ashepoo,  has  been  abandoned ; the 
guns  have  been  removed.  A picket  is  now  stationed  at  that  point.  The 
railroad  bridge  across  this  river  is  more  accessible  to  the  enemy  than 
any  of  the  other  bridges,  the  river  being  deep  and  navigable  some  dis- 
tance above  the  bridge.  Obstructions  were  placed  in  this  river  under 
fire  from  the  guns  of  Fort  Chapman. 

The  colonel  was  anxious  to  have  the  cavalry  under  his  command  or- 
ganized into  regiments;  there  being  at  present  so  many  independent 
companies  and  battalions  under  his  command,  he  thinks  they  would  be 
more  effective  under  good  regimental  commanders.  He  has  not  hereto- 
fore made  use  of  spies  to  procure  information,  but  scouts  in  uniform. 
He  now  has  the  offer  of  the  services  of  several  white  men  whom  he  will 
employ  in  that  capacity,  also  two  negroes,  which  he  will  endeavor  to 
make  use  of. 

We  returned  to  this  city  yesterday  at  1.30  o’clock  p.  in.,  when  I de- 
livered to  you  the  letter  of  Colonel  Walker,  being  his  reply  to  your  dis- 
patch. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  R.  CHISOLM, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Aide -de-  Camp. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

Ko.  195.  ) Charleston , S.  (7.,  October  16,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  Confederate  States  Army,  having  reported 
for  duty  in  this  department,  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  First 
Military  District,  vice  Brig.  Gen.  William  Duncan  Smith,  deceased,  re- 
lieving Brigadier-General  Gist,  who  will  resume  his  former  command. 
Brigadier-General  Ripley  will  direct  his  attention  especially  to  the  de- 
fenses of  Charleston  Harbor,  which  must  be  placed  in  as  complete  con- 
dition for  immediate  service  as  circumstances  will  permit,  and  will  call 
on  the  commanding  general  for  the  men  and  material  that  he  may  find 
essential  for  a successful  and  prolonged  resistance  to  any  attack  which 
the  resources  of  the  enemy  may  enable  them  to  make. 

II.  All  shot,  shell,  grape,  and  canister  in  heavy  batteries  and  in  heavy 
artillery  will  be  gauged  at  once  by  the  commanding  officers  .thereof, 
and  such  as  are  unsuitable  to  the  guns  they  were  issued  for  will  be  re- 
turned to  the  ordnance  depot,  with  a requisition  for  an  equal  number 
of  the  proper  kind. 

III.  Commanders  of  forts  and  batteries  will  examine  forthwith  their 
magazines,  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  they  have  any  projectiles  not 

41  R R — VOL  XIV 


642 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

suited  to  their  armament.  All  such  as  may  be  found  will  be  imrnedi 
ately  returned  to  the  ordnance  depot,  stating  their  number  and  caliber 
By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  October  17,  1862.  j 

Hon.  Charles  Macbeth, 

Mayor  of  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Dear  Sir  : I have  just  received  the  following  telegram  from  the  hon 
orable  Secretary  of  War,  which  I think  advisable  to  communicate  to 
you: 

A gentleman  who  brings  good  credentials  has  jnst  arrived  from  Baltimore  ; he  re- 
ports that  a Cabinet  meeting  was  held  in  Washington  on  the  7th  instant,  at  which  it 
was  ordered  that  Commodore  DuPont  should  attack  Charleston  within  the  ensuine 
two  weeks.  I give  you  the  statement  for  what  it  is  worth. 

This  may  be  a mere  rumor,  but  it  may  be  prudent  to  prepare  for  the 
event  in  case  the  news  should  prove  to  be  true. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

(Copies  sent  to  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  commanding  First  District, 
and  Commodore  D.  hi.  Ingraham,  commanding  naval  station,  Charles- 
ton.) 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  17,  1862. 
Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

We  will  endeavor  to  give  Commodore  DuPont  as  warm  a reception 
as  circumstances  will  permit.  Cannot  Captain  Harris,  of  Engineers, 
be  hurried  on  here  ? Much  has  still  to  be  done. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  17,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Colonel  Myers,  Quartermaster-General,  has  ordered  all  blankets  at 
Charleston  and  Savannah  to  be  sent  to  Richmond.  This  strips  this  de- 
partment ot  blankets  for  conscripts  to  come  in  under  the  new  law.  I ask 
authority  to  keep  at  least  one-fourth  supply  on  hand. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C .,  October  17,  1862. 

Dr.  Cheves, 

In  Charge  of  Harbor  Obstructions , Charleston,  S.  C.: 

Dear  Sir  : Information  having  reached  me  that  the  enemy  might 


643 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

soon  make  a demonstration  against  this  place,  I think  it  would  be  ad- 
visable to  hurry  on  as  soon  as  possible  the  laying  in  position  of  the 
proposed  obstructions,  including  the  “rope  entanglement.” 

I have  ordered  General  Mercer  to  send  as  soon  as  possible  all  the 
chains  and  anchors  not  required  for  the  obstructions  of  the  Savannah 
River  proper. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C .,  October  17,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District: 

General:  On  consideration  the  commanding  general  has  determined 
to  authorize  you  to  assign  Brigadier-General  Gist  to  such  command  in 
your  district  as  you  may  regard  as  most  advantageous  to  the  service 
and  for  the  operations  of  the  district. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  18,  1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  » 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

British  steamer  Leopard  arrived  last  night  with  valuable  cargo — 
arms,  ammunition,  blankets,  shoes,  and  army  supplies.  Have  to  ask 
authority  to  direct  purchase  of  all  wanted. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  October  18, 1862. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

Purchase  all  the  army  supplies  in  the  cargo. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  0.,  October  18,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  8.  A.,  Richmond , Va.: 

General:  I have  to  bring  to  the  notice  of  the  War  Department  the 
unorganized  condition  of  the  cavalry  under  my  command,  and  to  ask 
respectfully  that  early  measures  may  be  taken  to  correct  a state  of 
things  which  in  my  judgment  must  seriously  impair  the  efficiency  of 
this  arm  of  the  service.  The  volunteer  cavalry,  for  example,  stationed 
in  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  consists  of  Stokes’,  Morgan’s,  Jeffords’, 
and  Emanuel’s  battalions,  of  four  companies  each,  Willington  Raugers, 
three  unattached  companies  under  Major  Byrd  at  McClellansville,  the 


644  COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 

Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles,  Captain  Trenhnlm,  and  Charleston  Ligffit 
Dragoons,  Captain  Rutledge,  out  of  which  I ask  authority  to  organize 
two  regiments,  to  be  formed,  the  one  of  Jeffords’  and  Morgan’s  battalions, 
eight  companies,  and  the  other  of  Stokes’  and  Emanuel’s  battalions,  eight 
companies,  with  two  other  companies  to  be  added  to  each  from  the 
unattached  companies,  to  be  selected  with  some  view  to  homogenity 
with  the  other  companies  to  which  they  may  be  attached,  and  also  with 
some  regard  for  the  wishes  of  the  officers  and  men.  For  the  field  officers 
of  the  first  regiment  I respectfully  propose  as  colonel  Lieut.  Col.  S.  W. 
Ferguson,  now  of  Starke’s  regiment  Mississippi  Volunteer  Cavalry;  for 
lieutenant-colonel  Maj.  K.  J.  Jeffords,  and  Maj.  J.  H.  Morgan  as  the  major. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Ferguson  is  a graduate  of  West  Point,  a cavalry 
officer  of  experience,  both  of  regular  and  volunteer  cavalry;  served  with 
distinction  at  the  battle  of  Manassas  and  Shiloh;  is  a citizen  and  native 
of  this  immediate  section  of  South  Carolina,  and  there  would  seem  to 
be  entire  propriety  in  his  appointment  to  the  command  of  South  Car- 
olina troops.  I have  great  need  of  a cavalry  officer  of  his  experience, 
and  I regard  his  appointment  as  of  vital  importance  to  the  cavalry  arm 
in  this  department.  For  the  other  regiment,  on  the  recommendation  of 
my  predecessor,  I respectfully  submit  the  names  of  Capt.  B.  H.  Rut- 
ledge as  colonel,  Maj.  W.  Stokes  as  lieutenant-colonel,  and  Maj.  W.  P. 
Emanuel  as  the  major.  I may  add  that  this  organization  has  the  con- 
sent of  Majors  Stokes  and  Emanuel.  From  the  records  of  my  office  I 
am  assured  that  this  proposed  organization  is  essential  for  an  efficient 
use  of  the  cavalry.  Under  the  present  system  there  is  a material  want 
of  discipline  and  drill,  indeed  a lack  of  everything  needful  to  constitute 
effective  cavalry,  and  I trust  while  there  may  be  found  ample  authority 
for  the  consolidation  under  recently  enacted  laws  no  mere  personal 
aspirations  or  wishes  of  officers  will  be  allowed  to  stand  as  a bar  to  a 
measure  so  salutary. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  (7.,  October  18,  1862. 
Judge  Thomas  Baltzell,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Dear  Sir:  I have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  upon  the  information  com- 
municated to  me  by  you  relative  to  the  present  condition  of  the  railroads 
in  Florida,  that  the  completion  of  the  one  from  Thomasville  to  Bain- 
bridge,  on  the  Flint  River  (36  miles),  and  of  the  branch  from  Groves- 
ville  to  the  Tallahassee  Railroad  (16  miles)  would  add  greatly  to  the 
military  facilities  for  the  defense  of  Middle  Florida,  by  enabling  troops 
from  the  interior  of  Georgia  or  vicinity  of  Savannah  to  be  sent  rapidly 
to  any  point  in  that  part  of  the  State  which  might  be  threatened  by 
the  enemy. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  0.,  October  19,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  Comdg.  First  Military  District: 

General  : As  the  enemy  have  shown  a design  to  interrupt  or  pre- 


645 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

vent  the  erection  of  any  works  at  Mayrant’s  Bluff  the  commanding  gen- 
eral directs  me  to  suggest  that  the  enemy  may  be  foiled  bj  proper 
efforts.  Sham  works  should  be  attempted  at  some  point  in  view  of  the 
gunboats,  and  meanwhile  the  real  works  should  be  vigorously  prose- 
cuted at  night.  Al,  a T1 . > 

It  is  likewise  the  wish  of  the  general  commanding  that  Sullivan  s 
Creek  should  be  effectively  obstructed  without  delay  against  the  pos- 
sible attempts  of  mortar-boats. 

Some  arrangement  must  be  made  for  the  disposition  of  the  troops  on 
Sullivan’s  Island  not  needed  for  the  service  of  the  batteries  in  case  of 
an  attack  merely  by  gunboats.  To  this  matter  the  commanding  gen- 
eral wishes  you  to  give  your  attention. 

The  houses  on  Sullivan’s  Island  on  the  sea-shore  you  will  take  meas- 
ures to  remove  at  an  early  day. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F ’ THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  (7.,  October  20,  1862. 

Col.  W.  J.  Lawton, 

Albany , Dougherty  County , Ga. : 

Colonel:  Your  communication  of  the  7th  instant  has  just  been 
received,  and  I am  instructed  to  say  in  reply  that  attention  will  be 
given  to  the  defense  of  the  Chattahoochee  River,  steps  having  already 
been  taken  looking  to  that  important  measure.  The  enemy  will  scarcely 
send  so  far  into  the  country  a small  force,  that  could  be  handled  by  t he 
force  you  suggest.  The  mischief  to  be  anticipated  and  guarded  against 
is  the  ascent  of  the  river  by  gunboats.  You  do  not  mention  where 
your  regiment  (Second  Georgia  Cavalry)  is  now  stationed. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1 THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  October  20,  1862. 

I visited  this  day  the  defensive  works  on  the  river  below  the  city 
and  the  obstructions.  The  latter  are  considered  completed  by  the  offi- 
cers iu  command. 

1st.  Fort  Jackson,  3 miles  below  the  city  and  1£  miles  above  obstruc- 
tions, is  a very  weak  work,  mounting  two  8-iuch  columbiads,  seven  32- 
pounders,  oue  18-pounder— ten  guns.  Its  masonry  walls  are  almost  en- 
tirely exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire,  and  its  flanks  and  gorges  closed  by 
barrack  walls,  loop-holed.  It  is  entirely  under  command  of  a work  at 
Carstou’s  Bluff,  1J  miles  in  its  rear,  and  is  defective  in  many  respects. 
Moreover  its  armament  is  composed  of  guns  of  too  light  caliber.  I 
have  ordered  two  traverses  in  this  work  and  one  of  its  parapet  guns 
to  be  put  on  the  covered  way  and  a useless  18-pounder  removed  to  the 
lines. 

2d.  Battery  Lee,  near  and  just  below  Fort  Jackson,  is  a water  battery 
of  three  10-inch  mortars,  two  10-inch  columbiads,  three  8-inch  colum- 
biads, one  42-pounder,  and  oue  32  pounder,  iu  all  seven  guns  ; a good 
position,  but  its  rear  is  entirely  open  to  Carston’s  Bluff,  about  1^  miles 


646  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  FAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

off.  If  the  latter  were  occupied  by  au  euemy  with  rifled  or  heavy  guns 
both  of  these  works  could  not  be  held  more  than  one  or  two  hours. 
The  magazines  of  Battery  Lee  are  worse  than  useless,  being  so  damp 
(or  wet  rather)  that  powder  cannot  keep  in  them.  This  must  be  reme- 
died forthwith  by  draining  its  site  thoroughly  into  the  river,  by  means 
of  ditches,  levees,  and  a flood-gate. 

I then  visited  Lawton’s  Battery  of  seven  guns  (two  10-inch  colurn- 
biads,  two  8-inch  columbiads,  one  42  pounder,  one  32-pounder,  and  one 
32-pounder  rifled)  across  the  river  and  a little  above  Fort  Jackson.  It 
is  not  entirely  completed,  but  appears  to  have  good  traverses  between 
every  gun.  Its  new  magazine  is  not  yet  constructed;  the  old  one  is 
small  and  quite  damp. 

I then  visited  the  naval  battery,  on  a small  island  not  far  from  Law-* 
ton’s  Battery.  It  has  nine  guns  (seven  32-pounders,  two  24  pounders, 
Blakely),  it  is  unprovided  with  sufficient  traverses,  and  can  be  enfi- 
laded from  beyond  the  obstructions.  I have  ordered  one  of  its  guns 
to  be  removed  and  a large  traverse  constructed  in  its  place.  The 
magazine  is  in  as  bad  a condition  as  Lee’s  Battery.  The  defect  will 
have  to  be  remedied  in  the  same  manner.  But  the  site  of  all  these 
batteries  is  so  low  and  marshy  that  no  proper  magazines  can  be  con- 
structed without  settling  beneath  the  material  surface  of  the  ground, 
unless  built  on  piles.  Instructions  to  that  effect  have  been  given  to 
the  chief  district  engineer,  Captain  McCrady. 

On  a small  island  near  the  city  there  is  a small  three-gun  battery 
(three  32-pounders),  Hutchinson  Island  Battery,  enfilading  the  river,  and 
Screven’s  Causeway,  on  the  South  Carolina  side.  It  occupies  an  ad- 
vantageous position,  but  apparently  low  and  damp. 

Savannah,  October  21,  1862. 

I this  day  visited,  with  Brigadier-General  Mercer,  Colonel  Gonzales, 
chief  of  artillery,  and  Captains  Echols  and  McCrady,  Engineers,  the 
line  of  outworks,  commencing  with  Carston’s  Bluff,  on  Saint  Augustine 
Creek,  4 miles  south  of  Savannah.  It  is  an  open  battery  of  six  guns 
(two  8-inch  columbiads,  four  32-pounders),  on  a position  commanding 
the  navigation  of  creek  at  that  point,  about  300  yards  wide.  Yessels 
drawing  16  feet  water  can  navigate  it.  The  distance  of  Carston’s  Bluff 
Battery  from  the  obstructions  in  Savannah  Fiver  is  about  2 miles  and 
1 mile  from  obstructions  in  Saint  Augustine  Creek.  This  battery  is 
enfiladed  by  Oatland  Island,  about  700  yards  off,  and  taken  in  rear  by 
Whitemarsh  Island,  about  3,300  yards  off. 

I have  ordered  its  traverses  to  be  lengthened  sufficiently  ; also  door 
of  magazine  properly  protected,  and  those  islands  cleared  to  see  move- 
ments of  enemy. 

There  are  no  guns  bearing  up  the  Saint  Augustine  Creek.  This  is  a 
defect  which  must  be  remedied.  I have  ordered  a three-gun  battery  to 
be  constructed  at  Greenwich  Bluff,  an  advantageous  position  about  1 
mile  up  from  Carston’s  Bluff.  There  is  also  a three-gun  battery  on 
bluff  north  of  Carston’s  Bluff,  commanding  low  ground  between  the 
latter  and  Fort  Jackson.  Carston’s  Bluff  is  a most  important  position, 
which,  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  would  completely  command 
the  rear  of  Fort  Jackson  and  Battery  Lee  at  the  short  rifled-gun  range 
of  1J  miles. 

I will  here  remark  that  an  unfortunate  mistake  was  made  in  locating 
the  obstructions  and  defenses  at  Savannah  Eiver.  The  two  are  too  far 
apart,  1J  miles,  and  those  defenses  are  entirely  under  the  control  of 
batteries  placed  by  an  enemy  on  bluffs  from  Fort  Boggs  to  Carston’s 


-hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


647 


Bluff;  so  that  if  any  one  of  the  line  of  outworks  was  to  fall  into  his 
hands  the  series  of  them  would  necessarily  have  to  be  evacuated,  and 
the  enemy  would  then  have  the  way  open  to  establish  the  batteries 
already  referred  to  commanding  the  defenses  on  the  river. 

I then  visited  the  battery  of  twelve  guns  (two  8-inch  columbiads, 
two  42-pounders,  seven  32-pounders,  one  24-pounder  rifled,  two  8-inch 
navy  guns)  at  Thunderbolt,  on  Saint  Augustine  Creek,  above  Carston’s 
Bluff,  about  G miles  to  the  southwest  of  Savannah.  This  is  naturally  a 
strong  position,  with  good  traverses  between  the  guns  to  prevent  en- 
filade fire  from  Liberty  Island,  about  1J  miles  off,  excepting  the  two  ex- 
treme guns,  which  are  not  yet  sufficiently  protected.  Several  of  these 
[pins  are  also  exposed  to  rear  fire  from  the  Isle  of  Hope,  about  2 miles 
i>ff  in  a southwest  direction.  The  front  of  the  battery  is  exposed  to  direct 
fire  of  Whitemarsh  Island,  about  three  fourths  of  a mile  off  in  a south- 
east direction.  The  woods  on  this  and  Liberty  Islands  have  been  ordered 
ro  be  cleared.  Should  the  enemy  put  strong  and  numerous  batteries  ou 
I liese  three  islands  the  battery  at  Thunderbolt  might  be  made  untenable. 
It  is  also  liable  to  the  objections  already  referred  to  relative  to  Carston’s 
Bluff,  of  being  turned  in  case  any  of  the  other  outworks  should  fall. 

October  22,  1862. 

I went  this  day  to  visit  the  battery  fit  Beaulieu  of  eight  guns  (two 
12- pounders,  five  32-pounders,  one  12- pounder  rifled),  12  miles  from 
Savannah,  with  a fine  road  leading  to  it.  It  is  a good  position,  com- 
manding the  Vernon  River.  The  guns  are  well  protected  from  enfilade 
fire  by  heavy  traverses,  and  the  whole  battery  is  in  a very  fine  condi- 
tion, the  magazines  appearing  to  be  quite  dry.  Several  of  the  guns  are 
without  elevating  screws,  which  must  be  furnished.  I visited  also  the 
Isle  of  Hope  Causeway,  connecting  the  latter  island  to  the  main-land, 
with  a very  fine  road  to  Savannah,  only  about  8 miles  from  the  latter- 
place.  This  is  a very  important  line  of  communication,  and  one  by 
which  all  the  outer  works  cau  be  turned,  and  the  causeway  should  be 
commanded  by  a battery  for  two  guns  (siege  24- pounder  howitzers)  on 
-ach  side  of  it.  At  present  only  a rifle  pit  has  been  established,  with  a 
position  for  a field  gun. 


October  24,  1862. 

I visited  to-day  the  battery  at  Genesis  Point,  9 miles  below  Savannah, 
Albany  and  Gulf  Railroad,  and  25  miles  from  the  city,  and  commanding 
the  Great  Ogeechee.  It  is  armed  with  seven  guns  (one  8-inch  colum- 
biad,  one  42-pouuder,  and  five  32-pounders).  This  position  is  a strong 
one,  which  I am  informed  cannot  be  turned  or  flanked.  The  armament 
is  too  light.  Two  or  more  heavy  or  rifled  guns  should  be  sent  there 
immediately.  A row  of  piles  lias  been  driven  across  the  river  at  this 
point.  Vessels  drawing  13  feet  of  water  can  reach  the  important  rail- 
road bridge  across  the  Great’  Ogeechee.  The  traverses  m this  battery 
ire  too  weak  and  too  low.  They  must  be  raised  and  the  magazines 
better  protected.  The  hot-shot  furnace  is  badly  located  and  arranged; 
it  must  be  reconstructed  properly.  There  is  here,  besides,  one  light 
battery  of  eight  pieces. 

From  this  point  I could  see  Coffee  Bluff,  on  the  Little  Ogeechee, 
about  12  miles  from  Savannah,  to  which  there  is  a fine  and  straight 
shell  road.  That  is  an  important  position,  which  is  not  fortified,  beiug 
protected  only  by  one  light  battery  of  six  guns  and  one  rifled  6-pounder. 
This  bluff,  however,  does  not  command  a branch  of  the  Little  Ogeechee 


G48  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

(Grove  River),  which  empties  into  it  a short  distance  below  the  bluff; 
but  Rosedew  Island,  I am  informed,  commands  both,  and  should  be  at 
once  fortified,  and  armed  with  five  or  six  guns.  Heavy  vessels,  drawing 
15  feet  water,  I am  told,  can  get  up  to  the  Savannah,  Atlantic  and 
Gulf  Railroad  Bridge,  which  is  quite  a long  one.  A row  of  piles  has 
been  driven  across  the  river  1J  miles  below  said  bridge,  but  is  not  pro- 
tected by  any  works  or  guns. 

Grove  River  is  commanded  by  a light-  battery  of  six  pieces  and  one 
18-pounder  at  Stave’s  Landing,  without,  however,  any  parapet  to  protect 
the  guns.  The  same  is  the  case  at  Coffee  Bluff. 


October  27, 1862. 

I passed  in  review  to-day  about  4,000  men  of  troops  (infantry,  artil- 
lery, and  cavalry)  stationed  at  and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  city.  They 
looked  remarkably  well  and  moved  very  steadily. 

October  28, 1862. 

I visited  this  day  the  interior  line  of  defenses,  which  are  about  two- 
thirds  finished.  The  part  finished  is  too  strong  for  the  object  in  view, 
and  the  work  should  have  been  more  equally  distributed,  for  a portion 
of  the  most  important  or  exposed  part  is  still  unfinished ; the  part 
corresponding  to  the  left  flank  of  the  lines,  i.  e.,  from  Fort  Mercer  to 
Fort  Boggs.  The  latter  work  is  too  elaborately  finished  where  completed. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  October  22,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : In  obedience  to  instructions  from  department  headquar- 
ters, dated  October  13,  1862,  instructing  me  to  repair  to  Richmond, 
Va.,  on  special  service  with  the  War  Department,  1 left  this  city  on 
the  evening  of  the  same  day,  and  after  some  detention  on  the  route 
(via  Charlotte  to  Raleigh)  reached  Richmond  on  Thursday  eveuing, 
October  16.  I immediately  called  on  the  Hon.  William  Porcher  Miles, 
but  learned  that  he  was  too  unwell  to  receive  me.  At  his  request  I saw 
him  on  the  following  morning,  and  submitted  for  his  perusal  General 
Beauregard’s  letter  to  the  Adjutant  General. 

Mr.  Miles  being  still  indisposed,  I went  alone  to  the  Adjutant-Gen- 
eral and  placed  in  his  hands  the  dispatches  with  which  I was  charged. 
General  Cooper  expressed  a warm  interest  in  the  plan  proposed,  and 
immediately  submitted  it  to  the  consideration  of  the  Secretary  of  War, 
who  referred  it  to  Colonel  Gilmer,  Chief  of  Engineers.  After  explain- 
ing the  plan  in  all  its  details  to  Colonel  Gilmer  I left  it  in  his  hands 
until  the  next  morning. 

On  Saturday,  October  18,  Mr.  Miles,  by  appointment,  accompanied 
me  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  who,  after  perusing  General  Beauregard’s 
letter,  referred  it  with  his  warm  approval  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

Mr.  Miles  introduced  me  to  Mr.  Mallory,  and  after  a careful  examina- 
tion of  the  design,  expressed  his  deep  interest  in  the  undertaking  and 
his  entire  willingness  to  furnish  everything  in  his  power  to  make  its 
accomplishment  as  early  as  possible.  He  then  referred  the  matter  to 
Commander  [John  M.]  Brooke,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  Navy  Department, 
who  called  in  Mr.  Porter,  Naval  Constructor. 

Commander  Brook  weut  immediately  into  an  examination  of  the  plan 


C ii a r.  XXYI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


649 


and  prepared  his  report  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  approving  of  the 
design,  as  offering  a valuable  auxiliary  to  the  defense  of  rivers  and 

harbors.  _ _ _ , . 

I then  called  on  Colonel  Gilmer,  who  gave  me  some  valuable  advice 
in  reference  to  certain  details  of  the  design,  and  advised  that  some  ex- 
periments be  instituted,  not  to  interfere,  however,  with  the  immediate 
commencement  of  the  work.  After  leaving  Colonel  Gilmer  it  was  too 
late  to  see  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  obtain  his  order  for  the  ma- 
terials required.  I therefore  advised  with  Mr.  Miles  whether  it  would 
not  be  proper  for  me  to  leave  the  further  prosecution  ot  the  matter  in 
his  hands  and  immediately  return  to  my  post.  Mr.  Miles  replied  that 
nothing  more  remained  to  be  done  except  to  obtain  Mr.  Mallory’s  acqui- 
escence, which  he  would  endeavor  to  obtain  on  the  following  Monday. 

I thereupon  dispatched  a telegram  to  department  headquarters,  stat- 
ing briefly  what  had  been  done,  aud  reporting  my  intended  immediate 
departure  for  Charleston,  where  I arrived  on  this  morning. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

servant,  _ 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain  Engineers , Fro  visional  Army  Confederate  States. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  G\,  October* 22,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District : 

General  : I am  instructed  to  direct  you  to  send  with  the  least  delay 
practicable  to  Pocotaligo  a force  of  about  2,000  men  for  temporary  serv- 
ice, supplied  and  provided  as  directed  in  a communication  from  these 
headquarters  addressed  to  Brigadier-General  Gist  on  the  14th  instant. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  22,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  Adams  Run , S.  C. : 

Hold  about  1,000  infantry  in  readiness  (provided  and  supplied  as  pre- 
viouslv  directed)  to  move  by  rail  to  Pocotaligo  at  a moment’s  notice. 

J THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  22, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  Adams  Run , S.  C. : 

Dispatch  the  force  to  Pocotaligo  as  soon  as  transportation  is  ready. 

THoMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  22,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  Adams  Run , S.  C. : 

Of  course  send  off  any  troops  for  which  you  have  transportation.  As 


650  COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  FAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

soon  as  the  troops  here  shall  have  been  disembarked  at  Pocotaligo  trans- 
portation will  be  sent  for  you.  See  your  last  troops  off  and  be  ready  to 
move  with  them. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


• Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  22, 1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Savannah , Ga.: 

Under  circumstances  reported  by  Colonel  Walker  have  directed  re-en- 
forcements held  ready  to  be  sent  him  from  Ripley’s  command.  Await 
your  final  orders. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  October  22,  1862 — 5 p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff, ',  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Send  re-enforcements  to  Pocotaligo  or  to  Salkehatchie  Bridge  to  re- 
port to  Col.  W.  S.  Walker;  also  one  operator  with  the  troops. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


• Savannah,  Ga.,  October  22,  1862—7  p.  m. 

Col.  C.  J.  Colcock,  Grahamville , S.  C.: 

Make  a reconnaissance  with  disposable  force  toward  Bee’s  Creek  to 
ascertain  position  and  movements  of  the  enemy,  and,  if  possible,  make 
a dash  at  him. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  22,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Savannah , Ga.,  via  Augusta  : 

Have  ordered  the  forces  here  and  at  Adams  Run  (previously  directed 
to  be  held  in  readiness)  to  move  to  re-enforce  Walker  at  Pocotaligo. 
Walker  reports  enemy  in  possession  of  railroad  at  Coosawhatchie.  Let 
me  know  where  you  are. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  October  22, 1862 — 9 p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff , Charleston,  S.  C.: 

All  right;  I will  avrait  here  the  result.  Walker  reports  driving  back 
the  enemy. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  October  22, 1862— 10  p.  m. 
Col.  C.  J.  Colcock,  Grahamville,  S.  C. : 

Troops  are  beiug  sent  to-night  to  support  Colonel  Harrison  or  to  cut 


hal*.  XXVI.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC CONFEDERATE.  651 

ff  retreat  of  enemy  on  Bee’s  Creek ; circumstances  must  decide.  Wait 
o act  with  them,  but  send  scouts  toward  Bee’s  Creek. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  October  22,  1862 — 10.30  p.  m. 
)ol.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , S.  C.  : 

Would  it  not  be  preferable  to  send  the  two  additional  regiments  and 
ne  battery  with  Colcock’s  cavalry  to  cut  oil'  enemy’s  retreat  at  Bee’s 
Jreek  ? Re- enforcements  are  being  sent  you  Irom  Charleston.  Answer. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  First  Military  Dist.  of  S.  C., 

No.  5.  j Charleston , October  22,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist  will  proceed  immediately  with  three  regi- 
aents  and  a light  battery  of  his  command  to  Pocotaligo  to  re-enforce 
lie  troops  in  that  vicinity  now  threatened  by  the  enemy.  The  command 
dll  move  without  baggage  and  take  three  days’  cooked  provisions. 

II.  Brigadier-General  Gist  will  give  such  instructions  to  the  com- 
aanding  officer  on  James  Island  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  public 
ervice  during  his  absence. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  Genera  l,  Comm  anding . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  22,  1862. 

leneral  G.  T.  BeauregaRd,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Hagood  and  Gist  will  be  on  the  spot  with  their  forces  before  dawn. 
Droops  moving  rapidly. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  22,  1862. 

loL  W.  S.  Walker, 

Commanding , Pocotaligo , S.  C. : 

Hold  your  gound  at  your  position.  General  Gist  has  started  with 
ibout  2,000  men  to  re-enforce  you,  besides  re-enforcements  from  General 
lagood’s  command.  Fight  at  every  bridge. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  22,  1862. 

joL  W.  S.  Walker, 

Commanding , Pocotaligo , S.  C.: 

Re  enforcements  are  on  the  way.  Have  the  road  watched,  so  that  the 
iroper  point  of  disembarkation  of  troops  may  be  made  known  to  trains 
is  they  arrive. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


652 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.  XXVL 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  23, 1862. 

Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , S.  V . : 

General  Beauregard  absent  at  Savannah.  Affair  at  Pocotaligo  appar-J 
ently  ovpr.  Enemy  reported  to  have  re-embarked. 

THOMAS  JOEDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  October  23, 1862. 
Col.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , S.  C.: 

The  two  additional  regiments  and  batteries  left  here  before  your 
telegram  was  received.  They  are  at  your  disposal  on  the  road. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  October  23,  1862 — 12  p.  m. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.,  Richmond , Va.  : 

I must  call  the  attention  of  the  department  to  the  necessity  for  more 
troops  from  Eantowles  Creek  to  Savannah  Eiver,  a distance  of  75  miles,  i 
only  about  2,500  men  being  available  for  that  purpose.  Colonel  Walker: 
deserves  promotion  for  meritorious  services,  and,  moreover,  when  re- 1 
enforcements  are  sent  to  him  he  is  ranked  by  the  colonel  commanding 
them. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  October  25,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : Special  Orders,  No.  195,  current  series,  from  department 
headquarters,  directs  me  to  call  on  the  commanding  general  for  the  men 
and  material  that  I may  find  necessary  for  a prolonged  and  successful  re- 
sistance to  any  attack  which  the  resources  of  the  enemy  may  enable  him 
to  make. 

Did  no  other  reasons  than  those  purely  military  advise  an  attack  on 
Charleston  by  the  enemy  it  would  be  easy  to  estimate  the  force  and 
material  necessary  to  check  him.  Thus  far  this  vicinity  bas  been  com- 
paratively safe,  and  it  is  clear  to  my  mind  that  no  attack  would  have 
been  made  had  not  the  abandonment  of  the  mouth  of  tbe  Stono  Eiver 
invited  tbe  attack.  It  had  been  my  intention,  when  formerly  in  com- 
mand here,  to  hold  it  and  continue  to  fortify,  believing  that  such  occu- 
pation would  have  thrown  tbe  base  of  tbe  enemy’s  operations  to  tbe 
Edisto,  keeping  much  difficult  ground  and  several  rivers  between  bim 
and  tbe  city,  and  materially  lessened  tbe  number  of  men  necessary  for  tbe 
defense  from  any  approach  by  land.  The  mouth  of  tbe  Stono,  however, 
being  in  possession  of  tbe  enemy,  giving  bim  a base  of  operations  within 
a few  miles  of  tbe  city,  necessitates  tbe  occupation  of  our  extensive  lines 
and  works  on  James  Island  and  a constant  vigilance  by  a very  consid- 
erable force.  With  regard  to  tbe  men  and  material  necessary  to  insure 
a prolonged  and  successful  resistance  in  that  direction  1 beg  to  refer  to 
tbe  statement  of  Brigadier-General  Gist,  commanding,  which  1 agree 
with.  Tbe  force  which  be  calls  for  will  undoubtedly  be  necessary  if  the 


Chap.  XXVI.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  653 

attack  is  made  by  land  and  sea.  Still  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the 
enemy  can  immediately  spare  the  number  of  troops  from  his  armies  in 
the  North  and  West  for  the  attack  here,  and  as  the  possession  of  this 
city  would  give  him  moral  rather  than  military  advantages  in  the  pros- 
ecution of  the  war,  it  may  well  be  believed  that  our  greatest  danger  lies 
in  a naval  attack  by  his  iron-clad  fleet,  so  soon  as  it  can  be  prepared  for 
service.  The  means  of  defense  which  we  have  against  such  an  attack 
are  well  known  to  the  commanding  general.  Our  fortifications,  strength- 
ened and  increased  as  they  have  been,  are  formidable,  and  may  suflice 
against  an  attack  of  wooden  vessels.  Against  iron -clad  vessels,  however, 
the  case  is  different.  If  they  succeed  in  making  a rendezvous  inside  the 
bar  it  is  probable  that  they  can  at  once  run  past  the  forts  and  open  tire 
on  the  city.  The  means  which  first  occur  for  preventing  their  passage, 
obstructing  the  passage  between  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  have  been 
tried,  and  I regret  to  say  that  up  to  this  time  have  not  succeeded.  Some- 
thing of  the  same  kind  was  tried  when  I wras  in  command  and  held  for 
a while  in  the  position  where  parts  of  the  lately  constructed  boom  are 
now  lying,  but  the  same  obstacles  were  encountered  in  making  the  ob- 
structions permanent.  I had  determined  to  give  up  the  lower  position 
and  obstruct  the  upper  channels  between  the  shoals,  nearer  the  city, 
where  the  force  of  the  tide  is  much  less  and  where  the  holding  ground 
is  good  and  secure.  That  we  may  have  the  benefit  of  obstructions  to 
some  extent  I would  recommend  that  when  those  having  the  matter  in 
charge  are  satisfied  that  the  lower  boom  is  impracticable  the  material 
may  be  used  for  blocking  the  harbor  in  the  channels  between  Fort  John- 
son and  the  Middle  Ground,  between  Middle  Ground  and  Crab  Bank 
and  Hog  Island  Channel,  near  Sullivan’s  Island.  This  would  delay  the 
enemy  under  fire  of  the  outer  forts  and  be  of  some  utility.  I fear  that 
laying  it  in  sections  or  placing  it  in  any  way  between  Sumter  and  Moul- 
trie will  be  absolutely  useless. 

Preparations  for  explosive  obstructions  in  the  channels,  I under- 
stand, are  in  progress,  but  I have  not  learned  of  their  having  been  so 
far  advanced  as*  to  assist  in  the  defense  of  the  harbor.  The  main  de- 
fense at  the  command  of  the  military  authorities,  therefore,  consists  in 
the  forts  and  batteries  around  the  harbor. 

Bequisitions  have  been  made  by  the  commanding  general  for  an  ad- 
ditional supply  of  heavy  ordnance,  comprising  some  fifty  heavy  guns, 
with  their  proper  ammunition.  I believe  the  requisitions  have  been 
approved  at  Biclimond,  and  that  they  will  be  supplied  so  far  as  the 
means  at  the  command  of  the  Government  will  admit.  These,  how- 
ever, are  limited  and  transportation  slow.  I do  not  think  it  of  any 
use  to  make  requisition  for  material  until  those  requisitions  are  filled. 
It  will  of  course  be  advisable  to  strengthen  even  then  ; for  delay,  if  ac- 
corded us,  will  of  course  strengthen  the  enemy  also. 

I will  briefly  notice  the  works  for  the  defense  of  the  harbor  and  state 
what  additional  force  is,  in  my  opinion,  necessary,  and  what  disposition 
of  means  at  hand  and  already  acquired  would  be  advisable. 

Morris  Island:  The  work  extending  across  the  island  at  a distance  of 
about  2,400  yards  from  Fort  Sumter  protects  the  island  to  the  south- 
ward, and  will  while  held  effectually  prevent  the  erection  of  batteries 
against  that  castle.  It  has  five  guns  mounted  and  two  others  waiting 
for  carriages.  The  garrison  consists  .of  two  companies  of  artillery  and 
Col.  B.  F.  Graham’s  regiment  of  infantry.  The  position,  in  my  opinion, 
requires  an  addition  of  two  or  more  long-range  guns  to  enable  the  gar- 
rison to  reach  transports  lying  inside  the  bar.  It  also  requires  a light 
battery  of  four  pieces.  The  garrison,  with  the  addition  of  one  company 


654 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XXVI 

ot  artillery,  will  be  sufficient  to  hold  its  position  for  a long  time,  th 
works  being  completed.  This  is  being  done,  and  it  is  hoped  will  b 
pushed  forward  rapidly. 

Breach  Inlet  Battery,  Sullivan’s  Island,  mounts  eight  guns,  for  th 
protection  of  the  narrow  inlet  east  of  Sullivan’s  Island.  It  is  mannei 
by  one  company  of  South  Carolina  Infantry  and  supported  by  two  com 
pauies  of  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  Its  position  i 
quite  strong,  and  vessels  will  have  to  lay  some  distance  from  the  shor< 
in  cannonading  it.  It  would  be  very  difficult  for  them  to  shell  the  garl 
rison  out  or  dismount  the  guns,  and  still  more  for  them  to  land  undei 
the  fire.  The  works  are  being  strengthened.  The  addition  of  a longij 
range  rifled  gun  would  be  desirable.  \ 

The  Beauregard  Battery,  Sullivan’s  Island,  mounting  six  guns,  o 
which  but  two  are  of  use  against  a naval  attack  or  landing,  protect: 
Fort  Moultrie  from  a land  approach.  Its  present  artillery  garrison  i 
sufficient  tor  its  guns.  The  addition  of  a long-range  gun  is  desirable i 
The  execution  of  wTork  on  the  sea  flank  has  beeu  ordered  but  not  com 
menced,  and  obstructions  in  front  of  the  work  are  desirable. 

The  works  noticed  above  are  the  outworks  for  our  harbor  defenses 
and  are  serviceable  in  preventing  the  land  approaches  of  the  enemy 
Morris  or  Sullivan’s  Islands.  Properly  fought  they  will  retard  thesl 
attacks  as  much  as  outworks  can  be  expected  to  do. 

Fort  Moultrie,  Sullivan’s  Island,  mounting  thirty-seven  guns,  com 
manding  the  various  channels  and  crossing  fire  with  Fort  Sumter,  iJ 
old  and  of  not  very  high  command.  Nevertheless  it  would  be  very 
efficient  against  any  wooden  vessels.  Its  only  effect  against  iron-clad' 
ships  would  be  from  the  shock  of  its  full  battery,  if  well  served.  1 
would  at  this  time  suggest  nothing  except  the  banding  and  rifling  ol 
six  smooth-bore  32-pounders  now  on  the  water  faces  of  the  fort.  The 
garrison  could  hardly  be  increased  with  advantage. 

Enfilade  Batteries,  Sullivan’s  Island,  now  armed  with  five  10  inch  and 
one  8 inch  columbiads,  are  very  powerful,  intended  to  mount  four  ad- 
ditional heavy  guns  and  are  in  process  of  completion.  It  is  to  be  hoped 
that  they  will  be  finished  and  armed.  The  garrison  will  require  in- 
creasing by  another  company  when  the  armament  is  finished. 

A battery  of  light  artillery  and  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers are  on  the  island  for  support  of  the  various  positions.  As  an 
infantry  attack  or  landing  on  the  island  is  doubtful,  certainly  until 
after  a long  and  continued  cannonade,  it  would  seem  to  me  unadvisablej 
to  increase  the  permanent  garrison  of  the  island.  The  location  of  the 
troops  outside  of  the  forts  in  case  of  a naval  attack  is  to  be  in  the  Beau- 
regard Battery  and  behind  the  sand  hills  to  the  eastward  to  prevent  a 
landing  west  of  Breach  Inlet.  The  light  battery  would  be  with  the 
troops  behind  the  sand  hills.  These  positions  must  be  varied  accord- 
ing to  the  discretion  of  the  commanding  officer. 

It  would  be  well  perhaps  to  have  a body  of  troops  stationed  at  Mount! 
Pleasant  in  reserve,  for  the  support  of  the  troops  on  Sullivan’s  Island, 
service  in  Christ  Church  and  vicinity,  and  the  support  of  works  pro- 
jected at  Hobcaw.  I would  think  two  full  regiments  desirable,  with  a 
battalion  of  cavalry  and  two  batteries  of  light  artillery,  if  possible,  of 
long  range. 

Fort  Sumter  being  the  main  defense  of  the  channel  requires  and  is 
receiving  especial  attention.  The  barbette  batteries  are  becoming  ex- 
ceedingly heavy,  and  in  my  opinion  should  be  strengthened  by  as  many 
10-inch  guns  as  can  be  procured.  I should  advise  that  all  the  32- 
pounders  which  may  be  fit  should  be  rifled  and  banded  and  supplied 


Cmai-.  XXVI  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


65  5 


with  bolt  shot  for  iron-clad  boats  as  soon  as  possible,  and  that  the  case- 
mates in  the  second  tier  should  be  armed  with  rifled  pieces  as  soon  as 
they  are  embrasured.  Ten-inch  guns  would  be  preferable,  but  it  is  feared 
would  be  too  heavy  for  the  arch.  Three  10-inch  mortars  in  the  fort  re- 
quire new  beds;  those  which  they  have  are  useless  unless  provided  with 
elevating  screws.  A cupola,  now  constructing  under  the  supervision  of 
the  Ordnance  Department  lor  filling  shells  with  molten  iron,  is  slowly 
being  completed.  Much  of  the  engineer  work  lags,  and  under  present 
arrangement  all  that  can  be  done  by  the  commanding  officer  is  to  re- 
port. I would  suggest  that  the  officers  of  the  different  departments 
may  be  instructed  to  push  the  work  on  this  fort  and  supply  the  material 
required  as  speedily  as  may  be. 

Should  the  obstructions  be  moved  to  the  inner  harbor  heavy  guns  on 
the  western  face  of  Fort  Sumter  will  be  very  necessary.  They  could 
be  obtained  from  the  requisitions  already  in  when  supplied.  The  gar- 
rison will  want  two  more  companies. 

Fort  Johnson,  James  Island,  now  armed  with  two  guns,  will  become 
important  when  the  obstructions  are  placed  in  the  inner  harbor.  Fort 
Ripley,  on  the  Middle  Ground,  will  also  require  the  guns  which  have 
been  called  for.  These  and  the  other  projected  works  in  the  interior 
harbor  will  require  a full  regiment  of  artillerists. 

Powerful  auxiliaries  to  the  defense  of  the  harbor  are  the  iron-clad 
gunboats  of  the  Navy.  Properly  manned,  they  wifi  assist  in  the  greatest 
degree  in  increasing  the  chances  of  a successful  defense,  and  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  no  exertion  will  be  spared  to  assist  their  efficiency. 

For  a prolonged  resistance  our  powder  and  other  ammunition  is  not 
sufficient,  not  being  more  than  100  rounds  per  gun.  It  should  be  in- 
creased by  150,000  pounds  of  powder  at  least,  if  it  were  possible. 

I append  a recapitulation  of  increased  force,  as  estimated  by  General 
Gist  and  myself  as  desirable. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Hdqrs.  Fbrst  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , October  25,  1862. 

Increase  of  numerical  force  called  for  by  Brig.  Gen.  JS.  R.  Gist. 


For  defense  of  James  Island  and  the  main  : 

Of  all  arms 17,661 

One  light  artillery 100 

One  company  artillery 100 

200 

For  Morris  Island : 

One  company  artillery  for  Enfilade  Battery 100 

Sullivan’s  Island: 

Two  regiments  infantry 2, 000 

One  battalion  cavalry 400 

Two  light  batteries 200 

2, 600 

For  Mount  Pleasant : 

One  regiment  artillery  for  works  in  progress 1,000 

Total  numerical  increase  called  for 21, 561 


R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


656 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MIO.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVl. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.]  . 

Headquarters  James  Island  and  tiie  Main, 
Charleston , IS.  C.,  October  19,  1SG2. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District  of  'South  Carolina: 

General:  In  compliance  with  your  request  that-  I should  report 
what  additional  forces  are  necessary  to  a proper  defense  of  .the  city  of 
Charleston  from  an  attack  by  way  of  James  Island  and  the  main  land, 
I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  inclosed  estimate,  which  I consider  as 
absolutely  essential. 

In  submitting  this  report  I would  respectfully  call  your  attention  to 
the  want  of  heavy  artillerists.  We  have  several  important  batteries 
completed  on  the  main  land  that  are  without  guns  or  artillerists.  The 
guns  might  be  supplied  of  the  caliber  12  and  24  pounders,  but  we 
would  have  no  artillerists  to  man  them. 

I submit  a statement  of  the  present  effective  force  and  of  what  addi- 
tional forces  are  necessary  against  an  attack  by  a force  not  exceeding 
30,000  men. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  GTST, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Statement  of  forces  required  for  a proper  defense  of  Charleston  by  way  of 
James  Island  and  the  main  land. 


James  Island : 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry ,. 

6, 000 

1, 500 

200 

4 

— 

7,700 

City  of  Charleston : 

Infantry 

Artillery.. .• 

Cavalry 

2, 500 

250 

150 

2, 900 

Defense  of  the  main  movable  column : 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry 

10, 000 

'750 

500 

11,250 

21,850 

STATEMENT  OF  EFFECTIVE  FORCES. 


James  Island: 

Infantry 1,  680 

Artillery 1,085 

Cavalry 145 

2, 910 


City  of  Charleston  and  the  main : 


Infantry 906 

Artillery 190 

Cavalry 183 

1,279 


Total 


4,189 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  correspondence;  etc. CONFEDERATE. 


657 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Savannah , October  28,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah , Ga. : 

General  : Before  leaving  on  mjr  return  to  Charleston  I think  it  ad 
visable  to  leave  with  y.ou  a summary  of  the  additions  and  changes  I 
have  ordered  to  the  works  intended  for  the  defense  of  this  city,  and 
which  ought  to  be  executed  as ’promptly  as  practicable,  commencing 
with  those  on  the  river  and  at  Cars  ton’s  Bluff. 

1st.  The  magazines  of  several  of  the  river  batteries  must  be  thoroughly 
drained  at  once  and  repaired.  They  are  now  unfit  for  use  on  account 
of  their  dampness,  and  the  one  at  Battery  Lawton  has  hot  yet  been  com- 
menced. The  position  selected  for  it  is  too  far  to  the  rear.  It  should  be 
closer  to  the  battery,  and  well  drained.  Not  a moment  should  be  lost  in 
its  construction.  The  service  magazine  should  have  its  entrance  en- 
larged and  strengthened  at  the  top.  The  magazine  doors  at  Fort  Jack- 
son  do  not  open  freely ; this  defect  must  be  corrected. 

2d.  Good  and  strong  traverses  must  be  constructed  as  directed  in  the 
naval  battery  to  prevent  enfilading. 

3d.  The  two  8-inch  coluinbiads  on  Fort  Jackson  must  be  separated, 
and  one  of  the  barbette  32-pounders  removed  for  a traverse  to  be  con- 
structed in  its  place ; must  be  put  in  position  outside,  in  rear  of  the 
glacis,  to  fire  down  the  river. 

4th.  Those  river  works  when  garrisoned  must  always  be  provided 
with  several  days’  provisions  on  hand. 

5th.  The  mortar  chamber  in  Captain  Lama’s  battery  is  too  small;  the 
mortar  should  be  mounted  as  soon  as  practicable  and  the  men  drilled  to  it. 

6th.  It  would  be  important,  if  practicable,  to  lay  a boom  obstruction 
across  the  river  at  or  near  Hutchinson  Island  under  the  guns  of  its 
battery  and  of  Fort  Boggs,  and  a three  or  four  gun  battery  should  also 
be  constructed  at  Screven’s  Ferry  Landing. 

7th.  Carston’s  Bluff  must  be  made  an  inclosed  work,  with  two  mortars 
and  four  additional  heavy  guns  added  to  its  armament.  Two  of  these 
guns  must  be  placed  so  as  to  bear  up  the  Augustine  River. 

8th.  A three-gun  battery  must  be  constructed  at  Greenwich  Point,  on 
Augustine  River,  to  cross  fire  with  the  two  guns  just  referred  to  and 
enfilade  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  Whitemarsh  Island,  constructed 
against  Carston’s  Bluff. 

9tb,  One  rifled  32-pounder  must  be  added  to  the  Thunderbolt  Battery,' 
and  one  of  its  8-inch  shell  guns  must  be  changed  in  position  as  ordered, 
and  the  embrasure  of  its  8-inch  columbiad  must  be  reduced  in  size. 
Several  traverses  must  be  raised  and  lengthened.  The  upper  slope 
of  the  battery  in  front  of  several  of  its  guns  must  be  increased. 

10th.  A new  battery  for  four  24-pounder  howitzers  on  siege  carriages, 
with  some  rifle  pits,  must  be  constructed  to  command  the  Isle  of  Hope 
Causeway. 

11th.  Several  of  the  guns  of  Fort  Boggs  and  battery  at  Beaulieu  are 
in  want  of  elevating  screws,  and  some  in  the  latter  battery  require 
smaller  trunnion  plates,  and  the  upper  slope  of  its  parapet  must  be 
lowered  in  several  places. 

12th.  A new  battery  and  rifle  pits  must  be  constructed  on  Rosedew 
Island  for  five  or  six  pieces,  of  which  one  or  two  should  be  rifled  guns, 
so  as  to  command  the  Little  Ogeechee.  One  rifled  24-pouuder  is  already 
on  its  way  to  this  city  from  Atlanta  for  said  work. 

JL3th.  Two  rifled  guns  (one  32-pounder  and  one  24-pounder)  must  be 

42  R R — YOL  XIV 


658  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XX VI. 

added  to  the  work  on  Genesis  Point,  and  one  of  its  32-pounders  must 
be  changed  in  position,  as  ordered,  to  rake  the  piling  across  the  river. 
Its  traverses  must  be  raised  and  lengthened,  and  a mortar  constructed, 
to  protect  the  two  32-pounders  now  raking  the  obstrucrion  from  being 
enfiladed.  Its  magazines  must  be  better  protected,  and  its  hot-shot 
furnace  reconstructed  as  ordered.  A more  efficient  commander  than 
the  present  one  would,  I think,  be  required  for  this  important  position, 
and  whoever  is  sent  there  should  visit  first  the  work  at  Beaulieu  to  see  ! 
its  fine  condition. 

14th.  A proper  sunken  battery  should  be  constructed  for  the  protection 
of  the  men  and  horses  of  all  light  batteries  intended  for  the  de  fense  of  i 
water  courses.  This  applies  especially  to  the  light  batteries  now  on 
the  Little  and  Great  Ogeechee. 

15th.  No  provocation  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  to  draw  the  fire  of  our 
batteries  should  induce  officers  in  command  to  waste  in  return  their 
ammunition.  They  should  reserve  their  fire  until  the  enemy  comes  ! 
within  point-blank  range  of  a 32-pounder,  placing  meanwhile  all  the 
garrison  under  close  cover.  When  they  fire  let  them  open  simulta- 
neously  with  all  their  guns  upon  the  foremost  vessel,  in  order  to  sink 
it,  aiming  rather  low. 

16th.  Two  mortars  have  been  ordered  from  Charleston  for  Port  Jack- 
son  and  Cars  ton’s  Bluff  to  fire  on  river  obstructions,  and  in  respect  to  . 
the  latter  battery  to  fire  also  on  Whitemarsh  Island.  They  must  be 
placed  in  position  as  soon  as  they  shall  have  arrived  and  provided  with 
ammunition,  &c.,  and  a detail  of  men  drilled  at  them  regularly. 

17th.  Ship- Yard  Creek,  in  rear  of  Beaulieu,  must  be  guarded  by  a light 
battery,  as  already  indicated  for  the  Little  and  Great  Ogeechee. 

18th.  Signal  stations  must  be  established  forthwith  to  communicate  I 
with  each  other  at.  Genesis  Point,  Rosedew  Island,  Beaulieu,  the  Isle  I 
of  Hope  Causeway,  Thunderbolt,  Carston’s  Bluff,  Fort  Jackson,  Fort 
Boggs,  and  the  city. 

19th.  The  two  large  observatories  or  spindles  toward  the  mouth  of 
Savannah  River  must  be  destroyed  forthwith  for  fear  of  their  falling 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  uninjured. 

20th.  Brigade  drills  must  be  commenced  at  once  wherever  practicable, 
and  regiments  must  not  be  armed  with  weapons  of  more  than  two  dif- 
ferent calibers,  to  prevent  confusion  in  providing  them  with  ammunition. 

21st.  The  male  residents  of  this  city  not  liable  to  conscription  must  be  j 
organized  at  once  by  the  civil  authorities  for  the  defense  of  their  homes 
and  firesides  (in  case  of  an  attack  upon  the  city)  into  companies  and 
regiments.  They  will  thus  afford  material  assistance  to  the  Confederate  . 
troops  in  the  defense  of  Savannah. 

22d.  Aiqple  provision  must  be  made  by  the  civil  authorities  for  the 
removal  of  the  women  and  children  to  a safe  locality  outside  of  the  city,  j 
the  farther  the  better.  This  removal  should  take  place  on  the  first  ap-  j| 
pearance  of  real  danger. 

23d.  A sufficient  number  of  switch -lock  keys  should  be  provided  at 
railroad  depots  for  immediate  use  in  case  of  necessity. 

24tli.  The  Georgia  Central  Railroad  will  furnish  a reserve  train,  to  be 
stationed  at  Ashley  River  Depot,  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  troops 
without  delay  from  Charleston  to  the  South  Carolina  lower  parishes  or  to 
Georgia.  Another  one  will  be  held  in  readiness  at  the  depot  of  the  Cen- 
tral Railroad  in  this  city  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  troops  toward 
Charleston  when  required. 

25th.  The  troops  of  this  district  must  be  vaccinated  gradually. 

26th.  The  woods  of  the  island  fronting  the  outworks  must  be  cut 
down  as  soon  as  possible  wherever  in  too  dangerous  proximity. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


659 


27th.  The  city  must  always  be  provided  with  at  least  fifteen  days’ 
provisions  for  10,000  men,  with  the  same  quantity  in  a convenient  depot, 
not  nearer  than  30  miles  from  the  city,  along  the  Central  Railroad,  so 
as  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  enemy  in  eyery  contingency. 

28th.  Ample  supply  of  fuel  should  be  made  for  the  steamboats  and 
for  the  troops  forming  the  garrison  of  the  city. 

29th.  The  city  authorities  must  see  that  the  supply  of  water  be  ample 
for  all  emergencies  in  case  of  a bombardment. 

Respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

P.  S. — It  is  ordered  that  all  laborers  employed  on  the  interior  of  the 
city  lines  of  defenses,  except  those  employed  on  the  magazines,  should 
be  at  once  concentrated $ first  on  the  salient  faces  of  the  advanced 
lunettes  and  cremailleres,  except  those  from  Fort  Mercer  inclusive  to 
Fort  Brown,  then  on  the  salient  faces  of  the  retired  lunettes  or  redans, 
then  on  the  shoulder  faces  of  the  first  class  and  afterward  of  the  sec- 
ond. The  banquettes  of  Fort  Brown  must  be  put  forthwith  in  proper 
condition.  Ho  labor  must  be  expended  on  the  finish  of  the  above  works, 
which  must  be  put,  with  their  batteries,  magazines,  &c.,  in  a fighting 
condition  as  soon  as  possible,  even  if  we  should  have  to  work  day  and 
night.  Should  you  not  have  laborers  enough  for  such  a purpose  you 
must  call  on  the  Governor  of  the  State  for  additional  ones.  I earnestly 
request  that  the  utmost  activity  should  be  shown  in  every  department 
of  the  service,  so  as  to  be  ready  in  time  for  any  intended  attack  of  the 
enemy.  I have  called  for  five  10-inch  or  13-inch  mortars  and  twenty 
heavy  or  long-range  guns  (five  10-inch  and  five  8-inch  columbiads,  five 
42-pdrs.  rifled,  and  five  32-pdrs.  rifled),  which  will  be  distributed  to  the 
best  advantage  when  received  on  river  defenses  and  line  of  outworks. 


Armament  of  interior  line  of  works  at  Savannah,  Ga.,  October  28,  1862. 


Batteries. 

8-inch  siege 
howitzers. 

42-pounder 

carronades. 

32-pounders, 

long. 

32-pounders, 
short  navy. 

32-pounder 

carronades. 

xn 

gs 

P fl 
© © 

o 

CO 

18-pounders, 

long. 

24-pounder 

howitzers. 

Total. 

' 

Remarks. 

No.  1 

1 

1 

2 

No.  2 

1 

1 

No.  3 

1 

1 

No.  4 

1 

1 

No.  5 

1 

1 

1 

3 

No.  6 

1 

1 

No.  7 

1 

1 

No.  8 

1 

1 

No.  9 

1 

1 

Reamed  out  from 
24-pounder. 

No.  10 

1 

1 

No.  11 

1 

1 

No.  12 

1 

1 

No.  13 

1 

1 

No.  14 

No.  15 

1 

1 

Not  yet  mounted. 

No.  16 

1 

1 

No.  17 

1 

1 

No.  18 

1 

1 

Reamed  out  from 
24-pounder. 

Fort  Mercer 

2 

1 

3 

Cr&maill&re  between  Fort 

2 

*2 

1 

1 

6 

Mercer  aud  Fort  Brown. 
Fort  Brown 

4 

*1 

1 

6 

Cedar  Hill 

1 

1 

2 

Total  number  of  guns. 

4 

2 

3 

6 

6 

7 

5 

4 

37 

Reamed  out. 


660  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Names  of  batteries,  with  number  of  guns  and  caliber,  in  the  outivorlcs  and  river  defenses  of 

Savannah. 


Batteries. 

Mortars,  10-inch. 

Columbiads. 

Smooth-bore  guns. 

Rifled  guns. 

Blakely,  24-pounder. 

Navy  shell  gun,  8- 

inch. 

10-inch. 

8-inch. 

42-pounder. 

i 

rs 

a 

p 

c 

Cu 

C<l 

ec 

<B 

'P 

a 

p 

o 

pH 

CO 

32-pounder. 

24-pounder. 

12-pounder. 

Thunberbolt  Battery 

2 

2 

7 

1 

2 

Lee  Battery 

3 

2 

3 

1 

7 

Lawton  Battery _ _ 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

.Fort  Jackson 

2 

7 

1 

Naval  Battery 

7 

2 

Hutchinson  Island  Battery 

3 

Bay  Batteries ....  

*2 

1 

3 

Oarstnn’s  Bln  ff  Battery 

2 

4 

Fort  Boggs 

1 

1 

14 

Beaulieu  Battery 

2 

5 

1 

Genesis  Point  Battery. . . . 

1 

1 

5 

Total  number  of  guns 

6 

5 

13 

7 

63 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

Z 

* Not  yet  in  position,  but  will  be  in  a few  days. 


Bespectfully  submitted. 


A.  T.  CUNNINGHAM, 
First  Lieutenant , Artillery  and  Ordnance . 


Official: 

Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Eegt.  Cavalry  South  Carolina  Yols., 

Graliamville , October  30,  1862. 


Brigadier-General  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  of  calling  3 our  attention  to  the  limited  number 
of  troops  in  the  district  of  country  extending  from  the  Coosawhatchie 
Biver  to  the  Oketie,  a distance  by  a direct  line  of  25  miles  (which  of 
course  is  greatly  increased  by  the  coast  line),  which  I have  the  honor  to 
command,  under  Colonel  Walker.  Within  this  section  of  country  are 
two  prominent  points  to  be  defended:  The  village  of  Graham ville  and 
the  railroad  and  turnpike  bridges  over  the  Coosawhatchie  Biver.  The 
first  is  only  7 miles  from  a point  at  which  the  Abolitionists  can  land ; 
the  second  only  2.  To  perform  the  picket  duty  and  protect  this  section 
from  incursions  of  the  Abolitionists  1 have  five  companies  of  cavalry, 
four  of  infantry  (three  of  which  do  not  average  over  40  men),  and  one 
small  company  of  artillery.  Coosawhatchie  being  our  weakest  point, 
most  of  these  forces  are  stationed  in  its  immediate  vicinity,  and  the 
other  portion  of  the  country  is  left  comparatively  unprotected. 

The  partial  success  which  the  Abolitionists  met  with  in  having  reached 
the  road  at  Coosawhatchie  will  doubtless  induce  them  to  direct  their 
next  attack  to  that  point,  which  will  probably  be  combined  with  a simul- 
taneous movement  toward  this  place.  You  will  please  bring  these  facts 
to  the  attention  of  General  Beauregard,  with  the  most  earnest  request 
that  he  will  send  me  an  efficient  company  of  artillery,  two  more  com- 
panies of  cavalry,  and  two  of  infantry.  With  these  re-enforcements 
and  a little  time  to  complete  some  field  works  we  have  in  hand  I think 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE.  661 

we  can  drive  back  any  reasonable  force  the  Abolitionists  may  bring 
against  us. 

Permit  me  to  request  that  the  general,  in  assigning  the  two  cavalry 
companies,  if  he  be  pleased  to  grant  my  petition,  will  do  me  the  favor 
to  select  two  of  three  companies  belonging  to  my  regiment,  which  are 
stationed  near  Charleston,  viz : Captain  Cordes’  company,  on  James 
Island ; the  Rebel  Troop  ; Captain  Seabrook’s  company,  at  Adams  Run, 
and  Captain  Campbell’s  company,  at  Jacksonborough  Ferry. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  J.  COLCOCK, 

Commanding  Post. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.Dept.  East  and  Middle  Florida, 

No.  1342.  j Gainesville , October  30,  1862. 

Captain  Dickison  will  remove  all  negroes  having  no  owners  with 
them  and  free  negroes  from  the  Saint  John’s  River  into  the  interior 
at  a safe  distance  from  the  enemy,  and  place  them  in  charge  of  some 
white  person,  to  be  held  subject  to  their  owners’  orders,  and  in  case  of 
free  negroes  to  be  left  in  their  own  charge,  subject  to  the  laws  of  the 
State. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan : 

J W.  CALL, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  October  31,  1862. 

Hon.  S.  R.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy , Richmond,  Va.  : 

Sir:  On  my  return  yesterday  from  Savannah  I found  here  your  letter 
of  the  20th  instant.  I thank  you  for  the  prompt  and  favorable  support 
you  have  given  me  in  the  desire  to  construct  one  of  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee’s 
marine  torpedo  rams,  which  I think  is  destined  ere  long  to  change  the 
system  of  naval  warfare,  for  it  is  evident  that  if  ships  are  constructed 
invulnerable  above  water  they  must  be  attacked  under  it,  where  most 
vulnerable.  I confidently  believe  that  with  three  of  these  light-draught 
torpedo  rams  and  as  many  iron-clad  gunboat-rams  this  harbor  could 
be  held  against  any  naval  force  of  the  enemy,  who  could  never  bring 
here  seaworthy  iron-clad  gunboats  or  steamers  of  light  draught  that 
could  withstand  the  destructive  effects  of  our  harbor  rams.  The  same 
means  can  also  be  used  (with  one  less  of  each  class)  for  Savannah  and 
Mobile. 

I wish  it  understood,  however,  that  I never  desired  to  remove  the  con- 
struction of  that  torpedo  ram  from  the  competent  naval  officer  in  com- 
mand of  this  station.  All  that  I desired  was  to  see  it  afloat  and  ready 
for  action  as  soon  as  possible. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


662 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  <7.,  November  1,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  8.  A.,  Richmond , Va. : 

General:  As  reported  in  my  indorsement,  dated  October  19,  1862, 
on  a communication  of  Captain  McCrady’s,  having  become  satisfied  that 
the  defenses  of  Savannah  demanded  my  immediate  attention,  I repaired 
to  that  point  on  the  19th  and  remained  there  until  the  30th  ult.  Mean- 
time having  made  a careful  examination  of  the  entire  works  constructed 
or  under  construction,  the  following  report  is  now  submitted— not  as  an 
unnecessary  criticism  of  what  has  been  done  or  planned,  but  for  the  in- 
formation of  the  War  Department,  and  I may  add  that  I submit  this 
paper  rather  as  an  ex-engineer  officer  than  as  the  commanding  general 
of  the  department. 

The  system  adopted  for  the  defense  of  Savannah  may  be  divided  into 
three  lines. 

1st.  The  defense  of  the  Savannah  Eiver. 

2d.  The  line  of  outworks  covering  the  approaches  to  the  city. 

3d.  An  interior  line  of  works  around  the  place.  The  first  line  consists 
of  the  pile  and  crib  work  constructed  at  the  northern  extremity  of  Elba 
Island,  about  4 miles  below  Savannah  and  from  1£  to  1|  miles  below 
Fort  Jackson;  of  batteries  Lee,  Lawton,  and  the  naval  battery;  Fort 
Boggs  and  Hutchinson  Island  Battery,  about  1£  miles  below  the  city, 
and  of  Bay  Battery,  immediately  at  the  lower  extremity  of  the  town. 
Fort  Boggs,  forming  also  a part  of  the  interior  line  of  defense  against 
a land  attack,  has  nine  guns  bearing  on  the  river  and  five  on  the  land 
approaches.  The  works  of  this  line  have  a total  of  forty-seven  guns 
and  eight  10-inch  mortars  defending  the  river  approach,  but  fifteen  of 
which,  however,  are  of  heavy  calibers;  that  is,  42-pouuders  and  8 and 
10  inch  columbiads ; and  ot  these  it  should  be  stated  only  thirteeu 
guns  and  five  mortars  bear  on  the  obstructions.  In  addition,  the  bat- 
tery at  Carston’s  Bluff,  quite  2 miles  from  the  obstructions,  has  two  1 
8-inch  columbiads  bearing  on  them  at  that  long  range. 

From  the  foregoing  it  will  be  apparent  that  the  obstructions  are  too 
far  removed  from  the  works  for  their  defense  to  be  adequately  protected 
by  the  small  number  of  heavy  guns  bearing  upon  them,  especially  in 
view  ot  the  fact  that  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  of  a certainty  will  be  able 
at  night  or  in  a fog  to  work  deliberately  at  their  destruction. 

The  second  line  of  works  will  now  be  considered,  and  which  is  made 
up  as  follows : 

1st.  Of  a six-gun  battery,  of  two  8-inch  columbiads  and  four  32- 
pounders,  at  Carston’s  Bluff,  on  the  Saint  Augustine  River,  through 
which  15  feet  of  water  can  be  carried  4 miles  from  Savannah. 

2d.  Of  a twelve-gun  battery,  of  two  8-inch  columbiads,  two  42-pound- 
ers, seven  32-pounders,  and  one  24-pounder  rifled  gun,  at  Thunderbolt, 
on  the  Wassaw  River,  some  6 miles  from  the  city. 

3d.  Ot  au  eight-gun  battery,  of  two  42-pounders,  five  32-pounders,  and  1 
one  rifled  12-pounder,  at  Beaulieu,  on  Vernon  River,  some  12  miles  dis-  I 
tant  from  Savannah,  and  to  which  17  feet  of  water  can  be  carried. 

4th.  Of  a seven -gun  battery,  of  one  8-inch  columbiad,  one  42-pounder,  j 
and  five  32-pounders,  at  Genesis  Point,  on  the  Great  Ogeechee  River, 
about  25  miles  from  the  city,  and  to  which  place  20  feet  of  water  can  j 
be  carried.  But  besides  the  approaches  thus  defended  there  are  two 
other  important  landing  places  and  routes  of  approach  to  Savannah  1 
which  I find  have  been  left  nearly  unfortified,  to  wit,  the  Isle  of  Hope  j 


;hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


663 


Causeway,  about  8 miles  from  the  city,  and  Bosedew  Island,  or  Coffee 
Bluff,  11  or  12  miles  from  the  city,  on  the  Little  Ogeechee,  which  is 
o-uarded,  without  field  works,  by  a light  battery  of  six  guns  and  one 
rifled  G pounder  piece.  At  the  Isle  of  Hope  Causeway  a short  line  of 
rifle  pits  (with  a position  fora  field  gun)  have  been  thrown  up  It 
must  be  evident  that  should  any  one  of  these  outworks  tall  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy  all  the  rest  can  be  taken  in  reverse  and  must  neces- 
sarily be  evacuated  at  once,  or  else  a battle  must  be  fought  outside  ot 
our  interior  line  of  defenses  to  maintain  the  line  of  outworks,  which  is 
contrary  to  the  clear  interests  of  the  defenders,  who  must  be  supposed 
to  be  much  inferior  in  numbers  to  the  assailants.  The  enemy  being 
then  in  possession  of  the  line  of  outworks  would  establish  a number  of 
heavy  batteries  from  Carston’s  Bluff  toward  Fort  Boggs,  from  which 
he  would  completely  command  the  first  line  of  batteries  on  the  river, 
namely,  Fort  Jackson  and  Batteries  Lee  and  Lawton  and  the  naval 
battery,  the  two  first  being  taken  directly  in  rear  at  a distance  of  from 

^Fort4 Jackson,  I will  remark,  is  a very  weak  old  work;  its  masonry 
scarp  being  almost  entirely  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  heavy  guns  on  the 
river,  and  its  flanks  and  rear  loop-holed  brick  walls,  some  feet  thick 
and  25  feet  high,  are  exposed  almost  to  their  foundations  to  the  enemy  s 
batteries  from  the  line  already  indicated.  It  is  my  opinion  that  so 
defective  a work  could  not  resist  more  than  a few  hours’  cannonade.  It 
must  follow  therefore  that  the  enemy  would  not  be  long  in  silencing  the 
works  on  the  river  which  command  the  obstructions,  which  last  could 
then  be  removed  at  leisure,  leaving  the  river  open  to  the  fleet  to  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  the  city,  or  until  arriving  under  fire  of  the  Hutch- 
inson Island  Battery  of  three  32-pounders,  of  the  Bay  Battery  of  one 
8-inch  columbiad,  three  32- pounders,  and  two  10-mch  mortars,  and  of 
Fort  Boggs,  on  the  bluff,  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  the  channel, 
armed  with  one  10-inch  columbiad,  seven  32-pounders,  and  one  10-mch 
mortar:  that  is,  in  all,  fifteen  guns  and  three  mortars,  wdnch  could  not 
be  expected  to  interpose  a substantial  obstruction  or  delay  the  enemy 
Ion0"  in  his  passage  to  the  city,  in  which  event  the  garrison  of  the  city 
would  be  exposed  in  the  rear  to  the  enemy’s  heavy  naval  armament  and 
in  front  to  an  invading  land  force,  and  consequently  the  contest,  if  at- 
! tempted,  would  scarcely  be  of  long  duration. 

Thus  it  is  clear  the  safety  of  Savannah  is  made  to  depend  upon  the 
fate  of  the  line  of  outworks,  which  in  military  engineering  are  only  in- 
tended as  subsidiaries  to  delay  the  movements  of  the  enemy  until  the 
necessary  preparations  are  made  in  the  main  work  to  repel  successfully 
the  impending  attack,  just  as  pickets  and  advanced  guards  of  an  army 
are  thrown  out  to  arrest  the  movements  of  an  enemy  until  the  army, 
duly  warned  of  the  advance,  can  take  up  positions  in  line  of  battle.  If 
the  line  of  obstructions  had  been  placed  near  the  lower  extremity  of 
Hutchinson  Island,  immediately  under  the  guns  of  the  battery  at  that 
point  and  those  of  Fort  Boggs  and  of  two  revolving  iron-clad  land 
batteries,  one  on  the  western  and  the  other  on  the  eastern  bank,  near 
Screven’s  Ferry  Landing,  the  objections  and  hazard  just  exposed  m con- 
nection with  the  existing  line  of  obstructions  and  neighboring  river 
batteries  would  have  been  entirely  obviated,  while  by  the  construction 
of  two  strong  field  works  on  the  river  bluff  in  advance  of  loit  Boggs, 
to  secure  a plunging  fire  on  and  take  the  enemy’s  fleet  in  the  rear  should 
nn  attempt  be  made  to  remove  the  obstructions,  the  line  of  our  works 
could  at  any  time  be  evacuated  without  endangering  the  safety  ot  the 
city,  for  in  that  case  they  would  only  be  required  to  perform  their  legiti- 


664 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVIJ 

mate  duty — that  of  holding  the  enemy’s  land  forces  at  [bay  ?1  until  ouiii 
troops,  composing  the  garrison  of  the  city,  could  be  collected,  possibly 
re-enforced,  and  placed  in  position  to  resist  the  onset. 

The  third  or  interior  line  of  works  embraces  a system  of  detached! 
torts,  lunettes,  redans,  and  cremailleres  lines,  extending  from  Fort! 
Boggs  on  the  left  to  Laurel  Grove  Cemetery  on  the  right,  where  it! 
rests  on  the  inundations  on  that  flank.  This  line  is  some  41  miles 
long  and  averages  about  If  miles  from  the  center  of  the  city.  The 
armament  of  these  works,  exclusive  of  Fort  Boggs,  consists  of  thirty- 
six  guns;  that  is,  two  42,  fifteen  32,  seven  30,  four  24,  and  four  is 
pounders,  and  four  8-inch  siege  howitzers.  The  profile  is  stronger  and 
the  several  works  are  somewhat  closer  together,  in  my  opinion,  than 
was  necessary,  considering  the  relative  importance  of  having  the  whole 
line  completed  rapidly.  As  constructed  only  about  two-thirds  of  the 
system  have  been  completed.  Fortunately  that  portion  of  the  ground 
left  incomplete  offers  naturally  good  defensive  features,  of  which  ad- 
vantage may  be  taken  in  case  of  need. 

Although  as  a whole  the  system  of  defensive  works  adopted  is  most) 
detective,  in  my  opinion  it  is  too  near  completion  to  resort  to  a new 
one  at  this  late  day,  when  at  any  moment  our  powerful  enemy  may  be! 
looked  for.  I have  therefore  sought,  as  far  as  practicable,  for  reme- 
dies, to  which  end  I have  directed  the  construction  of  an  inclosed 
work  at  Carston’s  Bluff,  the  addition  of  two  guns  bearing  up  the! 
Saint  Augustine  Biver,  and  one  10-inch  mortar,  and  the  erection  of  a 
battery  for  three  guns  at  Greenwich  Point,  on  the  Saint  Augustine ' 
Biver,  to  gain  a cross-fire  with  the  two  guns  added  at  Carston’s  Bluff. ! 
A battery  for  four  pieces  (24-pounder  howitzers)  has  likewise  been 
ordered  to  command  the  Isle  of  Hope  Causeway,  and  another,  of  five 
heavier  guns,  of  which  one  shall  be  a rifled  24-pounder,  has  been  di- 
rected to  be  thrown  up-  on  Bosedew  Island,  to  command  the  Little ! 
Ogeechee.  Additional  traverses  have  been  ordered  in  some  of  the  j 
river  batteries,  and  one  10-inch  mortar  will  be  added  to  the  armament ! 
ot  Fort  Jackson,  to  bear  on  the  obstructions.  The  defective  maga- 
zines  of  these  batteries  will  also  be  put  in  proper  condition  at  once. 

Finally,  it  is  my  duty  to  state  that  I regard  it  as  absolutely  indispen- 
sable  for  a stout  defense  of  Savannah  that  there  should  be  added  to 
the  armament  of  the  most  important  works  at  least  twenty  guns  of  I 
the  .following  calibers:  say,  five  10-inch  and  five  8-inch  columbiads,  j 
and  five  42  and  five  32  pounder  rifled  pieces. 

The  garrison  and  forces  to  maintain  the  works,  now  some  7,700  eflect- 
^men  of  all  arms,  must  be  strengthened  to  at  least  10,000  infantry, 
2,000  cavalry,  1,200  heavy  artillerists,  and  eight  field  batteries,  the  esti- 
mate of  my  immediate  predecessor,  which  I accept  as  the  minimum  force  ! 
required.  Thus  prepared,  any  attack  of  the  enemy  may  be  hopefully  j 
e?COi1]itered’  desPite  the  defective  system  upon  which,  unfortunately, 
the  defenses  of  Savannah  have  been  planned  aud  constructed. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , 8.  <7.,  November  3,  1802. 

Capt.  D.  N".  Ingraham, 

C.  8.  N avy , Comdg.  C.  8.  Naval  Forces , Charleston , 8.  C. : 
Captain:  You  will  greatly  oblige  by  furnishing,  on  the  requisition 


665 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

of  Dr.  Cheves,  300  pieces  of  gunboat  plating,  from  2 to  3 feet  long,  for 
use  in  connection  with  the  boom.  Let  me  also  suggest  that  the  three 
ships  in  this  harbor  might  be  arranged  with  port-holes  and  Quaker 
guns,  or  dummies,  and  anchored  near  the  line  of  boom,  apparently  for 
its  defense.  These  dummies  were  found  quite  effective  in  retarding  the 
enemy’s  movements  at  Centreville  and  the  Potomac  border. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  4,  1862. 

Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , S.  C. : 

Dear  Sir:  I received  several  days  since  a copy  of  communication 
addressed  to  you  on  the  25th  ultimo  by  the  Secretary  of  W ar,  accept- 
ing four  regiments  of  the  reserve  force  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina, 
to  be  organized  in  the  manner  therein  specified;  a manner  I trust  that 
will  not  be  an  obstacle  to  the  early  muster  of  those  regiments.  I beg 
to  assure  you  that  no  time  can  be  prudently  lost  in  securing  the  services 
of  these  troops,  which  I desire  to  post  as  soon  as  possible  as  follows: 
Two  regiments,  under  Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  in  the  Third  Military 
District,  at  or  near  Pocotaligo,  and  the  other  two  near  Georgetown,  in 
a new  military  district,  which  I desire  to  establish,  under  command  of 
Brigadier-General  Trapier. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Special  Oedees,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspectoe  Geneeal’s  Office, 

No.  258.  J Richmond , Fa.,  November  4,  1862. 

* ****** 

III.  The  command  of  General  Beauregard,  besides  the  Department 
of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  will  embrace  the  Departments  of  East 
and  Middle  Florida ; the  former  to  comprise  that  part  of  Florida  east 
of  the  Suwannee  River;  the  latter  west  of  the  Suwannee  River  to  the 
Choctaw  hatch  ee  River.  Brigadier-General  Finegan  is  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  Department  of  East  Florida,  habitual  headquarters  at 
Lake  City,  and  a commander  for  the  Department  of  Middle  Florida 
will  hereafter  be  designated,  whose  habitual  headquarters  will  be  at 
Quincy,  Fla. 

******  * 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  88.  ) Charleston , S.  (7.,  November  4,  1862. 

I.  No  personal  application  whatever  will  be  considered  at  these  head- 
quarters ; and  pending  the  consideration  and  action  at  these  headquar- 
ters on  any  application  for  leave  of  absence  the  applicant  will  not  be 
permitted  to  leave  his  company,  regiment,  or  post  in  order  to  make  a 


666 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XXVL 


personal  application  at  these  headquarters  in  support  of  his  written 
one,  nor  will  he  he  allowed  to  do  so  indirectly  through  another  party, 
except  in  cases  of  surgeon’s  certificates,  upon  which  the  safety  of  the 
applicant  may  depend. 

II.  All  applications  or  communications  must  he  in  writing  and  regu- 
larly transmitted  to  these  headquarters  through  the  ascending  channel 
of  communication  or  they  will  not  he  considered. 

III.  Certain  batteries  in  the  First  Military  District  will  be  designated 
and  known  as  follows : 

Enfilade  Battery,  Sullivan’s  Island,  as  Battery  Bee. 

Beach  Inlet  Battery,  Sullivan’s  Island,  as  Battery  Marshall. 

Morris  Island  Battery  as  Battery  Wagner. 

McLeod’s  Battery,  James  Island,  as  Battery  Means. 

Lawton  Battery,  James  Island,  as  Battery  Glover. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  213.  ( Charleston , S.  (7.,  November  4,  1862. 

******  * 

IY.  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie  and  all  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s 
and  Morris  Islands  will  he  at  once  provided  and  kept  supplied  with  200 
rounds  of  ammunition  for  each  gun  of  their  respective  armaments. 
******* 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Columbia,  S.  C.,  November  5,  1862. 

President  Davis  : 

We  have  two  very  fine  regiments  from  this  State  with  Bragg.  Per- 
haps they  might  he  ordered  to  Charleston.  I only  suggest  it  because 
you  may  not  he  aware  of  their  being  with  Bragg. 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


Richmond,  Va.,  November  5, 1862. 

J.  F.  Bozeman,  Mayor  of  Columbus , Ga. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  the  department  is  fully 
aware  of  the  importance  of  defending  the  Chattahoochee  River  and  the 
city  of  Columbus,  and  has  taken  the  necessary  steps  to  provide  for  their 
defense.  The  country  between  the  Suwannee  and  Cliocta whatchee  Rivers, 
in  Florida,  together  with  Southwestern  Georgia,  has  been  thrown  into 
a military  district,  which  General  Howell  Cobb  will  command.  The 
experience,  energy,  and  stake  in  the  country  of  that  officer  afford  the 
best  guarantees  that  he  will  neglect  nothing  for  its  defense.  As  you 
have  been  informed  already  a competent  engineer  is  engaged,  and  will 
prosecute  whatever  system  of  defense  may  be  determined  on. 

An  authority  is  herewith  inclosed,  as  requested,  permitting  Captain. 
Wilkins  to  raise  a company  of  men,  not  liable  to  conscription,  for  the 
defense  of  Columbus  and  its  approaches. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


G.  W.  RANDOLPH. 


667 


;hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Headquarters,  State  of  South  Carolina, 

Columbia , November  5,  1862. 

General  Beauregard  : 

General  : I received  yours  inclosing  the  report  of  the  officers  on  the 
larbor  obstructions  and  defenses.  When  I was  in  Charleston  a few 
weeks  ago  I visited,  with  General  Gist  and  Dr.  Cheves,  these  obstruc- 
ious,  and  where  they  were  being  prepared  I then  thought,  and  so  ex- 
pressed myself,  that  the  tide  was  too  strong  and  the  channel  so  deep 
hat  no  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  those  chains,  floating  logs,  &c. 
Che  great  reliance  for  successful  defense  is  first  in  brave  and  skillful 
ightiug,  and  then  upon  bringing  from  Fort  Sumter  and  the  batteries 
Opposite  a concentrated  fire  of  heavy  cannon  upon  the  same  point  at 
he  same  moment.  With  this  view  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island, 
’ecently  erected,  mounting  10-inch  columbiads,  are  of  immense  ad  van - 
age.  If  some  thirty  heavy  cannon  can  be  brought  to  bear  at  the  same 
nornent,  and,  by  signals,  fired  upon  a given  object  at  the  same  time  from 
Free  sides,  it  would  be  difficult  for  any  boat  to  pass  it.  Then  the  two 
;unboats,  particularly  the  Chicora,  heavily  ironed  as  they  are,  will  also 
)e  of  great  additional  strength.  The  bow  guns  of  these  boats,  being 
( inch  rilled  and  carrying  a ball  of  125  pounds,  are  very  formidable  de- 
buses for  the  center  of  the  channel.  I also  received  yours  asking  for 
he  iron  and  other  material  on  the  old  floating  battery.  I answered  it 
mmediately  by  telegram,  and  transferred  it  all  to  your  order. 

Your  telegram  urging  the  propriety  of  Southern  Governors  meeting 
;he  Northwestern  Governors  at  Memphis,  to  see  if  propositions  of  peace 
}ould  not  be  suggested,  1 also  received.  I cannot  see  how  it  can  be  prac- 
:ieally  carried  out,  and  have  grave  doubts  as  to  any  favorable  results  ; 
iut  having  occasion  to  write  Governor  Harris,  of  Tennessee,  I mentioned 
he  matter  to  him  freely,  by  way  of  asking  his  opinion.  I did  the  same 
ilso  to  Governor  Brown.  If  Bragg’s  army  had  remained  on  the  Ohio 
n force  much  might  perhaps  have  been  done  in  this  way,  but  he  has 
retreated,  and  that  has  weakened  our  cause  greatly  in  the  Northwestern 
States.  These  States  would  not  be  able  now  to  make  any  separate 
nove.  I doubt  not  but  that  finally  the  Northwestern  States  will  sepa- 
rate from  the  Middle  and  Northern  States.  I received  yours  also  as  to 
i cipher  to  telegraph  in,  and  it  may  become  necessary. 

When  I was  in  Charleston,  in  the  first  part  of  last  month,  you  will 
recollect  I called  your  attention  to  the  manner  in  which  the  negroes  we 
iiad  sent  to  work  on  the  fortifications  were  managed.  I complained  that 
they  were  not  divided  off  and  assigned  to  the  control  or  command  of 
practical  men,  acquainted  with  negroes  and  how  to  get  work  done,  &c. 
You  observed  that  you  intended  to  have  them  divided  off*  and  strictly 
attended  to.  I know  it  is  almost  impossible  to  have  anything  done 
right,  particularly  if  not  in  the  direct  line  of  military  duty  and  service. 
There  has  been  great  irregularity  in  the  manner  of  executing  the  requi- 
sition for  negroes.  Parts  of  neighborhoods  have  been  taken  dow7n  and 
others  not  even  notified.  The  negroes  have  been  retained  beyond  the 
time  they  were  taken  down  for,  and  this  too  without  giving  any  notice 
to  their  owners  or  agents.  You  know  that  all  such  things  produce  great 
dissatisfaction  and  complaint.  If  notice  were  given  in  advance  when 
negroes  are  absolutely  required  to  remain  as  a military  necessity  it 
would  be  better.  We  have  sent  down  in  all  some  8,000  negroes,  and 
this  produces  in  the  aggregate  much  derangement  in  gathering  crops, 
so  necessary  for  winter  support.  I hope  it  will  not  be  long  now  before 
\ on  can  discharge  all  that  belong  to  the  country  and  impress  those  who 
are  in  and  around  the  city  to  finish,  as  the  work  necessary  to  get  in 


GG8 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI 


provisions  is  not  required  in  and  around  the  city,  and  there  are  manjj 
necessarily  idle  all  the  time  in  such  a place.  It  strikes  me  too  tha 
after  cool  weather  our  soldiers  could  be  directed  to  do  much  work,  suet 
as  is  done  in  other  armies.  I know,  when  in  January,  February,  and 
March,  1861,  I had  to  have  so  much  done  on  Morris  Island  and  arount, 
the  different  points,  that  the  volunteers  there  did  far  the  greater  par 
of  the  efficient  work.  I tried  to  make  a system  last  spring  by  which 
corps  of  negroes  could  be  attached  permanently  to  the  army  as  spades 
men  and  axmen,  under  military  discipline  and  army  regulations.  I stil 
think  it  could  be  done,  and  it  would  be  far  better  than  to  derange  agril 
cultural  labor  in  the  rural  districts  by  constantly  calling  for  negro  laboia 
at  times,  occasionally  deeply  injurious  to  raising  or  housing  crops. 

I may  be  mistaken,  but  I do  not  think  any  great  land  attack  can  bt 
made  upon  our  coast  or  city  unless  Lee's  army  is  first  disposed  of.  Wtij 
have  difficulties,  but  they  have  them  also.  In  any  case  I trust  you  arJ 
prepared  to  meet  them  by  land  or  by  water.  I telegraphed  you  as  to  whal.j 
arms  and  forces  were  proposed  to  order  to  report  to  you.  We  havtj 
ordered  out  four  regiments  of  State  Reserves  for  ninety  days  to  report  tc  ! 
you.  I hope  we  can  send  them  soon,  but  scattered  over  such  a wide 
extent  of  country  as  they  are,  and  never  having  been  called  together  ail 
regiments,  it  wiil  be  difficult  to  send  them  as  soon  as  we  desire.  I may 
be  mistaken,  but  I hope  the  force  now  ordered  to  you  will  perhaps  fur 
nish  2,400  men.  Their  officers  are  intelligent  and  efficient  gentlemen 
One  of  the  regiments  is  commanded  by  Colonel  Ryan,  who  is  at  Barn 
well  Court-House,  and  if  you  desire  it  his  regiment  can  be  ordered  tc 
Pocataligo  as  easy  as  to  come  here  and  more  so.  If  you  desire  it  catji 
be  ordered  directly  there.  Be  so  good  as  to  let  me  know.  Colonel  Cast] 
commands  another,  and  part  of  his  is  already  on  the  Pee  Dee  in  State 
service  and  has  been  for  some  time,  to  defend  that  stream  at  a point 
where  we  have  obstructions  and  a State  battery  at  Stone’s  Landing,  and 
I would  most  respectfully  suggest  that  he  be  kept  in  that  region  witl 
his  regiment  for  defense  of  the  Georgetown  and  Santee  country  too. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  very  truly,  yours. 

F.  W.  PICKENS. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  89.  1 Charleston , S.  0.,  November  5,  1862. 

###*#** 

II.  The  following  officers  are  announced  on  the  staff  of  the  general 
commanding  and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accordingly,  namely : 
Maj.  D.  B.  Harris  as  chief  engineer  of  the  department. 

Capt.  William  H.  Echols  as  chief  engineer  of  the  State  of  South  Caro- 
lina. 

Capt.  John  McCrady  as  chief  engineer  of  the  State  of  Georgia. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Signal  Office, 
Charleston , November  6,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Chief  of  Staff  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  submit  for  the  consider- 
ation of  the  general  commanding  the  following  suggestions  : 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


669 


The  material  of  the  signal  corps,  formed  as  it  is  of  educated  and  re- 
liable men,  affords  the  opportunity  of  employing  them  to  advantage  as 
magnetic  telegraph  operators,  the  duties  of  which  position  are  strictly 
germane  to  their  present  occupation  as  signal  men,  and  could  be  ac- 
quired with  comparative  ease  and  celerity. 

With  a corps  of  men  thus  thoroughly  instructed  in  all  the  scientific 
methods  for  the  early  transmission  of  information  the  general  com- 
manding would  have  at  hand  the  means  of  taking  possession  of  any 
telegraphic  line  already  constructed,  of  attaching  a portable  apparatus 
to  any  points  of  such  line  near  which  his  troops  may  be  operating,  and 
of  constructing  new  lines  or  ramifications  of  lines  to  points  either  ot 
strategic  value  or  value  as  lookouts. 

An  operator  under  these  circumstances  would  be  always  within 
reach,  and  being  under  military  supervision,  could  be  more  relied  upon 
as  being  at  his  post  when  required. 

In  point  of  economy  it  will  also  recommend  itself  to  the  general,  as 
the  operator  will  receive  but  his  pay  as  signal-man,  which  is  less  than 
half  that  of  the  civil  operator. 

The  use  of  the  galvanic  battery  would  also  tend  to  fit  some  of  the 
corps  for  the  responsible  duty  of  igniting  such  torpedoes  or  other  marine 
explosives  to  be  fired  by  the  electric  spark  as  may  be  in  contemplation  j 
also  the  management  of  the  electric  light. 

If  this  suggestion  should  meet  with  the  approval  of  the  general  two 
portable  apparatus  and  a teacher  for  the  manual  operation  would  be 

required.  jos.  MANIGATTLT, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General  and  Signal  Officer. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  (7.,  November  6,  1862. 

O.  P.  Fannin,  Gay,  Allen,  and  other  members  of  Committee, 

Blakely , Early  County , Ga.: 

Gentlemen:  Your  communication  of  the  11th  ultimo,  addressed  to 
the  Secretary  of  War,  has  been  referred  to  the  commanding  general  of 
the  department,  under  whose  instructions  I have  to  say  that  at  an  early 
day  he  noticed  the  importance  of  closing  the  Chattahoochee  to  the  gun- 
boats of  the  Abolitionists,  and  before  this  would  have  detached  a com- 
petent engineer  to  make  a reconnaissance  of  the  river  to  discover  the 
best  position  for  obstructions  and  batteries  to  command  them,  but  so 
far  he  has  been  unable  to  detach  an  officer  from  the  pressing  needs  of 
the  service  in  connection  with  the  defense  ot  Charleston  and  Savannah, 
more  immediately  threatened  by  and  accessible  to  the  enemy  than  your 
vicinity. 

Be  assured  your  river  shall  not  be  lost  sight  of  or  neglected.  Your 
citizens  meantime  may  do  much  by  collecting  accurate  information 
about  the  best  locations  for  obstructions.  Any  engineer  sent  to  your 
region  will  be  instructed  to  call  on  and  communicate  freely  with  you. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders,  » Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  216.  f Charleston , S.  (7.,  November  6,  1862. 

******  * 

IV.  A military  district,  to  be  known  as  the  Fourth  Military  District, 


670 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


is  hereby  constituted  in  this  department,  and  will  embrace  all  the  terri- 
tory east  and  north  of  the  Santee  and  South  Santee  Rivers.  Brig.  Gen. 
James  H.  Trapier  is  assigned  to  the  command.  He  will  establish  his 
headquarters  at  or  near  Georgetown,  as  he  may  find  practicable. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  <7.,  November  7,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding , &c.,  Savannah,  Ga.: 

General:  I am  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  direct 
that  you  call  on  Commodore  Tatnall  to  suggest  some  little  improvement 
in  connection  with  the  fitting  out  of  one  small  gunboat  (not  iron-clad), 
armed  w ith  heavy  guns,  to  be  placed  in  position  in  a cut  near  the  ob- 
structions especially  intended  for  that  defense. 

It  is  that  an  iron-clad  shield  be  adapted  on  board  to  protect  the  guns ; 
also  a levee  be  thrown  up  all  around  the  boat  sufficiently  high  and  strong 
as  to  secure  its  thorough  protection,  thus  saving  time,  labor,  and  ex- 
pense of  laying  foundations  for  land  batteries,  allowing  each  gun  to  fire 
through  one  or  two  embrasures,  the  latter  being  as  small  as  possible. 
Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

" A.  N.  TOUTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Charleston,  November  8, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff  : 

General  : By  Special  Orders,  No.  210,  paragraph  III,  from  depart- 
ment headquarters,  dated  October  31, 1862, 1 am  directed  to  take  charge 
of  the  construction  of  marine  torpedo  ram,  to  examine  and  supervise 
all  accounts  for  services  and  material,  the  disbursement  of  the  funds 
provided  by  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  and  to  make  a weekly  report 
to  department  headquarters  of  the  progress  made  with  the  work. 

In  obedience  to  said  orders  I called  to  my  assistance  Mr.  F.  M.  Jones, 
ship-carpenter,  and  Messrs.  Cameron  & Co.,  machinists.  The  former 
gentleman  was  warmly  recommended  to  me  by  Naval  Constructor 
Porter  as  the  best  person  to  accomplish  the  completion  of  the  unfin- 
ished vessel  transferred  by  the  Navy  Department,  inasmuch  as  the 
work,  so  far  as  it  had  gone,  had  been  performed  by  him.  Mr.  Taylor, 
machinist  of  the  concern  of  Cameron  & Co.,  having  been  already  thor- 
oughly informed  as  to  my  plans,  I thought  it  best  to  employ  the  firm 
of  which  he  is  a member  to  execute  all  the  iron  work.  The  Navy  De- 
partment having  also  transferred  the  engines  and  boilers  for  the  ram, 
I obtained  permission  from  department  headquarters  to  send  a special 
messenger  to  Richmond  for  the  purpose  of  superintending  the  shipment 
of  the  same.  I hope  to  be  able  to  report  the  return  of  said  messenger 
with  machinery  by  the  close  of  the  next  wreek. 

During  the  past  week  Mr.  F.  M.  Jones,  ship-carpenter,  has  been  en- 
gaged in  filling  in  between  the  ribs  of  the  vessel  frame,  rearranging 
the  bow  and  stern  to  suit  the  new  purpose  to  which  the  vessel  is  to  be 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  671 

applied,  and  collecting  timber  and  other  material.  I liave  to  report 
now  that  all  the  spaces  between  the  ribs  have  been  filled  in,  and  in  a 
few  days  hope  to  commence  the  planking. 

The  deck  timbers  are  fast  being  gotten  out  and  will  soon  be  ready  to 
go  into  position.  I have  succeeded  in  getting  a large  supply  of  pine 
timber  for  the  work,  and  have  made  application  to  Commodore  Ingra- 
ham for  a supply  of  oak.  I have  also  had  prepared  a complete  specifi- 
cation of  all  the  material  I can  possibly  require  and  sent  it  in  to  Com- 
modore Ingraham,  who  assures  me  that  he  is  ready  to  do  everything 
in  his  power  to  further  the  progress  of  the  work. 

I hope  in  ray  next  to  be  able  to  report  every  part  of  the  work  in  course 
of  successful  operation. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers. 


Charleston,  November  8,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : Since  preparing  my  report  I have  received  a reply  to  my 
communications  to  Commodore  Ingraham,  asking  material  to  conduct 
the  work  on  marine  torpedo  ram. 

The  following  are  my  letters,  with  the  commodore’s  reply : 

Charleston,  November  8,  1862. 

Capt.  D.  N.  Ingraham,  C.  S.  Navy : 

Commodore  : In  compliance  with  our  conversation  of  yesterday  I hereby  submit 
an  estimate  of  some  of  the  material  which  will  he  required  for  the  construction  of 
marine  torpedo  ram,  viz,  18,500  feet  oak,  sawed,  4 inches  thick;  6,000  pounds  oakum, 
5,000  pounds  8-inch  spikes,  one-half  inch  thick  ; 5,100  pounds  10-inch  spikes,  one-half 
inch  thick;  10,500  pounds  three-quarter  inch  iron  ; 4 tons  of  coal, 
j The  above  estimate  only  embraces  such  material  as  cannot  be  otherwise  procured 
by  the  ship-carpenter.  Messrs.  Cameron  & Co.  have  been  instructed  to  hand  in  an 
estimate  of  all  the  material  they  will  need  for  their  portion  of  the  work,  which  I will 
forward  immediately  upon  receipt.  You  will  confer  a special  favor  and  materially  ad- 
vance the  progress  of  the  work  by  obtaining  for  me  out  of  the  force  under  your  con- 
trol five  good  ship-carpenters.  We  have  only  three  or  four  now  in  our  employ,  and 
they  are  far  from  sufficient  to  meet  our  requirements. 

General  Beauregard  has  ordered  me  to  report  as  early  as  possible  the  means  at  my 
I disposal  for  the  prosecution  of  the  work. 

For  this  reason  you  will  oblige  me  by  answering  my  requisition  as  early  as  possible. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  commodore,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

. FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain,  Etujineers. 


Charleston,  November  8,  1862. 

Capt.  D.  N.  Ingraham,  C.  S.  Navy : 

Commodore  : The  following  material  is  required  by  Messrs.  Cameron  & Co.  for 
; the  construction  of  marine  torpedo  ram,  viz,  60  tons  cast  iron  (either  pig  or  scrap) ; 
50  tons  smith’s  coal;  20  tons  Tennessee  coke;  150  tons  2 by  7 wrought-iron  bars  ; 10 
tons  1£  round  iron  for  bolts;  2 tons  1£  square  iron  for  nuts  ; 1 ton  No.  14  sheet-iron; 
1 ton  No.  16  sheet-iron;  one-half  ton  No.  12  sheet-iron;  one-half  ton  No.  14  sheet 
! copper ; one-quarter  ton  No.  12  sheet-copper. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J * FRANCIS  D.  LEE. 


Commandant’s  Office,  Naval  Station, 

Charleston,  November  8,  1862. 

Sir  : Your  requisitions  of  the  8th  instant  have  been  received,  with  a list  of  articles 


672 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


I have  never  had  on  hand,  and  certainly  no  means  of  obtaining  them.  The  only 
articles  in  the  list  which  I can  assist  you  with  are  some  8-inch  spikes  and  f-inck  iron, 
and  that  to  a limited  extent. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  N.  INGRAHAM, 
Flag-Officer,  Commanding  Station. 

Capt.  Francis  D.  Lee,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Having  thus  failed  to  obtain  the  material  essential  to  the  prosecu- 
tion of  the  work  from  a source  which  I was  induced  to  believe  from  the 
communication  from  the  Navy  Department  to  General  Beauregard  was 
undoubted,  I would  respectfully  refer  you,  general,  to  my  note  dated 
November  4,  1862,  asking  the  authority  of  the  War  or  Navy  Depart- 
ments to  procure  from  the  Atlanta  or  Etowah  Works  such  iron  or  other 
material  as  may  be  necessary  to  the  work. 

If  such  authority  can  be  obtained  I am  assured  that  the  work  will 
be  accomplished. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FBANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  G\,  November  8,  1862. 

Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , S.  C. : 

Governor  : Your  letter  of  the  5th  instant  was  received  after  I had 
given  the  orders  for  Cash’s  regiment  to  report  to  General  Walker,  who,  :i 
being  nearest  to  the  enemy,  will  require  one  of  the  best  colonels  with 
him,  but  I will  endeavor  to  leave  him  in  the  Georgetown  district. 

With  regard  to  the  labor  furnished  for  the  defenses  of  the  city  the  i 
planters  have  done  nobly,  but  they  must  not  stop  three-quarters  of  the  i 
way.  Should  Charleston  fall  for  want  of  proper  works  they  will  be 
the  largest  sufferers  in  the  end.  Your  idea  of  organizing  negro  laborers  j 
with  the  troops  is  one  I had  already  recommended  to  the  Govern- i 
ment  long  ago.  I think  that  one  company  of  100  negroes  as  pioneers  | 
per  two  regiments  of  1,000  men  each  would  be  a good  proportion 
of  laborers,  and  would  leave  the  troops  to  attend  to  their  legitimate 
duties  of  drill  and  guard,  so  that  each  brigade  of  the  four  regiments 
would  have  200  negro  pioneers  or  laborers.  Our  Southern  soldiers 
object  most  strenuously  to  work  with  spades  and  shovels ; they  will  do 
it  in  very  pressing  emergencies,  but  on  ordinary  occasions  do  more 
grumbling  than  work  ; they  prefer  decidedly  to  fight.  I find  so  much  \ 
difficulty  in  procuring  mechanics  and  materials  here  for  the  construc- 
tion of  Captain  Lee’s  marine  torpedo  ram  that  I will  have  to  stop  its  ' 
construction.  Charleston,  in  its  exhausted  condition,  cannot  furnish  ' 
all  the  labor  and  material  required  for  the  building  of  three  rams  at 
once.  One  or  two  of  these  must  be  stopped  to  enable  the  others  to 
be  completed ; otherwise  all  three  will  still  be  unfinished  when  the  I 
enemy  will  make  his  appearance  here.  I am  free  to  confess  that  I be-  j 
lieve  our  ordinary  gunboats  will  effect  but  little  against  the  enemy’s 
new  gigantic  monitors,  provided  they  can  get  here  in  safety.  We  must 
attack  them  under  water,  where  they  are  the  most  vulnerable,  if  we  wish 
to  destroy  them,  and  the  torpedo  ram  is  the  only  probable  way  of  ac- 
complishing  that  desirable  end.  Moreover,  one  of  these  can  be  finished 
in  at  least  half  the  time  required  for  an  ordinary  sized  gunboat  ram. 

With  regard  to  your  supposition  that  the  enemy  will  not  make  a 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  673 

land  attack  on  our  coast  before  disposing  of  Lee’s  army,  I believe 
they  will  do  so  as  soon  as  the  forces  in  Virginia  shall  have  gone  into 
winter  quarters,  thus  enabling  them  to  send  re-enforcements  South  for 
a campaign,  and  with  their  great  facilities  of  transportation  they  could 
get  them  here  before  we  could  ours. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  November  10,  1862. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Commanding , &c. : 

General:  The  letter  of  Colonel  Gonzales,  with  your  indorsement, 
recommending  the  immediate  construction  of  two  light-draught  iron- 
clad gunboats  at  Charleston,  was  submitted  to  the  Chief  of  the  Engineer 
Bureau,  who  reported  that  such  vessels  would  be  of  great  value  in  the 
defense  of  that  city  if  constructed  in  time,  but  that  they  could  not  be 
paid  for  from  the  engineer  appropriation,  and  recommended  a reference 
to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  This  was  done,  and  Mr.  Mallory  replies 
that u the  Navy  Department  is  now  constructing  all  the  boats  at  Charles- 
ton that  it  can  find  mechanics  and  materials  for.  If  there  are  parties 
in  Charleston  able  and  willing  to  build  iron-clad  war  vessels  this  De- 
partment will  employ  them  at  once.” 

Your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  November  10,  1862. 

Col.  James  Chesnut,  Jr., 

Chief  of  Department  of  Military , Columbia , S.  C. : 

Colonel:  A few  days  ago  I answered  your  telegram,  informing  yon 
that  I would  be  able  to  furnish  an  artillery  officer  to  make  the  exami- 
nation of  the  Santee  River,  referred  to  by  you  in  your  telegram,  asking 
you  to  name  when  and  where  he  should  report,  but  thus  far  I have  re- 
ceived no  answer.  Meanwhile  I have  read  with  satisfaction  the  excel- 
lent report  of  Mr.  Niernsee  relative  to  his  reconnaissance  of  the  Santee 
River  from  Lenad’s  Ferry  to  Nowell’s  Point,  and  of  the  information 
obtained  by  him  relative  to  the  North  and  South  Santee  from  the 
point  of  junction  to  their  mouths.  My  conclusion  is  that  Nowell’s  Point 
is  the  proper  position  to  be  fortified,  and  where  the  river  ought  to  be 
obstructed,  not  more  than  400  yards  below  the  fort.  This  obstruction 
I think  can  be  made  of  several  rows  of  piles  (should  the  bottom  permit 
it),  interlaced  with  a properly  constructed  abatis  of  trees,  live-oaks  if 
possible.  As  it  is  not  probable  that  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  boats  will 
jbe  able  to  ascend  to  that  point  of  the  river,  the  armament  of  the  battery 
need  not  consist  of  heavier  guns  than  32-pounders  smooth-bore  (three  or 
tour  and  about  two  rifled  24-pounders  ; all  of  these  guns  to  be  separated 
by  heavy  traverses  or  placed  by  twos  in  detached  batteries.  Rifle  pits 
should  also  be  provided  (not  enfiladed  from  the  river)  for  the  infantry 
support  to  the  batteries.  The  thickness  of  the  parapets  of  the  latter 
should  be  about  20  feet  and  of  the  rifle  pits  12  or  15  feet ; the  height 

43  r r — yol  xiv 


674  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

of  the  crest  of  the  batteries  (which  may  be  half  sunk)  should  be  about 
G feet  above  the  front  and  about  8 feet  above  the  rear  terre-plein,  for  a 
greater  protection  to  the  men. 

I have  given  orders  for  the  construction  of  a battery  of  three  or  four 
guns  at  or  about  Ladson’s  Bluff,  on  North  Santee,  which  I suppose  is  the 
one  called  for  by  Mr.  Niernsee  Bear  Hill  Bluff. 

I am  informed  that  the  battery  at  Mayrant’s  Bluff,  commanding 
Winy  aw  Bay,  toward  Georgetown,  is  armed  and  completed,  and  I hope 
that  the  new  regiment  of  the  State  Reserves  (Cash’s)  I have  ordered  to 
report  to  General  Trapier,  in  command  of  Georgetown  District,  will  be 
able  to  support  these  two  batteries  until  other  forces  can  be  sent  in 
that  direction. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Chief  of  Ordnance,  Dept,  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

Charleston , November  10,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  a paper  con- 
taining a list  of  ordnance  stores  which  cannot  be  furnished  at  the  Charles- 
ton Arsenal,  and  indorsed  to  headquarters  by  Brigadier- General  Ripley, 
and  referred  to  this  office  by  the  general  commanding. 

As  the  indorsement  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley  contains  the  follow- 
ing, that  is  to  say,  “ I am  not  aware  that  any  preparations  are  making  to 
fill  the  rest,  and  as  many  of  the  articles  are  of  prime  necessity  and  must 
be  had,  I respectfully  refer  to  department  headquarters  for  information. 
Cartridge  bags  and  10-inch  columbiad  shot  are  especially  needed,”  &c., 
I think  it  proper  to  submit  to  the  general  commanding  what  prepara- 
tions have  been  made  for  supplying  the  articles  needed. 

On  the  7th  September,  as  soon  as  I could  get  reports  from  the  bat- 
teries, I brought  the  needs  of  department  to  the  attention  of  the  then 
commanding  general,  and  in  a communication,  at  his  instance,  to  Colonel 
Gorgas,  I applied  for  25,000  friction  tubes,  for  bolts,  and  rifle  shell  for 
42  and  32  pounders,  for  cartridges  and  cartridge  bags,  for  10-inch  and 
8-inch  columbiads,  and  for  42  and  32  pounder  guns.  It  was  then  sup- 
posed that  10-inch  shot  could  be  cast  here  to  supply  the  need  of  the 
batteries,  and  orders  for  the  same  were  standing  in  Columbia,  S.  C., 
and  an  order  soon  after  given  to  Cameron  & Co.  here.  After  some 
delay  I became  assured  that  these  would  have  also  to  be  procured  else- 
where. Soon  after  the  general  commanding  assumed  command  here  I 
brought  some  of  these  deficiencies  to  his  attention  in  a personal  inter- 
view, especially  the  matter  of  flannel  for  cartridge  bags.  In  conse- 
quence of  this,  as  I supposed,  I received  a communication  from  head- 
quarters on  the  — of  October,  to  which  I replied  on  the  4th  of  October; 
stating  there  was  not  flannel  enough,  but  that  arrangements  were  mak- 
ing to  get  some. 

Major  Childs  some  time  after,  with  some  difficulty  and  delay,  received! 
500  yards  from  Georgia,  and  this  is  now  being  made  up  into  10-iuch, 
cartridge  bags.  Also  about  three  weeks  ago,  a steamer  having  arrived 
here  from  abroad,  I called  to  see  Major  Childs,  and  requested  him  to 
secure  flannel  enough  for  our  requirements.  He  informed  me  that,  as; 
well  as  could  be  discovered  from  the  invoices,  no  flannel  was  on  board,! 
but  that  there  were  some  bales  of  serge  (I  think  he  said  five),  which 
would  answer  for  cartridge  bags.  I requested  him  to  secure  one  for? 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  675 

the  use  of  the  department.  October  7 wrote  to  headquarters,  stating 
deficiency  of  friction  tubes  and  10-inch  solid  shot.  October  23  wrote 
to  Major  Ouyler,  of  Macon  Arsenal,  for  10-inch  solid  shot,  friction  tubes, 
and  casemate  trucks.  October  23  wrote  to  Lieutenant  Cunningham 
for  10-inch  solid  shot,  he  having  promised  to  send  me  100  from  Savan- 
nah on  the  9th  instant,  when  I was  there.  October  23  wrote  to  headr 
quarters  of  need  of  solid  shot  and  friction  tubes,  and  informing  of 
delays  on  railroads  from  Richmond,  recommending  a special  agent  be 
sent  to  hurry  on  those  stores  from  Richmond.  October  28  wrote  to 
headquarters  of  delays  of  stores  ordered  here  from  Richmond,  and 
suggesting  that  they  be  shipped  by  passenger  trains.  October  29 
sent  in  a tabular  statement  to  headquarters  of  supplies  wanted  from 
Richmond.  The  delay  in  getting  10-inch  solid  shot  still  continuing,  I 
wrote  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  Rains,  at  Augusta  Arsenal,  November  7, 
for  10-inch  solid  shot  and  for  other  stores. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  need  does  not  arise  from  a want  of 
timely  preparation  here,  as  the  papers  at  headquarters  would  show  to 
Brigadier-General  Ripley.  The  articles  he  instances  are  those  which 
have  given  me  most  concern.  But  there  are  others  which  are  also  of 
great  moment,  and  which  have  addressed  themselves  to  my  earnest 
attention. 

The  replies  to  nearly  all  my  applications  are  that  the  arsenals  are 
averworked  and  cannot  furnish  what  I require ; but  the  commanders 
Df  arsenals  exhibit  every  disposition  to  do  what  they  can,  and  are  under 
engagements  to  supply  some  of  my  requisitions. 

No  one  who  is  not  in  a position  to  see  it  from  day  to  day  can  appre- 
eiate  the  difficulties  in  securing  supplies  seemingly  most  common  and 
ibundant  and  of  procuring  artisans  capable  for  ordnance  works. 
This  must  justly  be  considered  in  the  delays  at  the  different  arsenals 
n supplying  stores  that  we  require. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  J.  POPE, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Ordnance. 


Circular.]  Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

Charleston , S.  C .,  November  10,  1862. 

To  prevent  unnecessary  alarm  and  suppress  sensational  reports  the 
;ommanding  general  enjoins  upon  all  commanding  officers  to  take  and 
'eport  the  names  of  all  persons  who  may  communicate  important  intell- 
igence of  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  In  certain  cases,  at  the  dis- 
cretion of  the  officer  to  whom  communication  is  made,  the  person  who 
;hall  communicate  such  information  will  be  secured  until  further  orders 
rom  these  headquarters. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Richmond,  November  11,  1862. 

lis  Excellency  Governor  Pickens, 

Columbia , S.  C.: 

Your  telegram  of  the  5th  to  the  President  was  received.  With  every 
lisposition  to  oblige  you,  we  fear  to  weaken  General  Bragg  at  present. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War . 


676  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Columbia,  S.  C.,  November  11,  1862. 

General  Beauregard, 

Commanding , &c .,  Charleston , S.  C.  : 

My  Dear  General  : I reached  here  last  evening  on  a tour  of  in- 
spection of  our  ordnance  establishments.  I propose  going  to  Charleston 
a few  days  to  inspect  the  artillery,  &c.  As  we  have  to  use  such  arma- 
ments as  we  can  procure,  I do  not  see  that  I can  be  of  much  assistance 
to  you,  but  I shall  be  very  glad  to  aid  your  officers  with  any  information 
or  advice  my  experience  may  enable  me  to  furnish,  and  should  the  en- 
emy make  their  promised  attack  I hope  you  will  permit  me  to  assist  in 
repelling  them,  as  I am  sure  you  will. 

With  much  regard,  most  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

BENJ.  HUGER. 

[Indorsement.] 

Your  visit  here  will  be  welcomed  as  well  as  your  assistance  in  case  of i 
an  attack.  The  artillery  department  here  is  in  better,  condition  than  at' 
Savannah.  Colonel  Anderson,  in  command  of  the  artillery  there,  is 
sadly  in  want  of  two  assistants,  a lieutenant-colonel  and  a major  p 
without  them,  having  six  or  seven  works  under  his  charge  several  miles i 
apart,  I do  not  clearly  see  what  he  is  to  do.  I intend  writing  again  to 
the  Department  on  the  subject. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  B. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  11,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  Porcher  Miles, 

Member  of  Congress , Richmond , Va.  : 

Dear  Colonel  : Yours  of  the  4th  has  been  received.  Captain  Crafts, j 
quartermaster,  has  been  ordered  to  duty.  I was  not  aware  of  his  being 
commissioned,  although  I remembered  your  letter  relative  to  him,  but 
I was  waiting  to  see  him  on  the  subject.  It  seems  he  saw  Jordan,  who 
had  received  no  orders  yet  relative  to  him. 

I regret  much  to  learn  that  we  are  to  receive  no  more  additional  10- 
inch  columbiads  than  the  ten  referred  to  by  you.  Of  course  I under- 
stand the  inability  of  the  War  Department  to  furnish  more,  but  it  is 
with  the  most  serious  consideration  of  the  Government  to  determine 
which  is  worth  most  to  us  at  this  moment — the  free  navigation  of  the 
Mississippi,  which  from  the  nature  of  things  we  cannot  use,  or  the  port* 
of  Charleston,  which  is  at  present  our  only  means  of  communication 
with  Europe,  especially  at  this  juncture,  when  we  are  expecting  so 
many  things  of  vital  importance  to  the  country  from  that  quarter.  I 
sent  yesterday  to  the  Department  a letter  of  General  Ripley  on  the 
subject  of  having  a 15-inch  gun  cast  here.  It  seems  it  can  be  done,  at 
a high  cost,  it  is  true ; but  I have  great  faith  in  the  weight  of  metal 
(about  500  pounds)  which  could  be  thrown  from  it.  Three  of  those 
guns,  one  at  Sumter,  one  at  Eufilade  Battery,  and  one  at  Fort  Ripley, 
would  I think  supply  the  place  of  a good  boom  across  the  channel  be- 
tween Sumter  and  Moultrie.  Should  you  think  favorably  of  the  project 
I hope  you  will  support  it  toward  the  War  Department. 

Why  could  not  10-inch  guns  be  made  at  Macon,  getting  the  iron  from 
Spartanburg,  which  I understand  is  about  the  best  in  the  country, 
according  to  General  Ripley  ? 

Hoping  to  see  you  soon,  yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


:hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  677 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , November  11,  1862. 

General  H.  Cobb,  Athens , Ga. : 

You  are  this  day  assigned  to  the  command  of  Department  of  Middle 
Florida,  extending  from  the  Suwannee  to  the  Choctawhatchee  River, 
habitual  headquarters  at  Quincy. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  264.  j Richmond , Va .,  November  11,  1862. 

# # # * * * * 

X.  Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb,  Provisional  Army,  is  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  Department  * of  Middle  Florida,  and  will  establish 
his  headquarters  at  Quincy,  Fla. 

# # # # * # * 

XYI.  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Walker  will  proceed  to  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  and 
report  for  duty  to  Lieut.  Gen.  Th.  H.  Holmes,  commanding  Trans- 
Mississippi  Department. 

* * * * # * * 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War  : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  95.  J Charleston , S.  0.,  November  11,  1862. 

I.  The  chief  of  staff  superintends  and  directs  all  branches  and  de- 
partments of  the  service,  and  is  responsible  for  the  thorough  efficiency 
of  the  whole  military  mechanism. 

II.  All  field  and  other  military  works  in  the  department  will  be 
ordered,  planned,  located,  and  constructed  as  far  as  practicable  only 
under  orders  from  these  headquarters,  superintended  by  the  chief  en- 
gineer and  his  assistants,  except  when  this  course  shall  be  impractica- 
ble or  attended  with  undue  delay,  in  which  cases  the  commanders  of 
districts  will  be  authorized  to  give  the  necessary  orders  to  and  through 
the  senior  engineer  officer  on  duty  in  their  districts  for  immediate 
execution.  Plans  of  the  works  thus  ordered  and  the  ends  to  be  sub- 
served by  their  construction  will  be  promptly  forwarded  to  these  head- 
quarters. 

III.  All  officers  and  employes  on  duty  in  the  engineer  service  in  the 
department  will  report  to  and  be  under  the  orders  of  the  chief  engineer, 
except  in  cases  provided  for  in  the  foregoing  paragraph. 

IY.  Requisitions  for  labor  to  be  done  by  soldiers  and  for  supplies 
may  be  made  on  tbe  post  or  district  commanders  by  the  chief  engineer 
when  practicable,  or  on  occasion  by  the  senior  officer  in  charge  of  any 
work  under  construction,  and  they  will  be  promptly  obeyed,  without 
reference  to  superior  authority  or  to  these  headquarters. 


* This  command  seems  to  have  been  recognized  as  the  District  of  Middle  Florida. 
8ee  Beauregard  to  Cobb,  November  21,  p.  684. 


678  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CHAr.  XXVL 

Y.  The  chief  engineer  will  be  expected  to  consult  freely  with  the  chief 
of  artillery  touching  whatsoever  in  the  construction  of  the  works  that 
may  relate  to  the  greater  efficiency  of  the  guns  to  be  mounted  and  their 
protection  when  in  position. 

VI.  As  far  as  practicable  the  armament  of  all  works  in  the  depart- 
ment will  be  determined  at  these  headquarters,  but  when  this  course 
will  involve  injurious  delay  district  commanders  will  act  after  consulta- 
tion with  the  senior  engineer  and  artillery  officers  present. 

VII.  The  chief  of  artillery  will  be  advised  in  Writing  by  the  chief  of 
ordnance  with  as  little  delay  as  practicable  of  all  accessions  of  arma- 
ment in  his  department,  in  order  that  the  former  may  immediately  assign 
the  same  to  positions. 

VIII.  The  chief  of  artillery  is  ex-officio  chief  inspector  of  all  field 
and  siege  batteries  and  of  heavy  artillery  in  position  in  the  department; 
he  will  also  have  command  of  any  light  and  siege  batteries  in  reserve 
or  not  assigned  to  brigades  or  other  commands. 

IX.  Heavy  artillery  in  position  is  not  to  be  moved  except  when 
ordered  through  the  chief  of  artillery  (or  direct)  by  these  headquarters. 

X.  All  changes  of  position  of  light  batteries  (except  on  field  of  battle) 
ordered*by  officers  commanding  district  will  be  communicated  at  once 
or  as  soon  as  practicable  to  these  headquarters  through  the  chief  of 
artillery. 

XI.  Requisitions  for  increase  of  armament  in  light  and  heavy  bat- 
teries must  be  transmitted  to  these  headquarters  through  the  chief  of 
artillery  for  examination  and  approval.  Requisitions  for  equipments 
must  be  proportionate  to  the  armament  allowed. 

XII.  Commanders  of  forts  and  heavy  batteries,  as  well  as  of  batteries 
of  light  artillery,  are  strictly  enjoined  to  keep  their  supply  of  ammuni- 
tion fully  up  to  the  number  of  100  rounds  allowed  them  per  gun,  except 
for  works  at  all  liable  to  be  isolated,  when  200  rounds  shall  be  provided. 

XIII.  Any  expenditure  of  ammunition  in  action  or  practice  will  be 
certified  at  once  to  the  chief  of  artillery,  with  a statement  that  a requi- 
sition has  been  made  on  the  ordnance  department  to  supply  the  defi- 
ciency. 

XIY.  Light  and  siege  battery  commauders  will  inspect  their  com- 
mands before  guard  mounting  every  morning,  and  will  be  held  respon- 
sible that  their  respective  batteries  are  prepared  for  action.  They  will 
also  make  such  returns  to  the  chief  of  artillery  and  ordnance  as  these 
officers  may  direct. 

XV.  Light  batteries  will  be  presented  for  inspection,  with  the  ammu- 
nition chests  filled,  and  implements,  spare  parts,  &c.,  attached  to  the 
carriages.  The  inspecting  officer  will  particularly  report  any  neglect 
in  the  grooming  of  horses,  carelessness  of  harness,  or  neglect  of  material 
pertaining  to  the  battery. 

XVI.  Ordnance  stores  will  be  issued  from  ordnance  depots  on  requi- 
sitions approved  by  district  commanders  in  the  following  instances.  ! 
For  field  or  siege  batteries  by  commanders  of  such  batteries  ; for  forts 
and  intrenched  works  by  the  commanding  officers  of  the  same;  for  regi- 
ments, battalions,  independent  squadrons,  or  unattached  companies  by 
their  respective  commanding  officers.  These  requisitions  will  be  in 
duplicate,  one  of  which  will  be  returned  to  the  officer  making  in  case 
it  cannot  be  filled  or  only  partially  so,  the  ordnance  officer  having  in- 
dorsed thereon  why  not  filled. 

XVII.  Commanders  of  regiments,  battalions,  and  unattached  com- 
panies will  be  held  responsible  for  the  arming  and  equipping  of  their 
respective  commands.  Each  non-commissioned  officer  and  private  must 
be  armed  with  a musket  or  such  other  small-arm  as  can  be  supplied  by 


I CHAP  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  679 

the  ordnance  department ; 40  ball  cartridges  to  be  carried  in  the  cart-  • 
ridge  box  of  the  soldier,  in  addition  to  60  rounds  per  man,  which  shall 
be  habitually  provided  as  a reserve  supply. 

XVIII.  Acting  ordnance  sergeants  for  regiments  will  be  appointed 
as  directed  in  paragraph  V,  General  Orders,  Xo.  24,  Adjutant  and  In- 
spector GeneraPs  Office,  Richmond,  April  16,  1862. 

! XIX.  District  commanders  will  designate  in  their  commands  a suita- 
ble staff  officer,  who  will  ascertain  and  report  to  the  chief  of  ordnance 
of  the  department  on  the  Saturday  of  each  week  whether  each  regiment, 
battalion,  or  unattached  company  is  armed  and  equipped  and  has  the 
J prescribed  quantity  of  ammunition  as  directed  above.  In  the  first  re- 
port will  be  given  the  number  and  caliber  of  the  arms  in  each  regiment , bat- 
talion, and  unattached  company. 

XX.  District  ordnance  officers,  or  some  other  suitable  staff  officer  to 
j be  designated  by  district  commanders,  will  inspect  all  arms  reported 

unserviceable  by  regimental  or  other  commanders,  and  such  as  are  unfit 
i for  service  they  will  order  to  be  turned  into  the  depot.  The  inspectors 
i will  report  to  their  district  or  other  commanders  all  officers  and  men  who 
I have  neglected  or  permitted  their  men  to  neglect  their  at  ms. 

XXI.  District  commanders  will  organize  schools  of  instruction,  one 
! for  non-commissioned  officers  and  the  other  for  company  officers,  who 
I will  be  required  to  recite  each  day  such  parts  of  the  tactics  and  of  the 

ordnance  and  Roberts’  Manuals  as  may  be  deemed  necessary.  The 
| senior  artillery  officer  present  at  the  post,  in  the  absence  of  any  one 
I specially  designated  by  superior  authority,  will  be  held  responsible  that 
these  schools  are  regularly  held  and  conducted. 

XXII.  All  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  taken  or  lost  and  the  am- 
munition expended  in  action  will  be  reported  within  three  days  there- 
after to  the  chief  of  ordnance  of  each  military  district  or  organized 
brigade,  who  will  forward  a consolidated  return  thereof,  through  the 
chief  of  ordnance  of  the  department,  to  these  headquarters. 

XXIII.  Through  the  chief  of  ordnance  will  be  supplied  all  guns,  car- 
riages, chassis,  small-arms,  ammunition,  ordnance  stores,  and  equip- 
ments of  every  description  on  requisition,  approved  by  the  chief  of 
artillery  or  the  proper  commanding  officer.  The  chief  of  ordnance  will 
transport,  mount,  or  dismount  all  guns  when  called  upon  to  do  so  by 
the  proper  authority;  he  will  also  collect  and  keep  in  proper  and  con- 
venient depots  ample  supplies  of  ammunition  for  all  heavy  guns,  light 
i artillery,  and  small-arms  in  service,  or  for  possible  contingent  wants  in 
the  department. 

XXIV.  The  especial  attention  of  commanding  officers  is  called  to  the 
following  paragraph  (VII),  Special  Orders,  Xo.  48,  Adjutant  and  In- 
spector GeneraPs  Office,  Richmond, 1,  1862: 

Commanding  generals  will  have  furnished  to  the  Chief  of  the  Bureau  of  Ordnance 
f in  this  city  (Richmond)  monthly  reports  from  the  batteries  as  to  the  number  of  guns, 
i their  caliber,  how  mounted,  a full  list  of  the  ammunition  on  hand,  the  exact  locality 
i of  the  batteries,  whether  for  casemate  or  barbette  guns,  and  whether  the  range  is 
short  or  long.  They  will  also  instruct  the  officers  in  charge  of  the  batteries  to  submit 
I all  requisitions  for  their  appoval  before  forwarding  them  to  the  ordnance  officer. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

THOMAS  JORDAX, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Acting  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  District  Gulf,  Mobile , Nov.  12,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard: 

General  : I inclose  you  letters  of  the  Governors  of  Alabama  and 


680 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FDA.  [Chap.  xxyi. 

Florida,  expressing  their  desire  that  the  three  companies  of  Florida 
troops  may  be  retained  west  of  the  Apalachicola.  Yonr  dispatch  ot 
November  11,  answered  by  telegraph  to  day,  styles  them  cavalry.  Two 
of  the  companies  only  are  of  cavalry.  They  are  stationed  respectively 
on  the  Apalachicola,  near  Dead  Lake,  and  on  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay  at 
the  head  of  the  Northern  Arm.  The  infantry  company  is  near  the  town 
of  Saint  Andrew’s.  These  troops  are  within  my  district,  and  playing 
an  important  part  in  guarding  the  coast  and  preventing  the  running 
off  of  negroes.  I cannot  replace  them,  and  request  that  they  be  con- 
tinned  in  their  present  stations. 

General  Finegan  has  exercised  command  over  them  heretofore  and 
I wish  him  to  continue  to  do  so,  for  I have  no  one  in  that  region  of 
country  to  whom  to  intrust  such  command. 

I will  direct  Major  Johnston,  quartermaster  at  Eufaula,  Ala.,  to  fur- 
nish supplies  under  General  Finegan’s  orders,  if  so  desired.  I also 
send  General  Finegan  copy  of  this  letter. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FOENEY, 
Major-General , Commanding . 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Executive  Department, 
Tallahassee , November  5,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney: 

Sir:  I introduce  to  your  acquaintance  Dr.  John  Erwin,  first  lieu- 
tenant of  a company  in  your  department  commanded  by  Captain  Eob- 
mson.  There  are  two  cavalry  companies,  one  commanded  by  Captain 
Ihigpin,  the  other  by  Captain  Blocker,  and  the  infantry  commanded 
by  W.  J.  Eobmson.  Dr.  Erwin  will  give  you  all  necessary  information 
relative  to  them.  General  Finegan  is  making  an  effort  to  have  the 
companies  transferred  to  this  department,  in  which  event  a very  im- 
portant portion  of  your  department  would  be  left  entirely  unprotected, 
and  I hope  you  will  co-operate  with  me  in  opposing  the  transfer,  and 
issue  the  necessary  orders  to  secure  subsistence  for  the  companies  and 
tor  their  active  performance  of  duties. 

Eespectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor  of  Florida. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Executive  Department, 
Montgomery , Ala.,  November  10,  1862. 
lhe  suggestion  of  Governor  Milton  is  heartily  approved,  and  I hope 
General  Forney  will  accept  and  provide  for  the  troops  named.  Maj.  L. 
F.  Johnston,  quartermaster,  C.  S.  Army,  at  Eufaula,  Ala.,  can  furnish 
needful  supplies  if  ordered. 

JNO.  GILL  SHOETEE, 

Governor  of  Alabama. 


Charleston,  November  15,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  satisfactory  progress  of 
the  work  on  marine  torpedo  ram  during  the  past  week.  The  frame  of 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  681 

the  new  bow  has  been  put  up.  The  exterior  of  the  timbers  of  the  vessel 
has  been  dubbed  off  and  the  flanking  commenced. 

A large  quantity  of  timber  has  been  sawed  out  and  prepared  for  use. 
I have  secured  the  services  of  a number  of  hands  (ordinary  home  car- 
penters), who  will  be  put  upon  the  work  in  a few  days. 

My  supply  of  iron  for  bolts,  although  sufficient  for  immediate  wants, 
is  altogether  inadequate  for  future  requirements. 

The  designs  for  torpedo  shells,  with  machinery  for  using  the  same, 
have  been  perfected,  and  the  machinist  only  waits  a supply  of  iron  to 
execute  his  portion  of  the  work. 

The  engines  have  not  yet  arrived  from  Eichmond. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FEANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain  Engineers , Prov.  Army  Confederate  States. 


Hdqrs.  Fourth  Military  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  &c., 

Georgetoivn , November  17,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

* Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  and  Chief  of  Staff,  Charleston , S.  C : ^ 

General  : The  means  at  my  command  for  the  defense  of  this  military 
district  are  extremely  limited.  The  battery  at  Mayrant's  Bluff  is  with- 
out support  except  such  as  is  afforded  by  mounted  troops  and  field  artil- 
lery. The  only  infantry  troops  in  the  department  is  Colonel  Cash's 
regiment,  wrhich,  1 regret  to  say,  has  arrived  without  arms  and  without 
ammunition.  These  troops  are,  besides,  Eeserves,  and  in  service  for 
only  ninety  days.  It  is  questionable  whether  they  can  be  rendered  effi- 
cient in  that  time,  even  if  well  armed  and  equipped.  At  present  they 
are  literally  worth  nothing  at  all. 

I beg  leave  respectfully  to  suggest  to  the  commanding  general  that 
there  are  two,  and  but  two,  regiments  of  South  Carolina  troops  now 
with  the  army  ot  General  Bragg;  one  of  these  regiments,  the  Tenth, 
Colonel  Manigault,  is  composed  entirely  of  men  from  this  section  of 
country,  perfectly  familiar  with  it  and  accustomed  to  the  climate.  They 
would  make  a most  valuable  addition  to  the  forces  of  this  military  dis- 
trict, and  if  in  accordance  with  his  views  I would  respectfully  recom- 
mend that  an  appeal  be  made  to  the  War  Department  for  their  transfer 
to  this  department. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TEAPIEE, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

(Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  (7.,  November  20,  1862. 

I The  chief  of  staff  will  order  a requisition  made  forthwith  for  the  wants 
of  Cash's  regiment.  No  troops  can  now  be  spared  from  other  parts  of 
this  department  for  the  Fourth  District.  Application  must  be  made  at 
once  for  the  two  South  Carolina  regiments  now  in  General  Bragg’s 
ftrmy  of  Department  No.  2. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED, 

General , Commanding. 


i 


682 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond , November  18,  1862. 


Oapt.  Theodore  Moreno,  \ 

In  Charge  of  Chattahoochee  River  Defenses , Columbus , Ga. : 


Captain  : There  are  some  points  in  your  recent  communications 
which  have  not  been  answered  and  which  merit  consideration  : First, 
with  regard  to  the  obstructions  to  be  placed  in  the  Chattahoochee.  Such 
obstructions,  in  my  judgment,  and  with  the  light  before  me,  should  con- 
sist of  a row,  or,  better  still,  two  parallel  rows  of  square  cribs,  placed 
with  salients  up  and  down  stream  and  built  up  to  low- water  mark,  to 
which  floating  obstructions,  consisting  of  a raft  or  rafts,  should  be  at- 
tached, as  an  obstruction  to  the  progress  of  the  enemy  in  every  stage  of 
water.  Each  of  these  cribs  should  be  about  12  feet  from  its  neighbor, 
and  so  placed  as  to  protect  the  interval  in  the  parallel  row,  distaut  say 
30  feet.  I am  sorry  to  inform  you,  after  due  inquiry,  that  the  supply  of 
ordnance  is  so  limited  that  nothing  better  can  be  suggested  apparently 
at  present  than  to  have  the  18  and  24  pounders  at  Alum  Bluff  mounted 
on  siege  carriages  for  defending  the  lower  obstructions  at  Bock  Bluff, 
while  the  five  32-pounders  are  mounted  at  Fort  Gaines  to  defend  the 
upper  in  its  vicinity. 

At  both  of  these  points  it  might  be  well  to  make  further  preparations 
for  the  heavier  ordnance  called  for  by  you,  and  which  perhaps  can  be 
furnished  at  a future  day.  The  necessary  implements,  carriages,  &c., 
to  put  the  ordnance  now  on  the  river  in  a complete  state  of  efficiency 
can,  I am  informed  by  the  ordnance  department,  be  obtained  from 
the  arsenal  at  Macon,  Ga.,  and  it  would  be  well  for  you  to  suggest  to 
the  senior  captain  of  the  two  artillery  companies  mentioned  in  your 
letter  to  make  the  necessary  requisition  on  the  officer  in  charge  of  the 
arsenal,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  general  commanding  the  de- 
partment. 

General  Beauregard  has  been  informed  by  telegraph  of  your  being  in 
charge  of  the  defenses  of  the  Chattahoochee,  and  will,  I doubt  not,  re- 
ceive any  communications  or  suggestions  you  may  have  to  make  with 
due  consideration. 

By  direction  of  Col.  J.  F.  Gilmer: 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 


A.  L.  BIVES, 

Major  and  Assistant  to  Chief  Engineer. 


Office  Chief  Commissary, 

Savannah , November  18,  1862. 
General  H.  W.  Mercer,  Commandmg , &c. : 

General  : Beferring  to  my  letter  of  November  12,  I beg  to  make 
some  additional  remarks,  which  I respectfully  request  you  to  submit  to  j 
General  Beauregard  if  they  meet  your  approbation. 

In  that  letter  I informed  you  that  speculators  had  already  offered 
$1.25  per  bushel  for  corn.  Since  then  $1.50  per  bushel  has  been  freely 
offered,  and  such  large  quantities  shipped  out  by  speculators  that  the 
supplies  for  this  army,  commanded  by  you,  are  in  great  danger  of  not  ) 
arriving. 

Virgil  Powers,  superintendent  of  the  Southwestern  Bailroad,  writes 
that  so  much  corn  is  offered  for  shipment  by  individuals  he  finds  it  dif-  . 
ficult  to  transport  Government  corn. 


Chap,  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  683 

If  corn  is  allowed  to  go  up  in  this  manner  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
it  will  go  up  to  $4  and  $5  per  bushel,  which  many  anticipate.  The  con- 
sequence is,  first,  that  we  are  in  great  danger  of  being  cut  off  from  reg- 
ular supplies  ; second,  that  although  Major  Hirsch  and  myself  have 
i engaged,  under  written  agreements  to  sell  by  planters,  160,000  to  170,000 
bushels,  and  a bonus  has  been  paid,  planters  often  refuse  to  deliver  on 
a market  that  rises  so  rapidly.  In  confirmation  of  this  I beg  to  refer 
you  to  the  accompanying  extract  of  a letter  from  Captain  Stow,  acting 
' commissary  of  subsistence,  to  Capt.  M.  B.  Miller,  acting  commissary  of 
| subsistence. 

The  Government  is  constantly  subjected  to  embarrassments  of 
every  kind  and  needless  expense,  but  would  not  be  if  a check  was 
| put  to  speculation,  as  $1  per.  bushel  is  a high  and  satisfactory  price, 
and  a part  of  our  contract  is  to  send  bags  to  the  plantations  for  the 

i corn. 

I know  of  no  way  to  remedy  this  evil  but  to  imitate  the  example  of 
! Generals  Bragg  and  Kirby  Smith  in  Tennessee  by  preventing  the  de- 
j parture  of  trains  having  corn  for  speculators. 

I am  reluctantly  compelled  to  request  more  details,  in  relation  to 
I which  I beg  you  to  read  the  accompanying  letter  explanatory  from 
Captain  Miller. 

We  have  done  all  we  could  not  to  interfere  with  your  command,  and 
have  now  no  longer  fortification  negroes  at  work.  I hope  you  will  ac- 
quiesce in  these  details,  and  as  the  fortifications  are  soon  expected  to 
be  finished,  it  is  presumed  that  so  many  detailed  meo  will  be  remanded 
to  their  companies  that  tbe  details  now  asked  for  will  not  be  sensiblv 
felt. 

Most  respectfullv,  vour  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  LOCKE, 

Major  and  Commissary . 

(Forwarded  by  General  Beauregard  to  Secretary  of  War.) 


[In  closure.] 


Extract  from  Captain  Stow’s  letter  of  November  15,  1862. 

I bought  of  Mr.  Vickers’  overseer,  a few  miles  from  Drew’s  Mill. 
7,000  bushels ; sent  him  sacks.  On  Wednesday  I saw  Mr.  Vickers, 
He  said  he  did  not  know  anything  about  it,  but  he  would  see  his  over- 
seer and  let  me  know.  The  next  day  I saw  him  again ; he  said  his 
overseer  did  not  sell  me  his  corn.  Mr.  Drew  was  present,  also  Mr. 

! Crawford.  Mr.  Crawford  was  present  when  Vickers  told  me  what  his 
overseer  had  said,  and  confirmed  my  statement.  Vickers  then  said  he 
had  been  offered  $1.25  by  a merchant  in  Milledgeville,  and  could  not 
| let  me  have  the  corn. 

Jeremiah  Watson,  2 miles  from  Albany,  has  2,000  bushels;  he  will 
; not  sell  under  $2  per  bushel.  John  Jones  has  10,000  bushels  ; he  asks 
the  same  price.  The  people  of  Albany  are  very  anxious  that  it  should 
be  seized.  Some  course  must  be  pursued  or  the  Army  will  suffer  for 
bread.  You  have  no  idea  the  number  of  corn-buyers  in  Southwestern 
| Georgia,  mostly  on  speculation.  This  must  be  stopped  in  some  way  or 
our  Army  will  suffer.  Major  Locke  and  Major  Hirsch  must  do  all  they 
can.  I expect  we  shall  be  forced  to  haul  our  corn  or  go  without. 


€84 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  November  18,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Commanding  C.  8.  Forces , Tallahassee , Fla . : 

General  : It  is  the  wish  of  the  commanding  general  that  you  should 
remain  in  command  of  both  districts,  and  at  or  about  Tallahassee,  until 
the  arrival  of  Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb,  who  has  been  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  District  of  Middle  Florida. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  November  21,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  Cobb, 

Commanding  Middle  District  of  Florida , Athens,  Ga.  : 

Dear  General:  Your  letter  of  the  19th  instant  has  just  been  de- 
livered to  me  by  Captain  Barrow,  your  adjutant-general.  The  order* 
you  refer  to  was  not  understood  at  first  by  me  either,  but  I learn  that 
you  are  to  be  in  command  of  one  of  the  districts  (not  departments)  in 
Florida,  under  my  orders,  and  Brigadier-General  Finegan  of  the  other. 
Your  headquarters  are  to  be  at  Quincy.  General  Finegan  is  at  present 
in  Tallahassee,  where  you  will  go  to  relieve  him,  and  receive  whatever 
instructions  he  may  have  in  his  possession  from  the  War  Department. 

The  means  at  our  command  for  the  defense  of  my  Department  (South 
Carolina  and  Georgia  and  Florida  to  the  Chattahoochee)  are  very 
limited,  so  much  so  that  I am  unable  to  spare  one  man  from  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia  for  Florida  at  present,  but  I hope  after  the  fall 
campaign  in  Virginia  troops  will  be  sent  for  the  defense  of  my  depart- 
ment. Meanwhile  we  must  do  the  best  we  can  by  calling  on  the  State 
authorities  for  all  the  assistance  they  can  furnish  us.  I think  on  as- 
suming command  of  your  district  it  would  be  advisable  to  draw  up  a 
concise  statement  of  its  exact  defensive  condition  and  resources  for  the 
files  of  this  department.  General  Finegan  will  do  the  same  for  his  own 
district. 

In  conclusion,  I am  most  happy  that  you  have  been  ordered  to  assist 
me  in  the  defense  of  so  large  and  important  a section  of  our  country, 
and  I have  no  doubt  that  with  sufficient  means  the  result  can  but  be 
honorable  to  yourself  and  advantageous  to  our  cause. 

I hope  ere  long  to  have  the  assistance  of  your  brother  in  Georgia. 
I am  happy  to  hear  of  his  recent  promotion. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.  and  Ga., 

No.  229.  j Charleston , 8.  0.,  November  21,  1862. 

I.  The  chief  of  ordnance  will  make  the  following  changes  and  alter- 
ations in  the  position  of  certain  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance. 

1st.  The  32-pounder  medium  gun  en  barbette  and  painted  red,  on  the 


* See  Special  Orders,  No.  264,  November  11,  1862,  p.  677,  and  Cooper  to  Milton,  No- 
vember 24  and  27,  pp.  687,  689,  and  Cooper  to  Beauregard,  November  26,  p.  688. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


685 


extreme  left  of  Battery  Means,  James  Island,  and  the  smooth  18-pounder, 
on  siege  carriage,  uow  outside  of  Fort  Pemberton,  will  be  transferred  to 
the  extreme  left  of  the  western  lines,  near  the  Holmes  house,  in  lieu  of 
two  smooth-bore  42-pounder  carronades,  which  will  be  sent  to  Savannah, 
Ga.,  with  their  ammunition,  carriages,  and  equipments  complete. 

2d.  Two  Austrian  24-pounder  howitzers,  with  their  ammunition  and 
equipments  complete,  will  be  required  and  sent  from  the  Charleston 
Arsenal  temporarily  to  the  Sunken  Battery,  near  Holmes’  house,  James 
Island,  to  take  the  place  of  two  smooth-bore  24-pounders,  which  must 
be  transferred,  with  100  rounds  of  ammunition  per  gun,  to  Savannah. 

II.  As  soon  as  the  foregoing  transfer  shall  have  been  made  four  of 
the  six  32-pounder  carronades  (weight  about  2,700  pounds),  on  siege 
carriages,  sent  to  Savannah  by  Major  Childs,  will  be  brought  thence  and 
transferred  to  the  chief  of  artillery,  with  100  rounds  of  ammunition  per 

gUni.  The  commanding  general  of  First  Military  District  has  authority 
to  direct  and  order  the  rifling  and  banding  of  such  guns  as  require  it 
within  his  command  to  the  extent  of  the  capacity  for  doing  the  work 
effectually,  and  may  make  requisitions  directly  upon  the  Charleston 
Arsenal  or  other  proper  source  through  his  district  ordnance  officer  for 
the  necessary  material  for  the  work. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard:  jnq  m qt 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  22,  1862. 

J J Pope 

Maj.  and  Chief  of  Ord.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.  and  Ga.,  Charleston,  S.  C.: 

MAJOR  : The  commanding  general  directs  the  following  : 

1st.  The  8-inch  shell  (nnval)  gun  now  on  the  wharf  will  be  trans- 
ported and  placed  on  the  new  battery  at  John’s  Island  Ferry. 

2d.  The  32-pounder  navy  gun,  being  rifled  and  banded  at  Eason  s 
shop,  must  be  sent,  when  ready  for  service,  to  White  Point  Battery,  to 
be  placed  in  position  on  the  Ashley  Biver  adjoining  the  position  at  the 
salient  intended  for  heavier  gun. 

3d.  The  10-inch  bronze  (old  pattern)  mortar  on  wharf  will  be  placed 
in  Batterv  Wagner,  Morris  Island. 

4th.  New  beds  or  elevating  screws  will  be  supplied  as  soon  as  possible 
for  three  10-iuch  mortars  in  Fort  Sumter. 

5th.  If  not  already  done,  one  rifled  and  banded  32-pounder  will  be 
transferred  from  Battery  Means  to  Beauregard. 

6th.  If  not  already  done,  a 12-pounder  rifled  piece  outside  of  h ort 
Pemberton  will  be  sent,  with  the  proper  supply  of  ammunition,  to  Win- 

yaw  Bay.  . , 

7th.  Two  24-pounder  guns  (on  siege-carnages),  now  on  the  eastern 
crSmaillere  lines  of  James  Island,  will  be  sent  to  battery  at  Willstown 
Bluff,  in  Second  Military  District. 

8th.  The  32-pounder  recently  ordered  to  be  banded  to  replace  a detect- 
ive piece  in  Fort  Moultrie,  when  ready  for  service,  will  be  sent  to  Bat- 
tery Glover,  to  take  place  of  a 32-pounder  to  be  brought  there  by  com- 
manding officer  First  District  to  be  banded  and  rifled. 

9th.  All  guns  when  sent  or  transferred  to  positions,  not  already  suffi- 


686 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


ciently  supplied  with  ammunition  therefor,  will  be  at  once  furnished 
with  about  100  rounds  of  the  proper  character  and  proportions. 

Please  report  to  this  office  when  these  orders  shall  have  been  fully 
executed. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

Tallahassee,  November  22,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

The  mayor  of  Columbus,  under  direction  of  the  city  council,  is  ar- 
ranging to  obstruct  the  Apalachicola  River  below  our  batteries  at  Alum 
Bluff,  and  desires  protection  and  permission  to  proceed  with  the  work. 

I received  a dispatch  yesterday  which  led  me  to  suppose  that  the 
mayor  was  at  Chattahooochee  on  his  way  down  the  river  for  that  pur- 
pose, but  find  this  morning  that  he  has  not  left  Columbus  yet.  Gov- 
ernor Milton,  of  this  State,  protests  against  the  obstructions  being 
placed  in  the  river,  unless  done  under  direction  of  the  proper  military 
authorities  of  the  Confederate  States. 

To  prevent  complications  in  the  matter  I respectfully  ask  instructions 
from  the  commanding  general  on  the  subject. 

Governor  Milton  requests  that  no  boat  be  permitted  to  go  below 
Alum  Bluff  for  the  purpose  of  obstructing  the  river  until  the  command- 
ing general  is  heard  from. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c., 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  22,  1862. 
Brig  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : I beg  leave  respectfully  to  present  my  third  weekly  re- 
port on  the  progress  of  the  work  on  marine  torpedo  ram. 

The  ship -carpenters  during  the  past  week  have  been  actively  engaged 
in  planking  the  vessel. 

The  special  agent  sent  to  Richmond  to  bring  on  the  engines,  boilers, 
shafting,  and  propeller  has  returned  with  one  engine,  shafting,  and 
propeller,  but  was  unable  to  procure  the  other  engine  and  boiler  prom- 
ised. He  is  informed  that  there  are  two  boilers  in  Wilmington,  which 
wrere  intended  for  a vessel  of  about  the  same  size  as  our  ram,  begun 
in  that  city,  but  since  interrupted  by  the  epidemic. 

The  Navy  Department  has  a lot  of  boiler-plate  at  Richmond  which 
they  propose  sending  to  Charleston  for  one  or  more  of  the  gunboats 
now  being  constructed.  If  a portion  of  this  could  be  obtained  for  our 
purposes  the  boilers  could  be  soon  constructed. 

The  procuring  of  boilers  already  made  would  however  economize 
time,  which  is  now  invaluable. 

It  is  almost  indispensable  to  the  success  of  the  enterprise  that  a second 
engine  be  procured  from  Richmond.  It  should  not  resemble  that  re- 


CHAI*.  XXYI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  687 

ceived,  but  should  be  direct  acting.  With  two  engines  far  more  speed, 
safety,  and  certainty  would  be  insured. 

I am  using  my  utmost  efforts  to  procure  a supply  of  pig  or  scrap  iron 
; for  casting  the  machinery  proposed  to  be  used  in  operating  the  torpedo. 

I have  sent  an  agent  to  collect  all  that  can  be  procured  on  the  rice 
plantations  on  Cooper  River,  and  have  addressed  several  gentlemen  on 
the  subject  in  the  interior  of  the  State. 

I have  received  such  supplies  of  bar-iron  from  the  flag-officer  of  the 
station  as  were  necessary  to  supply  the  immediate  requirements  of  the 
ship-carpenter. 

I have  taken  all  the  necessary  steps  to  procure  an  early  supply  of 
such  timber  as  may  be  required  to  meet  further  demands.  Upon  mak- 
ing a careful  examination  of  the  vessel  and  calculating  its  draught  it 
is  evident  that  it  may  be  advantageously  used  against  such  of  the  en- 
emy’s vessels  as  now*  frequent  the  inlets  and  water-courses  reached  by 
inland  navigation. 

If  the  design  proves  practicable  there  is  no  estimating  the  advantage 
which  may  be  derived  from  it  in  this  field  of  operations,  which  cannot 
be  reached  by  the  gunboats  now  built  or  in  course  of  construction. 

I would  earnestly  and  respectfully  suggest,  however,  that  a single 
pivot  gun  be  placed  in  a suitable  shield  amidships  to  enable  the  vessel 
to  make  a defense  in  case  any  accident  should  occur  to  the  engine  or 
other  machinery.  This  necessity  would  become  more  imperative  should 
the  ram  go  into  action  single-handed ; it  would  further  insure  to  the 
service  a useful  vessel  should,  from  some  unforeseen  cause,  the  torpedo 
be  found  ineffectual. 

Such  a modification  I am  further  assured  would  bring  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  design  the  sympathy  of  those  whose  co-operation  would 
be  invaluable. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers . 


Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Dist.  East  and  Middle  Fla., 

Tallahassee , November  24,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : His  Excellency  Governor  Milton  has  informed  me  that  he  with- 
draws any  objection  he  may  have  had  to  the  obstructions  of  the  Apa- 
lachicola  River,  having  ascertained  that  the  work  was  to  be  done  under 
direction  of  a Government  engineer.  Captain  Moreno,  I understand,  is 
now  progressing  with  the  work. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  great  respect,  your,  obedient 

servant, 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  November  24,  1862. 

Hon.  John  Milton, 

Governor  of  Florida , Tallahassee : 

Your  dispatch  to  the  President  referred  to  this  office  for  answer. 
General  H.  Cobb  has  been  assigned  to  command  of  Department  of 


688 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


Middle  Florida,  from  the  Suwannee  to  Chattahoochee  Rivers,  headquar 
ters  Quincy,  and  will  receive  instructions  from  General  Beauregard  a 
Charleston,  with  such  amount  of  force  as  the  latter  can  command 
The  Government  has  not  the  means  at  this  time  to  do  more. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector -General. 


Tallahassee,  Fla.,  November  25,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

Why  not  establish  the  department  of  the  part  of  Florida  under  com 
mand  of  General  Cobb  and  parts  of  Georgia  and  Alabama  asked  foj 
by  the  Governors  of  the  three  States.  With  General  Cobb  in  commauc 
of  it  we  can  raise  the  force  needed  without  interfering  with  existing 
organizations. 

Respectfully, 

JOHN  MILTON, 

Governor  of  Florida. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , November  26,  1862. 


General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 


General:  Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb  has  been  assigned  to  the  com 
mand  of  the  Department  of  Middle  Florida,  extending  from  the  Su 
wannee  to  the  Choctawhatchee  River.  As  this  assignment  is  within  the 
geographical  limits  of  your  command  he  has  been  directed  to  report  tc 
you  for  instructions.  To  enable  you  to  give  these  instructions  it  is 
proper  to  inform  you  that  the  chief  object  of  this  assignment,  besides 
the  protection  to  be  given  to  Tallahassee,*  is  the  defense  of  the  Chatta 
hoochee,  Flint,  and  Apalachicola  Rivers  against  the  approaches  of  th€ 
enemy  by  means  of  their  boats. 

Although  the  order  restricts  the  limits  of  this  department  to  Middle 
Florida,  it  is  nevertheless  contemplated  that  the  instructions  to  General 
Cobb  should  give  him  a wider  discretion,  so  that  his  observations  and 
duties  may  embrace  the  navigable  waters  of  the  Chattahoochee  and 
Flint  Rivers.  His  habitual  headquarters  have  been  established  in  the 
order  at  Quincy,  Fla.,  where  it  was  thought  he  would  have  the  advan 
tage  of  ready  and  prompt  communication  with  you  by  telegraphic  lines 
Any  other  position  however  which  you  may  think  better  adapted  for  the 
headquarters  of  the  department  is  left  to  your  discretion  to  determine 
and  direct. 

Under  the  pressure  on  the  Department  for  troops  in  various  quarters 
it  is  feared  that  an  accession  of  force  in  that  direction  may  not  be  im- 
mediately given ; but  relying  on  the  popularity  of  General  Cobb,  it  is 
hoped  that  his  efforts  to  obtain  troops  iu  his  own  State  and  the  adjoin 
ing  States  may  be  so  far  successful  as  to  enable  them  to  collect  a suffi- 
cient force  until  aid  from  other  quarters  can  be  sent  to  him. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


CUA1-.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


689 


,,  kj.  w.,  November  26,  1862. 


Charleston,  S.  C.. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond,  Va.  : 

I learn  with  regret  from  Colonel  Rhett  that  the  two  7-inch  rifled 
guns  have  been  turned  over  to  Navy  for  Mobile,  as  the  boom  here  is 
likely  to  prove  a failure,  which  increases  the  necessity  for  much  larger 
number  of  heaviest  guns. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Richmond,  November  27,  1862. 

Hon.  John  Milton, 

Governor  of  Florida , Tallahassee : 

The  command  of  General  Cobb  has  been  enlarged  to  include  that 
part  of  Georgia  which  embraces  the  navigable  waters  of  Chattahoochee 
and  Flint  Rivers,  and  has  been  instructed  to  use  his  best  efforts  to 
obtain  forces  from  that  State.  Alabama  is  within  the  department  of 
General  J.  E.  Johnston,  lately  assigned,  extending  west  to  the  Missis- 
sippi River.  He  will  be  directed  to  use  like  efforts  in  obtaining  troops 
from  Alabama. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston , S.  (7.,  November  27,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

General  : About  the  20th  instant,  having  ascertained  that  a suffi- 
cient number  of  guns  of -the  heaviest  caliber  could  not  be  procured  for 
the  defense  of  this  important  harbor  and  that  the  floating  boom  across 
its  entrance  would  possibly  be  a failure,  I determined  to  hasten,  by  all 
practicable  means  in  my  power,  the  rifling  and  banding  of  as  many  42 
and  32  pounders  already  in  position  in  the  works  of  this  harbor  as  time 
and  the  limited  means  under  my  control  would  permit.  But  having 
ascertained  by  actual  Experiment  that  the  rifling  and  banding  of  a 
32-pounder  by  the  ordnance  officer,  Maj.  F.  L.  Childs,  in  charge  of  the 
arsenal  here,’ had  taken  more  than  four  weeks  to  be  completed,  and 
having  at  least  twenty  other  guns  of  that  caliber  and  of  42-pounders 
to  rifle  and  band  in  a similar  manner,  it  became  evident  to  me  it  would 
be  utterly  impossible  to  complete  them  in  time  for  the  pressing  emer- 
gencies of  our  situation.  About  the  same  time  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Rip- 
ley, commanding  First  Military  District,  having  informed  me  that  he 
felt  convinced  he  could  have  the  alterations  desired  made  in  less  than 
half  the  time  taken  by  the  ordnance  department  if  I would  place  the 
matter  under  his  control,  and  being  extremely  anxious  to  have  the 
work  done  as  soon  as  practicable  I issued  Special  Orders,  No.  229,  of 
which  the  following  is  the  section  bearing  on  the  case,  viz : 

Par.  III.  The  commanding  general  of  the  First  Military  District  has  the  authority 
to  direct  and  order  the  rifling  and  handing  of  such  guns  as  require  it  within  his  com- 
mand to  the  extent  of  the  capacity  for  doing  the  work  effectually,  and  may  make 
requisitions  directly  upon  the  Charleston  Arsenal  or  other  proper  source,  through 
his  district  ordnance  officer,  for  the  necessary  material  for  the  work, 

44  R R — YOL  XIY 


690 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XXVI. 


General  Ripley  immediately  took  the  matter  in  hand,  catised  several 
heavy  guns  to  be  dismounted  from  the  works  and  brought  to  Messrs. 
Eason  & Co.’s  foundery  in  this  city,  and  made  on  Major  Childs  a requi- 
sition, in  pursuance  of  the  orders  already  referred  to,  for  two  sets  of 
bands  for  42-pounder  guns  in  depot.  Major  Childs  declined  to  issue, 
inclosing  me  the  requisition  indorsed  as  follows  : 

Respectfully  referred  to  General  Beauregard  to  know  if  it  is  his  desire  to  devolve 
any  portion  of  my  duties  upon  General  Ripley. 

The  hands  wanted  have  been  waiting  at  Cameron’s  establishment  for  some  time  jt 
for  the  guns  to  be  sent  up.  If  General  Ripley  continues  to  send  guns  as  fast  as  they 
are  wanted  he  will  accomplish  all  he  can  possibly  do  and  not  violate  the  reiterated  9 
orders  and  regulations  of  the  Ordnance  Bureau. 

This  paper  was  returned  by  me  with  the  following  indorsement : 

The  necessities  of  the  service  require  that  Special  Orders,  No.  229,  from  these  head-  U 
quarters  shall  be  carried  into  effect. 

But  having  called  on  both  of  said  officers  for  a statement  of  the  shortest 
time  in  which  the  rifling  and  banding  could  be  done  under  the  superiu- j.| 
tendance  of  each,  their  answers  were  as  follows: 

General  Ripley’s : 

Messrs.  Eason  & Co.  inform  me  that  they  can  band  and  rifle  two  guns  in  nine  days 
from  this  date,  and  that  they  can  continue  so  as  to  turn  out  one  or  two  guns  there- 1 
after  every  five  or  seven  days  if  they  have  the  bands ; they  can  furnish  the  bands  i i 
themselves  after  ten  days,  i believe  them. 

Major  Childs  says : 

That  full  three  weeks  have  heretofore  been  taken  by  Messrs.  Eason  & Bro.  in  rifling  4 
and  banding  32-pounder  and  42-pounder  guns;  but  that  by  working  at  night  and  on  ji 
Sundays  and  distributing  the  work  between  Eason  and  Cameron  I hope  to  be  able  H 
to  finish  one  gun  per  week.  I should  state  that  it  is  only  lately  that  Cameron  & Co.  I 
have  procured  a lathe  large  enough  to  hold  a 32-pounder. 

I thereupon  determined  that  the  former  should  direct  those  important  i 
alterations,  on  which  might  depend  the  safety  of  this  harbor  and  city,  ij 

On  or  about  the  23d  instant  Major  Childs  had  called  on  me  to  express  i 
his  objections  to  Orders,  No.  229,  stating  that  the  Ordnance  Department  i 
would  not  pay  for  work  done  at  the  founderies  of  this  city  not  ordered 
through  him.  I then  remarked  that  in  that  event  I would  procure  the 
money  from  other  sources,  intending  in  that  case  to  call  on  the  city  or 
State  authorities  to  pay  for  the  rifling  and  banding  of  the  guns  intended  - 
specially  for  the  defense  of  this  harbor. 

On  the  26th  instant  General  Ripley  again  sent  the  same  requisition 
to  Major  Childs,  who  reiterated  positively  his  refusal  until  he  had  seen  : 
me.  General  Ripley  then  went  to  the  arsenal  in  person,  accompanied 
by  an  armed  force,  to  compel,  if  necessary,  obedience  to  Orders,  No.  229. 
Major  Childs  having  again  refused  to  issue  the  bands  called  for,  alleg-  j 
ing  that  he  wished  to  see  the  general  commanding  the  department 
before  complying  with  the  orders  he  had  received,  General  Ripley  felt 
compelled  to  arrest  him,  and  as  he  refused  to  turn  over  his  duties  to  the 
next  officer  in  rank  (Lieutenant  Fraser)  General  Ripley  called  on  the  I 
latter  to  inform  him  where  the  bands  were.  They  were  found  in  a yard  i: 
adjoining  the  arsenal  and  were  taken  possession  of,  the  necessary  in-  I 
voices  and  receipts  were  furnished,  and  the  bands  transported  to  the 
foundery,  w here  the  guns  were  awaiting  them.  In  order,  however,  not 
to  delay  at  this  critical  moment  the  important  operations  of  the  ord- 
nance department  the  limits  of  Major  Childs  have  been  extended  to  < 
those  of  the  city  of  Charleston,  and  he  has  been  authorized  to  attend 
to  all  the  current  duties  of  his  position. 


Chap.  XXYI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  691 

Charges  and  specifications  have  been  preferred  against  Major  Childs 
by  General  Ripley,  as  per  copy  "herewith.  Before  ordering  a court  I 
shall  await  the  instructions  of  the  War  Department  in  this  case.  I can 
but  express  my  regret  at  the  occurrences  just  referred  to,  especially  at 
this  critical  juncture,  when  so  much  energy  and  harmony  should  pre- 
vail in  all  the  departments  of  the  service;  but  I must  be  permitted  to 
state,  as  my  deliberate  opinion,  that  so  long  as  the  arsenal  is  kept  here 
in  so  close  proximity  to  the  headquarters  of  the  department  and  of  the 
First  District  so  long  will  there  be  a clashing  of  authority  between  them, 
for  in  the  military  service  an  imperium  in  imperio  cannot  be  permitted 
without  a conflict  of  authority  sooner  or  later.  Moreover  the  chiefs  of 
ordnance  of  this  department  and  district,  relying  too  much  on  the  sup- 
plies of  the  arsenal,  of  which  they  are  not  fully  informed,  often  make 
requisitions  at  too  short  notice,  thereby  causing  unnecessary  delays  and 
confusion. 

Again,  the  failure  of  the  floating  boom  across  the  entrance  of  this 
harbor  and  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  a sufficient  quantity  of  the 
heaviest  ordnance  (as  already  called  for)  renders  the  removal  of  the 
arsenal  to  a safer  locality  a matter  of  urgent  necessity,  leaving  here 
only  such  stores  and  supplies  as  may  be  absolutely  required  for  the 
immediate  wants  of  this  district  and  department.  Several  weeks  ago 
I called  the  attention  of  Major  Childs  to  the  probable  necessity  of  such 
a change  of  locality,  and  he  reported  to  me  a short  time  after  that  he 
had  made  the  selection  of  a place  in  the  northwestern  part  of  this  State 
for  the  arsenal  to  be  removed  to,  and  that  he  had  given  orders  for  the 
immediate  construction  there  of  the  necessary  buildings,  &c.  I there- 
fore respectfully  but  earnestly  request  the  War  Department  to  give 
such  orders  as  will  insure  the  immediate  translation  of  the  arsenal  from 
this  city  to  the  place  already  selected  by  Major  Childs. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

p.  s. — The  accompanying  papers  are  inclosed  herewith,  marked  as 
follows : * 

A. — R.  S.  Ripley,  brigadier-general,  commanding:  Reports  circum- 
stances connected  with  arrest  of  Maj.  F.  L.  Childs,  and  incloses  charges 
and  specification  against  that  officer. 

B. — R.  S.  Ripley,  brigadier-general : Charges  and  specifications  pre- 
ferred against  Maj.  F.  L.  Childs,  C.  S.  Artillery. 

C. — F.  L.  Childs,  major,  C.  S.  Army:  In  relation  to  his  arrest  by 
Brigadier-General  Ripley  for  refusing  to  fill  a requisition. 

D.  — G.  T.  Beauregard,  general,  commanding:  Giving  reasons  for  the 
arrest  of  Maj.  F.  L.  Childs,  &c. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  30,  1862. 

R.  B. — This  letter  and  accompanying  papers  have  been  delayed  to 
enable  Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger  to  arrange  this  whole  matter  without  resort- 
ing to  a court-martial;  but  he  has  failed  to  do  so.  Major  Childs,  not 
yet  understanding  the  gravity  of  his  offense,  seems  to  think  that  the 
ordnance  department  was  created  solely  for  the  special  benefit  of  its 
officers,  and  as  I will  necessarily  be  compelled  to  bring  charges  against 
him  myself,  I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  request  that  the  War  De- 


Not  found. 


G92  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA .,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

partment  will  order  as  soon  as  practicable  the  assembling  of  a court 
for  his  immediate  trial. 

Respectfully, 

G.  T.  B. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  29,  1862—10  a.  m. 
General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

Enemy’s  ordinary  fleet  reported  to  have  left  Hilton  Head,  probably 
for  an  expedition  on  coast  or  for  the  north;  if  the  latter,  it  indicates 
Burnside’s  operations.  Will  telegraph  further  when  more  is  known 
here. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  29,  1862—8.15  a.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Comdg.  1st  Mil.  Dist .,  Dept,  of  8.  C.  and  Ga .,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 

General:  I am  informed  the  enemy’s  fleet  has  left  Hilton  Head.  We 
must  be  prepared  to  meet  him  at  all  points.  You  will  issue  three  days’ 
provisions  to  movable  troops  and  sufficient  ammunition.  See  that  all 
troops  are  provided  with  haversacks.  Collect  cars  enough  to  transport 
two  regiments  at  a time  on  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  and 
the  Northeastern  Railroad.  No  train  should  be  overloaded. 

My  impression  is  that  the  enemy’s  demonstration  is  intended  against 
Georgetown;  if  so,  vre  may  have  to  march  also  some  troops  from  here; 
make  all  the  necessary  preparations.  You  will  be  put  in  command  of 
all  troops  moving  in  that  direction.  You  will  please  forward  by  ex- 
press the  inclosed  note  to  General  Trapier. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Charleston,  November  29.  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier: 

Be  on  lookout;  enemy’s  fleet  has  left  Hilton  Head;  issue  three  days’  ‘ 
provisions  to  movable  troops;  look  to  ammunition  and  haversacks. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

[Similar  dispatches  sent  to  Mercer  and  Hagood.] 


Charleston,  November  29,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  C. : 

Enemy’s  fleet  reported  to  have  left  Ililton  Head;  look  out  for  them. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


603 


Executive  Department, 

Milled geville,  Ga.,  November  29,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga,,  and  Fla,,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

General:  The  General  Assembly  of  this  State  lias  .just  passed  an 
act  authorizing  me  to  place  obstructions  in  the  navigable  streams  ot 
this  State  against  incursions  of  the  enemy  and  to  hire  or  impress 
slaves  to  perform  the  necessary  labor.  As  I desire  to  preserve  and 
cultivate  the  most  cordial  relations  between  yourself  as  the  commander 
of  the  military  department  in  which  Georgia  is  embraced  and  myself 
in  carrying  out  the  provisions  of  said  act,  I propose  to  furnish  the  la- 
borers by  hiring  or  impressing  them  as  contemplated  in  the  act,  and 
putting  them  under  officers  and  engineers  detailed  by  you  for  that  duty, 
and  to  give  the  whole  planning,  supervision,  control,  and  execution  of 
the  work  to  such  officers  and  engineers  as  you  may  order  on  such  duty. 

I make  this  proposition,  as  it  may  be  difficult  for  me  to  procure  the 
services  of  competent  engineers,  and  to  avoid  any  conflict  which  might 
ensue  in  having  the  obstructions  put  m the  rivers  between  State  and 
Confederate  officers  or  any  other  conflicting  interests.  Should  you 
take  charge  of  and  execute  the  work  I will  cause  all  the  laborers  to 
be  furnished  at  such  points  as  you  may  designate,  and  will  expect  the 
Confederate  Government  to  pay  the  expense  of  the  slaves,  including 
hire,  subsistence,  transportation,  &c.,  on  terms  somewhat  similar  to 
those  on  which  the  laborers  are  furnished  to  General  Mercer  to  finish 
the  fortifications  at  Savannah,  in  obedience  to  his  requisition  made  on 
the  State  for  laborers.  Be  pleased  to  communicate  with  me  on  the 

subject.  , „ _ . , . 

The  places  in  the  streams  where  obstructions  shall  be  placed  will  be 

selected  by  your  engineers  or  officers. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  E.  BROWN. 


Charleston,  November  30,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

Destination  of  Hilton  Head  fleet  not  yet  known  ; about  ten  vessels 
from  here  also  gone.  Deceived  last  night  following  from  Savannah  : 

Four  steamers,  one  river  steamboat,  one  large  sailing  ship  have  sailed  during  the 
day.  Ten  or  lifteeu  schooners  at  anchor. 

Departure  of  so  many  heavy  vessels  may  indicate  Wilmington  or 

Mobile.  _ _ 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD, 

General,  Commanding. 


Charleston,  November  30,  1862. 

Bng.^Jen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah,  Ga. : 

Please  inform  me  the  condition  of  enemy’s  fleet  at  Fort  Pulaski.  It 
all  be  quiet,  discharge  cars  collected. 

H ’ G.  T.  BEAU  PEG  ADD, 


694  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  30,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo  : 

Please  inform  me  appearance  of  enemy’s  fleet  at  Hilton  Head.  If 
all  be  quiet,  resume  normal  condition  of  troops. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 


Charleston,  November  30, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff  : 

General  : I would  respectfully  present  my  report  on  the  progress 
of  the  work  on  marine  torpedo  ram  for  the  fourth  week  of  its  construe-  j 
tion,  ending  November  29, 1862.  During  that  period  the  workmen  have 
been  engaged  in  planking  the  exterior  and  ceiling  the  interior  of  the 
vessel,  in  preparing  the  clamps  on  which  to  place  the  deck  timbers,  now 
ready  to  go  into  position. 

After  making  many  ineffectual  efforts  to  obtain  a supply  of  iron  for 
casting  from  official  sources,  and  finding  it  absolutely  impossible  to  i 
procure  by  purchase  any  considerable  quantity  in  this  city,  I sent  an 
agent  to  the  plantations  on  Cooper  River  to  arrange  with  the  planters  I 
for  the  purchase  of  such  scrap  iron  as  may  be  in  their  possession. 

My  agent  has  just  returned,  and  has  reported  that  he  has  obtained  i1 
about  twenty-five  tons,  deliverable  at  the  landings  on  the  river.  I have  j 
also  received  information  of  a further  supply  to  be  delivered  at  the  rail- 
road depot  at  Camden,  S.  C.,  and  have  ordered  its  transportation  to 
this  city.  These  supplies  will  no  doubt  be  sufficient  to  accomplish  our 
purpose. 

A special  agent  sent  by  me  to  Wilmington  to  examine  the  boilers 
belonging  to  Government  at  that  place  and  to  ascertain  everything  j 
concerning  them,  also  to  make  careful  inquiry  as  to  whether  a proper  ' 
engine  and  boilers  may  be  obtained  from  other  sources  in  that  city,  has  ! 
not  yet  reported. 

In  obedience  to  the  instructions  of  the  general  commanding  I ad- 
dressed a communication  (November  26)  to  Capt.  John  McCrady,  chief 
engineer  of  Georgia,  in  reference  to  obtaining  all  necessary  infor- 
mation as  to  the  dimensions,  &c.,  of  engines,  boilers,  shafting,  and  pro-  j 
peller  of  steam-tug  Barton,  at  Savannah ; also  to  make  inquiry  of 
Brigadier-General  Mercer  if  said  vessel  could  possibly  be  spared  from 
her  present  service.  No  reply  has  yet  been  received  to  my  letter.  In 
connection  with  this  matter  it  may  be  proper  for  me  here  to  state  that 
Commander  Hartstene  has  addressed  me  a Dote,  stating  that  if  the  en- 
gine, &c.,  desired  can  be  obtained,  to  give  the  ram  good  speed,  he  would  , 
volunteer  to  take  charge  of  her.  He  has  expressed  a deep  interest  in 
the  undertaking,  and  I believe  his  cool  judgment  and  determination 
would  aid  to  a great  degree  in  obtaining  a successful  issue  to  the  enter- 
prise. 

In  conclusion  1 would  beg  to  say  that  all  the  practical  difficulties 
that  presented  themselves  on  a close  and  careful  investigation  of  the 
design  have  been  satisfactorily  overcome,  and  I now  feel  assured  of 
success.  This  assurance  is  greatly  strengthened  by  the  confidence  ex- 
pressed by  every  one  associated  with  me  in  the  work. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers , Provisional  Army  Confederate  States, 


Chat.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.—  CONFEDERATE. 


695 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  Districts  of  East  and  Middle  Florida,  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph 
Finegan  commanding,  for  November , looA 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

W 

<D 

O 

m 

o 

£ 

15 

6 

11 

35 

2 

299 

168 

119 

636 

115 

358 

206 

172 

758 

121 

418 
276 
267 
1, 035 
164 

1st  Special  Battalion  Florida  Infantry  (4  companies) 

| Three  independent  companies  of  inlantry 

1 Three  companies  of  Partisan  Rangers  . - - - - - ^ 

! Nine  companies  of  cavalry  and  Dunham  s hatterv  

69 

1,  337 

1,  615 

2, 160 

1 

ported  as  cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  December  2,  186^. 

His  Excellency  Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown,  Milledgeville , Ga.  : 

Sir  • Your  letter  of  the  29th  ultimo  has  been  received.  I thank  you 
for  the  considerate  offer  of  placing  under  my  control  and  that  ot  the 
engineer  officers  to  be  designated  by  me  the  laborers  required  to  ob- 
struct the  navigable  streams  of  Georgia  in  pursuance  to  an  act  ot  the 
General  Assembly.  I avail  myself  with  pleasure  ot  said  offer  and  I 
have  ordered  my  chief  engineers  for  Georgia  and  Florida  (Oapt.  John 
McCrady  and  Theodore  Moreno)  to  correspond  with  you  directly  on  the 
subject.  The  latter  officer  is  in  charge  of  the  obstructions  ot  the  Chat 
tahoochee  by  order  of  the  War  Department. 

After  full  inquiry  and  mature  consideration  I decided  a few  days  ago 
to  obstruct  the  Altamaha  River  at  a favorable  military  position,  Lake 
Bluff  about  li  miles  below  the  Albany  and  Savannah  Railroad,  lhe 
officer  specially  in  charge  of  said  work  and  protecting  battery  is  Cap.. 
John  Howard,"  Provisional  Army  of  the  Contederate  States,  under  tu^ 

general  instructions  of  Capt.  John  McCrady. 

The  general  plan  of  obstruction  I have  adopted  tor  shallow  rivers  is 
simple,  easily  constructed,  of  little  cost,  and  I hope  will  prove  very 

eftectual^the  gtreams  y0ur  Excellency  should  consider  ought  to  be  ob- 
structed would  be  reconnoitered  as  soon  as  an  engineer  officer  could  be 

selected  for  that  object.  . ' « 

The  conditions  contained  in  your  letter  relative  to  the  negroes  lur- 

nished  by  you  are  accepted.  , , , , 

I remain,  with  respect,  Your  Excellency’s  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ G.  T.  BEAUREGARD,  * 

General , Commanding .. 


Hdors  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  <7.,  December  2,  1862. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris,  „ 7 „ 7.  _ ~ 

Chief  Engineer , Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  • 

Sir  • You  will  at  once  adopt  all  necessary  measures  for  the  immediate 
excavation  of  a channel  13  feet  in  depth  at  high  water  in  the  Wappoo 


696  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Cut,  for  the  passage  of  gunboat-rams  from  the  Ashley  to  t he  Stono,  in 
order  that  they  may  operate  in  either  river  according  to  circumstances; 
we  will  thus  be  enabled  to  retake  possession  of  and  hold  Cole’s  Island, 
thereby  doing  away  with  the  necessity  of  keeping  so  large  a force  on 
James  Island  as  is  now  required  for  the  protection  of  this  city  from  an 
approach  of  the  enemy  in  that  direction. 

According  to  the  best  information  the  whole  length  of  the  excavation 
will  be  about  1,000  yards  by  about  2J  feet  in  depth  and  by  about  25 
feet  in  width,  or  7,000  cubic  yards  in  all.  I desire  the  whole  matter  to 
be  done  as  quietly  as  possible,  in  order  not  to  awaken  the  suspicions  of 
the  enemy’s  gunboats  in  the  Stono.  We  may  then  have  the  opportunity 
of  taking  them  and  then  of  reopening  our  inland  water  communications 
with  Port  Royal,  or  we  may  obtain  stronger  engines  for  our  iron  gun- 
boats and  rams  here. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD,* 

General , Commanding. 


Columbus,  Ga.,  December  3, 1862. 

(Received  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office,  Jan.  7,  1863.) 

Dear  Sir  : I trust  you  will  pardon  me  for  trespassing  on  your  time 
with  this  unofficial  letter  in  reference  to  the  condition  of  the  defenses 
of  Middle  Florida. 

I am  now  on  my  way  to  my  post  and  am  not  as  fully  informed  as  I 
hope  to  be  after  reaching  there,  but  I have  learned  enough  to  induce 
the  writing  of  this  letter. 

The  great  apprehension  which  has  been  felt  in  Southwestern  Georgia, 
as  well  perhaps  as  the  upper  portion  of  Middle  Florida,  has  been  from 
the  enemy  coming  up  the  Apalachicola  River  and  thence  up  the  Flint 
and  Chattahoochee ; hence  their  efforts  have  been  directed  to  the  de- 
fenses of  these  rivers,  and  particularly  the  Apalachicola.  I think  that 
the  arrangements  made  for  putting  obstructions  in  the  Apalachicola 
are  ample,  and  I have  no  doubt  we  will  soon  be  in  a good  condition  to 
resist  successfully  any  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  come  up  the  river  with 
their  boats.  But  to  my  mind  the  point  of  danger  is  in  a direction  which 
either  has  not  been  looked  to,  or  at  all  events  is  not  guarded  against. 
With  the  map  before  you  I think  I can  present  the  matter  pretty  clearly 
to  your  mind.  The  movement  of  the  enemy  will  not,  in  my  opinion,  be 
up  the  Apalachicola,  but  they  will  attempt  either  to  land  at  Shell  Point, 
about  the  mouth  of  the  Ocklockonnee,  to  move  on  Saint  Mark’s,  or  else 
going  directly  to  Saint  Mark’s  (which  is  in  a defenseless  condition),  land 
their  forces,  march  upon  Tallahassee,  and  thence  to  the  Apalachicola 
River;  or,  leaving  Tallahassee  to  the  right,  go  directly  to  the  river. 
Attacking  in  the  rear  our  batteries  on  the  river  they  inust  fall,  as  at 
present  organized,  and  then  the  removal  of  the  obstructions  and  the 
Jpe  passage  of  the  river  is  simply  a question  of  time.  With  the  Apa- 
lachicola River  and  the  country  which  they  will  have  possession  of  in 
carrying  out  these  movements,  not  only  Middle  Florida  but  Southwest- 
ern Georgia  must  be  lost. 

The  importance  of  holding  Southwestern  Georgia  cannot  be  over- 
estimated. It  is  the  only  section  of  our  State  which  was  blessed  with 
good  crops  this  year  and  is  now  looked  to  for  supplies  both  of  corn  and 
bacon. 

To  meet  these  apprehended  attacks  the  force  now  in  Middle  Florida 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE 


697 


consists  of  five  companies  of  infantry,  one  of  cavalry,  one  Partisan 
Ranger,  and  one  battery  of  artillery,  in  all  not  amounting  to  700  effect- 
ive men. 

I need  not  say  to  you  that  this  is  for  the  purpose  no  force  at  all.  I 
shall  bring  the  subject  in  formal  reports  to  the  attention  of  the  proper 
departments;  but  I address  you  this  unofficial  letter  because  I think 
you  should  know  the  facts,  and  because  I should  like  very  much  to  have 
your  views  on  the  points  I have  suggested  as  far  as  your  time  would 
enable  you  to  consider  them.  I have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  I 
could  raise  in  a very  short  time  an  ample  force  for  this  defense  if  the 
law  would  authorize  it  and  your  judgment  sanctioned  and  approved 
the  plan. 

If  the  persons  whom  I would  authorize  to  raise  companies  and  regi- 
ments would  be  commissioned  to  the  commands  after  raising  the  troops 
and  were  authorized  to  take  men  subject  to  the  conscript  law  and  can 
be  armed  and  equipped  after  being  raised,  [ feel  confident  that  I could 
in  a very  short  time  have  in  the  field  as  many  regiments  as  might  be 
required.  I might  want  a few  officers  irom  the  Army  to  aid  me  in  rais- 
ing the  men,  and  whose  experience  would  be  important  in  organizing 
and  disciplining  the  new  troops. 

I submit  the  suggestion  for  your  consideration.  If  it  could  be  done 
I should  be  greatly  gratified  to  have  my  old  regiment,  the  Sixteenth 
Georgia,  as  a nucleus  for  the  new  organization. 

If  you  can  do  so  I should  be  pleased  to  hear  from  you,  not  only  in  re- 
ply to  the  suggestions  of  this  letter,  but  also  to  receive  such  sugges- 
tions as  may  occur  to  you  in  reference  to  the  defenses  of  the  district  to 
which  I have  been  assigned. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  &c., 


HOWELL  COBB. 


General  S.  Cooper  : 


Charleston,  December  3,  1862. 


The  usual  fleet  is  reported  to  have  returned  to  Port  Royal. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Columbus,  Ga.,  December  3,  1862. 

General  : At  my  instance  Captain  Moreno  visits  Charleston  to  lay 
before  you  the  information  he  has  in  reference  to  the  defenses  of  Middle 
Florida.  He  has  examined  pretty  thoroughly  the  Flint,  Chattahoochee, 
and  Apalachicola  Rivers,  and  I should  be  pleased  to  get  your  views  in 
reference  to  the  contemplated  obstructions  in  the  latter  river.  From 
all  I can  learn  I think  that  the  obstructions  in  the  Apalachicola  will  be 
ample,  but  I desire  to  call  ymir  attention  particularly  to  what  I regard 
the  point  of  danger.  Whilst  we  will  be  able  to  resist  successfully  the 
passage  of  the  enemy’s  boats  up  that  river,  I apprehend  that  the  move- 
ment of  the  enemy  will  be  from  a different  point.  Landing  their  forces 
at  Saint  Mark’s,  they  can  march  upon  Tallahassee  and  thence  to  the 
Apalachicola;  or,  leaving  Tallahassee  to  the  right,  make  directly  for  the 
river.  The  march  would  be  comparatively  a short  one,  and  the  country 
being  an  open  piney  woods  country,  with  no  natural  obstructions,  it 
would  be  an  easy  one.  If  this  movement  was  successful  they  could 


698  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai>.  XXVT. 

attack  our  river  defenses  in  the  rear,  and  they  would,  as  at  present 
organized,  fall.  The  removal  of  the  obstructions  in  the  river  and  the 
passage  of  their  boats  up  the  river  would  then  be  simply  a matter  of 
time. 

To  meet  these  or  any  other  movements  of  the  enemy  in  Middle  Florida 
we  have,  as  I am  informed,  five  companies  of  infantry  about  350  strong*, 
one  battery  of  six  pieces  about  150  strong one  cavalry  company  of  50 
men,  and  one  company  of  Partisan  Rangers.  The  utter  inadequacy  of 
this  force  is  too  apparent  for  comment. 

I address  you  this  letter  before  reaching  my  post  because  I deem  it 
important  that  you  should  be  advised  at  once  of  the  condition  of  affairs 
in  this  portion  of  your  department.  I leave  here  in  the  morning  for 
Quincy  and  Tallahassee,  and  as  soon  as  1 obtain  more  full  and  accurate 
information  will  submit  to  you  a formal  report  on  the  subject.  In  the. 
mean  time  I shall  be  most  happy  to  receive  such  suggestions  and  in- 
structions as  you  may  make  and  such  additional  force  as  can  be  fur- 
nished. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ HOWELL  COBB, 

Brigadier- General. 


Savannah,  December  4, 1862. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

The  Navy  here  is  in  urgent  need  of  seamen.  I have  a number  of  vol- 
unteers from  the  Army  ready  and  anxious  to  enter  that  service.  Can  I 
not  transfer  them  at  once  without  further  formality  ? Please  reply. 

H.  W.  MERCER, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

You  may,  if  you  approve  the  transfer,  order  them  to  be  made  under 
General  Orders,  No.  77  and  No.  89. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  0.  and  Ga., 

No.  115.  f Charleston , S.  0.,  December  4,  1862. 

I.  All  light  batteries  in  this  department  will  hereafter  consist  of  four 
pieces,  each  drawn  by  six  horses  (caissons  the  same),  of  calibers  as  fol- 
lows : Either  four  6-pounder  smooth-bore  or  two  6-pounder  smooth- 
bore, and  two  12-pounder  or  two  24-pounder  howitzers;  or  four  12- 
pounder  Napoleon  guns  or  four  rifled  guns  of  same  caliber,  if  practica- 
ble; or  two  12  (or  two  24-pounder)  howitzers  and  two  rifled  guns;  and 
no  battery  will  have  guns  of  more  than  two  different  calibers. 

II.  Rifled  guns  are  intended  for  long  ranges,  and  in  action  should  be 
Stationed  on  commanding  positions  beyond  the  range  of  grape  and  rifled 
small-arms,  to  be  used  principally  on  the  enemies  reserves  and  to  select 
his  batteries.  It  is  enjoined  on  officers  to  require  and  impress  upon 
their  men  the  advantage  of  firing  slowly  and  with  deliberation. 

III.  Artillery  should  be  employed  against  the  enemy’s  advancing 
columns  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  and  after  routing  them  should  then 


699 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

! be  turned  against  bis  artillery.  At  all  times  the  horses  must  be 
kept  under  cover  and  concealed  as  much  as  practicable,  tor  by  them 
alone  the  pieces  can  be  moved  expeditiously  in  advancing  or  to  the 
i rear. 

IY.  Field  and  company  officers  are  specially  enjoined  to  instruct 
their  men  under  all  circumstances  to  fire  with  deliberation  at  the  feet 
; of  the  enemy;  they  will  thus  avoid  overshooting,  and,  besides,  wounded 
men  give  more  trouble  to  our  adversary  and  disable  him  more  than  his 
dead,  as  they  have  to  be  taken  from  the  field. 

Y.  Officers  in  command  must  be  cool  and  collected  in  action,  hold 
their  men  in  hand,  and  caution  them  against  useless,  aimless  firing. 
The  men  must  be  instructed  and  required  each  one  to  single  out  his 
mark.  It  was  the  deliberate  sharpshooting  of  our  forefathers  in  the 
| Revolution  of  1776  and  at  New  Orleans  in  1815  which  made  them  so 
formidable  against  the  odds  with  which  they  were  engaged. 

YI.  In  the  beginning  of  a battle,  except  by  troops  deployed  as  skir- 
mishers, the  fire  by  file  will  be  avoided;  it  excites  the  men  and  renders 
their  subsequent  control  difficult.  Fire  by  wing  or  company  should  be 
resorted  to  instead.  During  the  battle  the  officers  and  non  commis- 
sioned officers  must  keep  the  men  in  the  ranks,  enforce  obedience,  and 
encourage  ®md  stimulate  them  if  necessary. 

YII.  Soldiers  must  not  be  permitted  to  quit  the  ranks  to  strip  or  rob 
the  dead,  nor  even  to  assist  in  removing  our  own  dead,  unless  by  special 
permission,  which  shall  only  be  given  when  the  action  has  been  decided. 
The  surest  way  to  protect  our  wounded  is  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the 
field  ; the  most  pressing,  highest  duty  is  to  win  the  victory. 

YIII.  Before  and  immediately  after  battle  the  roll  of  each  company 
will  be  called,  and  absentees  must  strictly  account  for  their  absence 
from  the  ranks.  To  quit  their  standard  on  the  battle-field  under  fire 
under  the  pretense  of  removing  or  aiding  the  wounded  will  not  be  per- 
mitted; any  one  persisting  in  it  will  be  shot  on  the  spot,  and  whosoever 
shall  be  found  to  have  quit  the  field  or  his  regiment  or  company  with- 
out authority  will  be  regarded  and  proclaimed  a coward  and  dealt 
with  accordingly. 

IX.  Commanders  in  action  when  in  doubt  or  without  orders  must 
rapidly  advance  in  the  direction  of  the  heaviest  firing,  for  the  art  of 
war  consists  in  the  concentration  and  handling  of  masses,  and  the  more 
rapid  the  attack  the  weaker  habitually  the  resistance. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  East  and  Mid.  Fla., 

No.  1489.  f Tallahassee , December  4,  1862. 

Col.  Caraway  Smith,  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  is  hereby  assigned  to 
the  command  of  the  coast  defenses  from  Headman’s  Bay  west  to  in- 
clude Dickinson  Bay;  his  headquarters  to  be  near  Camp  Leon.  All 
company  officers  iucluded  within  the  limits  here  indicated  will  report 
through  Colonel  Smith.  • 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan  : 

R.  B.  THOMAS, 

Major  and  Inspector  General , Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen. 


too 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  OA.,  AKD  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

IIdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , ■&  (7.,  December  7,  1862. 

Dr.  John  [R.]  Cheyes,  « 

Di  Charge  of  Boom  Construction , Charleston  Harbor , C.  : 

Dear  Sir  : The  commanding  general,  in  consequence  of  the  report  of 
the  hoard  directed  on  the  22d  ultimo,  instructs  me  to  direct  the  cessa- 
tion of  all  future  work  on  the  boom  for  the  obstruction  ot  the  entrance 
into  the  harbor  of  Charleston.  , a,  , ^ 

You  will  please  turn  over  to  Captain  Echols,  Confederate  States  En- 
gineers, the  material  employed  or  collected  lor  the  construction  of  the 

boom.  „ , a 1 1 

The  commanding  general  desires  you  to  continue  in  charge  ot  the 

torpedoes  being  constructed  for  the  entrance  of  the  harbor. 

J am  further  instructed  to  convey  to  you  the  thanks  of  the  command- 
ing general  for  the  zeal  and  iudomitable  industry  display  ed  by  > ou  in 
the  construction  of  the  boom  in  the  face  of  so  many  difficulties  and  lack 
of  resources. 

Please  have  all  the  accounts  connected  with  the  boom  construction 
made  rip  as  soon  as  practicable,  and  report  the  aggregate  of  expendi- 
tures  under  the  several  heads  of  material  purchased,  labo^,  miscella- 
neous. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  HOMAS 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs  Dept,  op  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Q Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  8,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Ripley,  , „ _ 

Comclg.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  South  Carolina  and  Georgia: 
General:  I am  instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  inform 
vou  that  Major  Harris  reports  the  two  redoubts  in  rear  of  Fort  1 em- 
berton  as  ready  for  their  armament,  to  wit:  One  24-pounder  on  siege 
carriage  from  the  eremaillere  line,  and  one  24-pounder  in  barbette  from 

Fort  Moultrie  or  Castle  Pinckney.  . ...  o _ 

The  general  requests  that  you  have  them  sent  to  their  positions  as 
soon  as  practicable,  without  calling  on  the  ordnance  department  if  it 
can  be  avoided. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  ^ 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  December  8,  1862. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris, 

• Chief  of  Engineer  Department  8.  C.  and  tra,  : 

Major  : The  commanding  general  directs  that  General  Rains’  sub- 
marine  batteries  shall  be  located  in  the  following  manner  towit:  Below 
Simmons’  Bluff,  in  the  Wadmalaw : below  Gnmball  s,  on  the  Dawho,and 
inTe  South  Edisto  River,  opposite  Aiken’s  Mill  or  at  some  o her  con- 
venient  and  tit  place  below  the  obstrucaons  m the  1 on  1 on  hirer. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  701 

You  will  also  construct  a magazine  at  Summerville  for  ordnance  stores, 
to  be  stored  in  case  of  an  emergency  or  necessity. 

Respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Ch  ief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  December  8,  1862. 

D.  B.  Harris,  Major  and  Chief  Engineer : 

Major:  The  commanding  general  wishes  the  battery  at  Church 
Flats  to  be  converted  at  once  into  a small  inclosed  work,  to  hold  two 
12-pounder  smooth-bore  guns  (now  at  the  Rantowles  Battery),  an  18- 
pounder  gun  already  ordered  to  it,  and  two  G-pounder  (light)  pieces  to 
be  transferred  to  it  and  placed  in  position  on  the  land  front. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  247.  f Charleston , December  8,  1862. 

I.  Two  breech-loading  rifled  guns,  recently  received  from  the  Ordnance 
Department,  Richmond,  will  be  transferred  to  the  commanding  general 
of  the  Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  who  will  man  them 
from  some  company  in  Jeffords7  battalion,  which  wili  be  organized  and 
equipped  for  service  as  horse  artillery,  but  remaining  attached  to  the 
battalion. 

II.  The  following  disposition  and  arrangement  of  ordnance  will  be 
made  by  the  proper  staff* officers  without  delay: 

1st.  One  12-pounder  rifled  gun,  with  all  necessary  implements,  equip- 
ments, and  100  rounds  of  proper  ammunition,  will  be  transferred  from 
the  White  Point  Battery  to  a position  at  Mr.  Lowndes7  Mill,  near  Com- 
bahee  Ferry,  in  the  Third  Military  District,  to  which  place  also  will  be 
transferred  at  same  time  one  24-pounder  siege  howitzer  from  those  in 
charge  of  Maj.  Charles  Alston  at  Hampstead,  near  Half-Moon  Battery,  • 
100  rounds  assorted  ammunition  to  be  supplied  with  the  gun. 

2d.  Two  32-pounders  and  the  8-inch  navy  gun  will  be  removed  from 
Church  Flats  Battery  to  the  wTorks  at  Jolin7s  Island  Ferry. 

3d.  The  two  12-pouuder  and  two  24-pounder  smooth-bore  guns  at 
present  at  the  Rantowles  Battery  will  be  transferred  as  follows : The 
12-pounders  to  the  work  at  Church  Flats ; one  of  the  24-pounders  to  the 
John’s  Island  Ferry  work,  and  the  other  to  work  at  Wallace’s.  The 
Rantowles  Battery  will  be  left  with  an  armament  of  field  pieces  only. 

4th.  The  two  6-pounder  rifled  and  banded  guns  in  Major  Alston’s 
battery  will  be  transferred  to  the  La  Fayette  Artillery,  now  at  Coosaw- 
hatchee,  forming,  together  with  their  two  12-pounder  howitzers,  a com-* 
plete  battery  of  four  guns.  Their  other  guns  will  be  sent  into  depots. 

5th.  The  two  10-pounder  Parrott  guns  just  arrived  from  Richmond 
will  be  given  to  the  Washington  Artillery,  Captain  Walter,  in  General 
Hagood’s  district,  forming,  together  with  their  two  12-pounder  howitz- 
ers, a complete  battery,  and  their  G-pounder  guns,  if  belonging  to  this 
State,  will  be  marked  “ S.  C.”  aud  scut  to  the  ordnance  depot. 


702 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiai\  XXVL 

6th.  Captain  Waties  (Lieutenant-Colonel  White’s  Palmetto  Battalion 
Light  Artillery)  will  turn  in  one  of  his  three  6-pounder  bronze  guns,  and 
will  receive  instead  one  12-pounder  bronze  howitzer  from  the  three  at 
the  arsenal,  when  his  battery  will  consist  of  two  6-pounders  and  two 
12-pounder  bronze  howitzers. 

7th.  The  12-pounder  howitzer  remaining  at  the  arsenal  will  be  issued 
to  Captain  Culpeper  (Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery),  who  will  turn 
into  depot  the  iron  guns  in  his  battery,  and  two  6-pounder  brass  pieces 
will  be  given  him  instead,  making  a complete  battery  of  four  guns. 

8th.  The  two  12-pounder  bronze  howitzers  of  Major  Alston,  turned 
into  the  arsenal  as  already  ordered,  together  with  two  6-pounder  brass 
pieces  from  the  arsenal,  will  be  given  to  Captain  Earle  (Company  A, 
Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery),  stationed  at  Hardeeville,  in  lieu  of 
the  iron  guns  he  has  at  present,  making  him  a complete  battery  of  four 
bronze  pieces.  His  iron  guns  will  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  General 
Walker,  to  be  mounted  in  works  of  Third  Military  District. 

III.  The  chief  of  ordnance  will  see  that  all  the  guns  referred  to  in  the  ! 
above  orders  are  provided  with  a sufficient  quantity  and  proper  quality  ( 
of  ammunition  and  equipments. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

J JNO.  M.  OTEY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Tallahassee,  Fla.,  December  8, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant - General : 

Sir  : We  have  the  honor  to  submit,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding,  that  in  assuming  the  command  of  our  respective  districts 
we  have  made  such  division  and  disposition  of  the  forces  as  will  in  our 
judgment  be  best  for  the  interest  of  the  service.  We  submit  herewith  a 
statement  showing  the  troops  to  each  district.* 

The  last  returns  from  this  office  will  exhibit  the  aggregate  and  effect- 
ive strength  of  each  company  and  of  the  whole  command. 

The  inclosed  statement  will  exhibit  the  fact  that  portions  of  the  sev- 
eral organizations  are  serving  in  each  district.  This  arrangement  is  very 
objectionable,  but  in  the  present  condition  of  affairs  it  could  not  be  i 
avoided.  To  have  done  otherwise  would  have  required  all  the  cavalry  j 
of  both  districts  to  be  sent  into  one  and  nearly  all  the  infantry  of  both  : 
to  be  in  the  other. 

To  avoid  as  far  as  practicable  the  evils  of  a portion  of  an  organiza-  I 
tion  being  beyond  the  control  of  its  chief  we  have  issued  orders  regard- 
ing returns  and  reports,  copies  of  Which  we  have  the  honor  to  inclose.* 

This  arrangement  is  intended  as  a temporary  one,  and  will  remain  in 
force  only  until  additional  troops  are  obtained,  when,  with  your  ap- 
proval, we  propose  to  bring  the  whole  of  each  organization  under  the 
same  district  commander. 

We  trust  that  the  expected  addition  of  troops  to  this  portion  of  the 
department  will  enable  ns  at  an  early  day  to  do  this. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HOWELL  COBB, 

Briqadier- General.  Comdg.  District  of  Middle  Florida . 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 

Brigadier- General,  Comdg.  District  of  Fast  Florida. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


703 


Tallahassee,  Fla.,  December  9,  1862. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard: 

General:  I have  to-day  relieved  Brigadier-General  Finegan  and 
assumed  the  command  of  the  District  of  Middle  Florida,  to  which  I have 
been  assigned. 

The  joint  letter  addressed  to  you  of  this  date  [December  8,  1862]  by 
General  Finegan  and  myselfi  will  put  the  general  commanding  in  full 
possession  of  the  forces  under  my  command.  The  utter  inefficiency  of 
this  force  for  the  purpose  of  defense  is  too  manifest  to  require  remark 
or  comment. 

The  effective  force  does  not  reach  800  men.  The  extent  of  territory 
can  be  seen  by  a glance  upon  the  map.  The  distance  from  the  Suwan- 
nee to  the  Ohoctawhatchee  is  about  140  miles,  whilst  the  distance  from 
the  coast  is  considerable,  but  cannot  be  stated,  as  the  northern  limit  of 
the  district  has  not  been  defined. 

The  importance  of  defending  this  portion  of  the  country  from  an 
invasion  I have  no  doubt  has  been  considered  by  the  Government,  but 
I may  be  permitted  to  refer  to  a fact  rendered  important  by  the  result 
of  this  year’s  crop.  Not  only  do  the  abundant  crops  of  Middle  Florida 
present  a strong  temptation  to  the  enemy  for  raids  into  the  interior, 
but  in  Georgia  the  failure  of  the  crops  in  the  upper  portion  of  the 
State  has  made  the  southwestern  counties  of  the  State  the  main  source 
from  which  provision  supplies  must  be  obtained.  To  this  section  of 
the  State  must  we  look  for  supplies  of  corn  and  pork,  not  only  for  the 
army,  but  indeed  the  people  of  the  interior  and  upper  counties  are 
already  resorting  there  to  supply  their  own  wants,  occasioned  by  the 
failure  of  the  crops  above.  Another  fact  worthy  of  consideration  is 
the  amount  of  salt  now  being  produced  on  the  coast  of  this  district.  I 
am  informed  that  there  is  now  a daily  production  of  2,000  bushels. 

I do  not  allude  to  other  considerations  demanding  the  energetic 
defense  of  this  section  of  the  country,  because  they  are  well  known 
and  understood  by  the  Government. 

I have  reason  to  believe  that  the  Legislature  of  Florida,  now  in  ses- 
sion at  this  place,  will  before  their  adjournment  adopt  the  necessary 
measures  for  bringing  into  the  field  all  the  force  which  can  be  had  in 
the  State  not  subject  to  the  operation  of  the  conscript  law.  I trust 
that-  the  Legislatures  of  Alabama  and  Georgia,  also  in  session,  will  do 
the  same. 

In  reference  to  Florida,  I deem  it  proper  to  suggest  that,  in  view  of 
her  great  extent  of  sea-coast  and  territory,  her  small  population,  and 
the  number  of  volunteers  which  she  has  sent  for  the  general  defense  to 
other  and  distant  portions  of  the  country,  no  additional  troops,  either 
conscripts  or  any  other  kind,  should  be  withdrawn  from  the  State. 

Though  a small  State,  Florida  has  done  her  full  part  in  furnishing 
troops  for  the  general  defense,  and  should  be  permitted  to  retain  within 
her  own  limits  all  who  are  willing  to  volunteer  into  the  Confederate 
service  for  the  defense  of  the  State  in  its  present  emergency. 

It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  number  of  troops  that  will  be  required 
for  the  proper  defense  of  this  district,  for  the  manifest  reason  that  it 
depends  upon  the  character  and  extent  of  the  attack  and  invasion  that 
the  enemy  may  make. 

If  confined  to  raids  for  the  destruction  of  salt-works  and  other  prop- 
erty immediately  upon  the  coast  the  numbers  would  be  necessarily 
smaller  than  would  be  required  to  repel  a more  extensive  invasion,  look- 
ing to  the  taking  of  the  capital  and  an  advance  into  the  heart  of  the 
State  and  the  southern  portions  of  the  adjoining  States. 


704 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  |Ohaf.  XXVI.  j 

Looking  to  all  reasonable  contingencies,  I think  it  prudent  and  wise 
to  have  a force  of  not  less  than  5,000  men. 

In  the  letter  of  General  Cooper  of  . the  26tli  of  November  to  you,  a 
copy  of  which  you  inclosed  to  me,  the  general,  alluding  to  the  defenses  ; 
of  this  district,  says  : 

Under  the  pressure  on  the  department  for  troops  in  various  quarters  it  is  feared  that  j 
an  accession  of  force  in  that  direction  may  not  he  immediately  given;  but  relying  on  I 
the  popularity  of  General  Cobb,  it  is  hoped  that  his  efforts  to  obtain  troops  in  bis 
own  State  and  the  States  adjoining  will  be  so  far  successful  as  to  enable  him  to  col- 
lect a sufficient  force  until  aid  from  other  quarters  can  be  sent  him. 

Appreciating  highly  the,kind  feelings  which  dictated  this  generous  > 
compliment,  I propose  to  deal  with  the  subject  in  a practical  manner. 

I have  already  stated  the  extent  of  territory  to  be  defended,  and  i 
called  your  attention  to  the  temptations  which  the  abundant  supplies  i 
in  Middle  and  West  Florida  and  the  adjoining  couuties  of  Alabama 
and  Georgia  present,  inviting  an  attack  from  the  enemy.  The  map  will 
exhibit  the  various  points  from  which  such  an  attack  could  be  made. 

I have  also  given  you  a statement  of  the  force  at  my  command  to  i 
meet  any  attack  or  invasion  that  may  be  made.  That  it  is  wholly  in- 
adequate for  any  such  purpose  is  manifest ; indeed  it  is  scarcely  suffi- 
cient to  discharge  picket  duty. 

If,  as  suggested  by  General  Cooper,  I am  expected  to  raise  in  my  own  i 
and  the  neighboring  States  a force  to  supply  this  deficiency,  either  tem- 
porarily or  permanently,  there  is  no  time  to  be  lost  in  effecting  that 
object.  At  present  I have  no  instructions  to  raise  such  a force,  nor 
have  I the  power  to  raise  that  or  any  other  force,  nor  did  I know  that 
the  department  was  looking  to  me  to  do  so.  If,  however,  lam  intrusted 
with  the  power  and  duty  < f raising  this  force  I feel  quite  confident  that 
I shall  be  able  to  do  it  in  a very  short  time.  To  do  so,  I should  be 
authorized  to  receive  companies,  battalions,  or  regiments,  with  such 
officers  as  they  may  present,  and  when  approved  by  me  commissions  i 
should  be  issued  to  them.  Those  who  undertake  to  raise  their  com-  ; 
panies,  &c.,  should  be  permitted  to  take  all  persons,  whether  subject  to 
conscription  or  not.  With  these  powers,  and  the  announcement  that 
they  were  raised  for  the  defense  of  the  country  in  my  command,  I will 
undertake  to  raise  as  many  troops  as  the  Government  will  agree  to  arm 

and  equip  for  the  purpose.  . 

The  President  has  the -power  under  the  law  to  authorize  the  raising 
of  troops  in  the  manner  I propose.  Between  the  operations  ot  this  plan 
and  the  conscript  law  all  the  force  within  the  limits  of  their  joint  oper- 
ation will  certainly  be  bi  ought  into  the  field. 

There  is  another  mode  by  which  this  force  could  be  raised,  which  I 
will  suggest  for  the  consideration  of  the  Department.  It  is  to  authorize 
me  to  call  upon  the  Governors  of  Alabama,  Georgia,  and  Florida  lor 
their  respective  proportion  of  the  troops  required.  To  carry  out  this 
plan  it  would  be  necessary  to  authorize  the  Governors  to  include  m 
their  call  those  subject  to  conscription.  It  is  due  to  candor  to  say  that 
I cannot  look  with  confidence  to  the  raising  of  the  troops  under  either 
of  the  modes  suggested  if  those  subject  to  conscription  are  excluded 
from  the  number.  Whilst  the  continued  operation  of  the  conscript  law 
will  stimulate  volunteering  and  greatly  expedite  the  raising  of  the  troops, 
no  injury  can  possibly  result  from  the  adoption  of  either  of  the  plans 
suggested,  as  both  volunteers  and  conscripts  will  alike  be  in  the  service 

of  their  country.  . • , . ,, 

I have  not  yet  made  a personal  examination  ot  the  defenses  on  the 
Saint  Mark’s  aud  Apalachicola  liivers.  1 propose  to  visit  both  within 


0 ii a l*.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE 


705 


the  next  ten  days,  and  will  report  upon  their  condition  as  soon  there- 
after as  practicable.  Regarding,  however,  the  question  of  raising  as 
promptly  as  possible  the  additional  troops  required  for  this  service  as 
of  vital  importance,  I was  unwilling  to  postpone  this  communication 
for  that  length  of  time.  For  that  reason  I make  it  at  once,  and  to  in- 
sure its  reaching  you  I send  it  by  Major  Cobb,  one  of  my  staff.  If  you 
desire  he  can  proceed  to  Richmond  with  any  communication  that  you 
may  desire  to  make  them  on  the.  subject. 

If  practicable,  I should  like  to  obtain  an  answer  by  telegraph  when- 
ever the  Government  determines  on  the  number  of  troops  to  be  raised 
and  the  mode  and  manner  of  raising  them. 

It  is  important  that  the  limits  of  my  district  in  the  States  of  Alabama 
and  Georgia  should  be  defined,  and  I request  that  it  may  be  done  as 


soon  as  possible. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 


HOWELL  COBB, 


Brigadier- Gen'eral,  Commanding  District  of  Middle  Florida. 


Charleston,  December  9,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard: 

If  I were  to  obtrude  upon  your  attention  a matter  of  personal  interest 
which  had  already  been  decided  I might  be  censured  for  my  impor- 
tunity, but  the  evident  importance  of  the  subject  I hope  will  be  a suffi- 
cient apology,  and  a conviction  that  there  still  remains  unsaid  and  un- 
tried some  things  worthy  of  consideration  encourages  me  to  appeal  to 
you  again  in  reference  to  the  boom  obstruction. 

When  I reported  to  you  the  condition  of  this  work,  immediately  after 
the  wreck  of  it  by  the  tide,  I was  entirely  unprepared  in  the  conception 
of  it,  under  the  influence  of  this  new  disaster,  and  was  consequently 
wanting  in  confidence  to  hope  for  a renewed  effort.  Later  reflection, 
however,  rendered  the  subject  more  clear  to  me,  and  when  notified  by 
you  that  I would  be  called  upon  by  the  board  of  investigation  to  answer 
inquiries,  I flattered  myself  that  I would  have  an  opportunity  to  give 
the  result  of  my  thoughts  and  information  for  what  they  were  worth. 
In  this  I was  disappointed. 

I cannot  conceive  of  the  absolute  and  final  condemnation  of  a work 
because  of  any  recognized  difficulty  while  there  is  a probability  or  even 
a possibility  of  developing  it  to  the  fullest  extent  ever  anticipated  with- 
out other  means  than  those  already  allowed  and  approved  for  its  exe- 
cution. I cannot  believe  that  it  is  good  judgment  to  cast  aside  the 
results  of  long  and  costly  labor  on  the  presumed  insufficiency  of  means 
which  it  will  cost  but  little  to  put  to  the  test  of  experiment. 

There  is  now  in  the  dock  a formidable  chain,  more  than  2,200  yards 
in  length,  altogether  unused,  with  floats,  buoys,  &c.,  ready  tor  location. 
It  wants  only  the  anchors  and  mooring  chains.  In  the  channel  there 
is  at  least  1,000  yards  more.  The  construction  of  it  was  a great  under- 
taking, perhaps  an  unwise  one,  but  it  is  done. 

The  trials  which  have  been  made  in  placing  it  may  justly,  when  com- 
pared with  the  magnitude  of  the  work,  be  regarded  as  experiments,  the 
failure  of  which  show  what  is  required  and  conduce  to  ultimate  success ; 
but  if  these  trials  are  considered  as  failures,  involving  the  character  of 
the  work  itself,  let  it  be  considered  that  the  plan  is  vouched  tor  by  high 
authority  and  that  its  failure  is  for  want  of  material.  It  is  like  an  arch 

45  R R— VOL  XIV 


706 


. 

COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

without  its  abutments,  or  a suspension  bridge  without  its  cables,  and  : 
just  as  much,  no  more,  a subject  for  the  exercise  of  private  ingenuity 
as  would  be  either  of  these  under  such  circumstances.  The  surest  and 
most  economical  remedy  is  to  supply  the  evident  deficiency. 

The  material  already  located  is  worth  recovering ; as  it  is,  it  is  a 
nuisance;  it  has  to  be  removed,  or  it  will  break  loose  and  destroy  any  i 
other  structure  in  the  vicinity.  _ 

The  rope  obstruction  certainly  cannot  withstand  it,  and  it  will  be  i 
useless  to  put  down  torpedoes  while  large  masses  of  timber  are  drifting! 

on  every  tide.  . 

That  which  lies  in  the  docks  exacts  constant  attention,  for  any 
other  purpose  than  intended  it  will  have  little  value,  aud  that  little  will 
deteriorate  daily.  It  is  clear  that  the  whole  of  it  has  to  be  disposed  of,  or 
if  rewrought  into  any  new  form  fora  boom  that  it  will  be  a costly7  exper- 
iment  without  the  sanction  of  authority,  which  it  has  in  its  present  con- 
dition. . _ . . 

Suppose  a man  should  build  himself  a house  with  strong  and  lofty 
walls,  and  should  with  a few  slender  rafters  thrice  fail  in  his  efforts  to 
cast  a roof-span  ; ought  he  for  that  reason  to  despair  and  live  forever 
after  unsheltered  % Would  he  not  rather,  timber  wanting,  double  his 
rafters  and  cover  one-half  of  his  house  But  it  is  not  one-half  of  the 
channel  only  that  can  be  closed. 

l^et  the  boom  be  doubled  on  itself.  The  anchors,  which  were  be- 
fore at  the  enormous  distance  of  270,  will  then  be  only  135  feet  apart. 
Surely  this  is  worth  a trial.  If  this  plan  succeeds,  there  is  enough  ot 
the  boom  to  close  the  whole  channel  in  that  way. 

The  facts  to  which  I wished  most  especially  to  draw  attention  are : 

First,  that  in  the  trial  section  last  placed  the  anchors  were  270  feet 
apart;  that  I did  not,  and  I believe  no  reflecting  person  did,  considei 
that  enough  to  insure  the  stability  of  the  boom,  but  as  I did  not  hope 
to  be  sustained  in  a greater  expenditure  of  material  I tried  it  at  the 
maximum  I thought  I could  get  and  the  minimum  I thought  would  do, 
and  it  did  hold  perfectly  until  in  a certain  spring  tide  the  force  of  the 
current  much  exceded  its  nominal  rate. 

Secondly,  that  an  experiment  with  one  section  in  the  manner  I pro 
pose  can  cost  very  little  trouble,  and  as  the  enemy  is  not  expected  to 
come  immediately,  it  may  decide  the  question  favorably  and  in  full  time 

for  its  application.  . . J 

Thirdly,  that  the  boom  could  be  beached  in  some  suitable  place,  and 
thus  not  only  do  no  harm,  but  be  out  of  harm’s  way  and  avoid  being 

water-logged.  , 

Fourthly,  that  the  material,  consisting  of  cast  iron,  wrought-iron,  and 
coal,  for  which  we  have  been  waiting  and  the  want  ot  which  is  the  sole 
cause  of  unsuccess,  has  now  at  last  come  or  is  coming  abundantly. 

Fifthly,  that  excellent  chain  has  been  made  under  my  orders,  and 
that  it  requires  little  more  than  half  the  time  to  make  as  estimated  at 
the  last  official  consideration  of  the  work.  J 

Finally,  from  a gentleman  to  whom  I was  referred  by  General  Gist 
for  information  relative  to  the  subject,  I am  informed  that  the  yield  oi 
iron  from  the  Southern  mines  is  rapidly  increasing,  and  that  the  pro 
duction  of  a hundred  tons  is  now  the  work  of  only7  a few  days;  lienee 
it  cannot  continue  long  to  be  so  precious  either  to  the  public  or  to  the 
Government. 

To  these  observations,  which  I have  made  with  the  desire  to  prevent 
any  precipitate  action  in  the  matter,  I will  take  the  liberty'  of  adding 
some  views  relative  to  the  general  plan  of  obstructing  the  channel, 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


707 


There  are,  as  I have  observed,  over  3,000  yards  of  the  boom  capable 
of  being  laid.  The  distance  between  the  forts  may  be  considered  as 
1 600  yards,  but  the  width  of  the  water  in  which  a vessel  would  venture 
does  not  exceed  1,400  yards.  If  the  boom  were  laid  in  a triple  line,  con- 
nected  together  closely,  the  number  of  anchors  allotted  would  place  two 
(one  up  and  one  down  stream)  at  every  90  feet,  which  I think  would 
give  a strong  security  for  its  remaining  in  place.  This  being  located  in 
the  middle  would  leave  but  a short  distance  on  each  side  between  its 
extremities  and  the  forts.  _ , . , 

In  these  spaces  I propose  to  sink  such  hulks  as  can  be  procured,  which, 
though  insufficient  to  obstruct  the  passage,  would  render  the  naviga- 
tion of  it  uncertain  and  dangerous.  In  addition  to  this,  any  small  bulls 
of  vessels,  or  even  flats,  might  be  moored,  floating,  and  charged  with 
powder  and  combustibles,  and  be  connected  with  the  torts  on  either 
side  by  electric  wires,  so  that  they  could  be  exploded  at  any  desired 

moment.  . , , 

I most  earnestly  solicit  a consideration  of  the  statements  above  made, 
both  in  regard  to  their  correctness  and  value,  in  the  hope  that  an  exper- 
imental section  may  be  ordered  in  the  manner  proposed;  that  the  rest 
may  be  disposed  of  so  as  to  preserve  it,  and  that  the  construction  of 
mooring  chains  may  be  continued.  I do  this  with  the  firm  conviction 
that  the  work  is  almost  a necessity  for  the  completeness  of  the  defense 
and  in  confidence  of  its  ultimate  success. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  R.  CHEVES. 


[Indorsement.] 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Charleston , S.  O.,  December  12,  1862. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  chiefs  of  engineers  of  the  department  and 
of  the  State  for  their  remarks  as  soon  as  practicable.  They  will  please 


state  also: 

1st.  When  this  boom  was  commenced. 

2d.  How  much  of  it  is  at  present  in  a useful  condition. 

3d.  When  could  it  be  completed  if  carried  on  on  the  present  plan  1 
4th.  Can  anything  in  your  opinion  justify  the  hope  of  its  being  com- 
pleted with  success  and  in  time'? 

5th.  What  is  its  present  cost,  and  what  would  be  its  final  cost  it  com- 


pleted on  the  present  plan  ? 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 


General , Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

For  final  decision  see  letter  to  Dr.  Cheves  of  December  18,  1862. 

G.  T.  B. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  O.,  December  10,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  Cobb, 

Comdg.  District  of  Middle  Florida , Tallahassee , Fla. : 

General  : Your  communication  of  the  3d  instant  hhs  been  duly  re- 
ceived and  considered  by  the  commanding  general,  who  instructs  me  to 
answer  it  as  follows : 


708  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

Captain  Moreno  was  at  tliese  headquarters  some  days  ago  and 
received  verbal  instructions  to  this  effect:  The  Chattahoochee  is  to 
obstructed  at  Fort  Gaines,  and  a battery  to  be  erected  to  cover  the  ob- 
structions for  two  32  and  one  24  pounder  pieces.  At  Fock  Bluff,  54 
miles  above  the  junction  with  Flint  Fiver,  another  obstruction  is  to  be  es- 
tablished, with  three  batteries  commanding  it,  one  of  three  32-pounders, 
one  for  two  24-pounders,  and  the  third  for  two  18  pounder  guns.  At 
the  Narrows,  at  Fulton’s  Bend,  on  the  Apalachicola,  1(1  miles  below 
junction  with  the  Flint  Fiver,  other  obstructions  and  a battery  for  one 
24  and  one  18  pounder  gun,  are  likewise  to  be  constructed.  In  this 
way  will  be  disposed  the  twelve  pieces  which  Captain  Moreno  has 
a vailable  at  present.  The  positions  j ust  named  are  all  regarded  as  favor- 
able for  the  ends  in  view. 

Captain  Moreno  will  be  further  instructed  to  examine  Flint  Fiver, 
with  a view  to  finding  a good  position  (on  the  north  bank  if  possible) 
for  a battery  for  three  or  five  guns  and  obstructions  not  to  exceed  500 
yards  distant  from  the  work.  Heavier  guns  will  be  procured  if  possible. 

In  relation  to  the  suggested  danger  to  be  apprehended,  that  the 
enemy  may  land  in  force  at  Saint  Mark’s,  march  via  Tallahassee,  or  by 
a more  direct  route  to  the  left  of  that  place,  on  the  Apalachicola  Fiver, 
and  thus  turn  the  obstructions,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral that  the  distance  and  character  of  the  country  to  be  traversed  will 
be  found  highly  unfavorable  for  such  an  attempt.  To  insure  successor 
guard  against  serious  disaster  the  enemy  would  be  obliged  to  move  in 
larger  force  than  he  can  bring  to  bear  for  such  an  enterprise  at  present 
it  is  believed. 

I served  myself  for  several  years  in  Middle  Florida,  and  scouted 
repeatedly  the  whole  region  from  Saint  Mark’s  and  the  Wakulla  Fiver 
to  the  Ocklockonnee  and  along  both  banks  of  the  latter  river,  which  is 
a considerable  stream.  Its  banks  can  only  be  approached  (except 
through  dense  hammocks  and  almost  impenetrable  morasses,  which 
line  both  sides)  at  one  or  two  places  from  its  double  mouth  to  almost 
the  point  of  crossing  beyond  Tallahassee.  There  is  no  place  where  an 
army  or  considerable  force  marching  from  Saint  Mark’s  and  leaving 
Tallahassee  to  the  right,  whether  moving  up  the  west  bank  of  the 
Wakulla  or  passing  around  its  head,  can  effect  a passage  of  the  Ock- 
lockonnee, except  at  Jackson’s  Bluff,  where  the  pine  woods  reach  the 
water’s  edge  for  a short  distance  on  the  southern  bank  of  the  stream, 
with  a dense,  somewhat  dry,  hammock  on  the  northern  bank.  It  was 
there  General  [Andrew]  Jackson  crossed  his  forces  when  he  penetrated 
the  country,  and  traces  of  his  trail  yet  remain,  which  strike  the  Apa- 
lachicola below  the  obstructions  to  be  constructed  by  Captain  Moreno. 

Such,  too,  is  the  character  of  the  country  between  Saint  Mark’s  and 
the  Ocklockonnee  and  between  that  stream  and  the  Apalachicola  in  the 
winter  season  that  I feel  assured  it  would  be  found  impracticable  for 
any  considerable  force;  while  the  crossing  at  Jackson’s  Bluff  would 
prove  [such]  a difficult  undertaking,  especially  in  face  of  an  opposing 
force  of  far  inferior  strength,  that  the  route  by  Tallahassee  would  be 
resorted  to  in  preference.  Any  force  penetrating  by  the  longer  route 
of  Tallahassee  must  still  cross  the  Ocklockonnee,  and  as  well  as  I re- 
member at  a point  generally  if  not  always  unfordable,  and  where  a 
much  smaller  resolute  force  could  interpose  an  effectual  resistance. 

Any  force  landing  at  Saint  Mark’s  or  Port  Leon  must  necessarily  have 
with  it  its  own  means  of  transportation ; for  as  soon  as  a descent  on 
the  coasts  should  be  made  in  such  force  as  to  indicate  such  an  expedi- 
tion nothing  were  easier  than  for  you  to  cause  the  timely  removal  be- 


Cur.  XIVt.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  — CONFEDERATE. 


709 


yond  the  reach  of  the  enemy  of  all  the  means  of  transportation  of  the 
planters  in  Middle  Florida.  In  this  way  a delay  would  ensue,  during 
which  all  the  defensive  resources  of  Middle  Florida  and  of  the  adjoin- 
ing sections  of  Georgia  could  be  collected  fur  a successful  resistance. 
Under  these  circumstances  the  commanding  general  is  mainly  solicitous 
that  such  obstructions  should  be  constructed  in  the  Apalachicola  and 
Chattahoochee  Fivers,  with  defensive  works  to  cover  them  at  points 
which  cannot  be  turned  by  a force  thrown  up  the  Apalachicola  by 
transports  supported  by  gunboats. 

The  commanding  general  regrets  profoundly  the  utterly  inadequate 
force  under  your  command,  but  sees  at  present  no  way  for  increasing 
it.  You  are  authorized,  however,  in  an  emergency  to  call  on  the  Govern- 
ors of  Florida  and  Georgia  for  any  troops  at  their  disposition. 

The  general  will  be  pleased  for  you  to  communicate  your  views  and 
wishes  freely  and  fully  at  all  times,  and  will  comply  with  your  requisi- 
tions to  the  utmost  of  his  limited  powers. 

There  are  certain  companies  of  troops  west  of  the  Apalachicola  over 
which  you  are  to  exercise  command.  A copy  of  General  Forney’s  let- 
ter on  the  subject  will  be  transmitted  to  you. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

P.  S. — Since  the  foregoing  wTas  written  Captain  Moreno  has  been 
telegraphed  to  construct  the  battery  at  the  Narrows  for  three  guns 
instead  of  two,  and  to  substitute  t wo  32-pounders  from  Fort  Gaines  for 
the  18-pouuder  originally  designed  for  the  Narrows’  work. 


Charleston,  December  10,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond : 

Guns  are  now  being  rifled  and  banded  here  under  my  orders  at  rate 
of  one  per  two  and  half  days  instead  of  thirty-five  days,  as  hereto- 
fore. 

Cannot  a rifling  and  banding  establishment  be  added  to  foundery  at 
Savannah  for  guns  there  ¥ 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  122.  ) Charleston , S.  GV,  December  11,  1862. 

* # * * * * * 

IV.  So  much  of  the  Xllth  paragraph,  General  Orders,  No.  95,  from 
these  headquarters  as  relates  to  guns  in  works  liable  to  be  isolated  is 
modified  to  refer  only  to  the  important  heavy  guns.  The  remainder  of 
the  armament  of  such  posts  will  be  provided  with  ammunition  at  the 
discretion  of  the  district  commander. 

Bv  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


710  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

Headquarters  District  of  Middle  Florida, 

Quincy , December  11,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

General  : On  the  9th  instant  I made  a visit  to  Saint  Mark’s  and  ex- 
amined the  condition  of  the  defenses  at  that  point. 

The  narrow  and  difficult  channel  of  the  Saint  Mark’s  Fiver,  with  the 
obstructions  placed  in  it,  renders  the  approach  of  the  enemy  up  that 
river  almost  impracticable.  The  fact  that  no  important  result  would  be 
accomplished  by  them  in  taking  Saint  Mark’s  renders  such  an  approach 
very  unlikely. 

The  defenses  at  Saint  Mark’s  are  of  themselves  in  a very  unsatisfactory  ji 
condition.  There  is  a small  vessel  there,  under  the  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant McGary,  of  the  Navy,  with  an  armament  of  three  guns— one  32-  |l 
pounder  rifled  and  one  Parrott  and  one  Blakely  gun  of  small  caliber,  i 
She  also  has  two  32-pounders  in  a barge.  All  these  guns  are  in  good  E 
order,  but  both  on  account  of  the  character  of  the  boats  and  the  want 
of  men  to  man  them  would  be  of  little  or  no  service  in  resisting  any  ; 
formidable  attack. 

The  fort  at  Saint  Mark’s  has  five  guns — three  32-pounders  and  two 
24-pounders.  One  of  the  32-pounders  is  a pivot  barbette  and  the  others 
are  in  half-finished  casemates;  the  whole  of  them  in  bad  condition  for 
active  service.  The  carriages  are  badly  constructed,  of  new  timber. 

I should  rely  very  little  upon  the  guns  of  the  fort  but  for  the  fact 
that  there  is  no  reason  why  the  enemy  should  hazard  anything  to  get 
possession  of  Saint  Mark’s.  I have,  however,  directed  such  changes 
and  improvements  as  the  means  at  my  command  would  enable  me  to 
make. 

If  the  enemy  should  attempt  a movement  in  that  quarter  I am  very 
decidedly  of  the  opinion  that  their  policy  would  be  to  land  their  troops 
either  at  Shell  Point  or  the  west  side  of  the  Saint  Mark’s  Fiver  or  at 
the  light-liouse  on  the  east  side,  and  march  into  the  interior  without 
reference  to  Saint  Mark’s.  Indeed  if  the  object  was  to  take  Saint 
Mark’s  the  best  plan  would  be  to  attack  it  in  rear  in  this  way. 

I leave  here  in  the  morning  to  visit  Apalachicola  Fiver  with  Captain 
Moreno  and  the  commissioners  appointed  to  make  the  obstructions  in 
that  river. 

I am  happy  to  learn  by  letter  from  Captain  Moreno  that  he  is  fully  ; 
instructed  by  you  in  reference  to  the  obstructions  in  that  river. 

I repeat  my  earnest  recommendation  for  additional  troops  in  this 
district,  and  hope  soon  to  receive  a favorable  answer  to  the  suggestions  , 
contained  in  my  letter  to  you  from  Tallahassee  of  the  9th  instant. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

HOWELL  COBB, 

Brigadier- General,  Comdg.  District  of  Middle  Florida. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  12,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Tenth  instant  Banks’  fleet,  with  about  10,000  men,  left  suddenly  its 
southern  course  and  made  directly  for  Cape  Lookout.  This  is  reliable. 

G.  T.  BEAUFEGAFD.  ' 


Chap.  XXVI.1  CORRESPONDENCE, -ETC. — -CONFEDERATE. 


711 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va.,  December  13,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , & 0.  : 

General  Lee  lias  just  telegraphed  to  General  Smith  as  follows : 

For  Wilmington  and  the  coast  ot  North  Carolina  draw  re-enforcements  from  North 
Carolina  and  General  Beauregard. 

Other  intelligence  induces  General  Smith  to  conjecture  the  Purpose 
of  the  enemy  to  march  in  conjunction  with  the  force  from  their  tleet  to 
be  landed  at  Beaufort,  on  the  railroad,  and  then  to  assail  Wilmington 
i„  reverse.  It  is  recommended  to  you,  in  case  of  intelligence  confirma- 
tory of  such  movements,  to  act  oil  the  suggestion  of  General  Lee,  and 
send  re-enforcements  if,  and  to  the  extent,  you  think  it  can  be  done 
without  too  greatly  risking  your  command.  SUo."|A®®,“^V^|lon 
between  Wilmington  and  this  city  be  broken  you  will  Slv®  £o  Wilmiug- 
ton  special  attention  and  such  aid  as  you  can  spare.  Of  this  order 

General  Whiting  will  be  notified.  ^ ^ SEDDON 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  13, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood, 

Commanding , Adams  Run , S.  C. : 

The  seven  companies  of  McCullough’s  Sixteenth  South  Carolina  Yol- 
unteers  at  Adams  Kun  and  the  seven  of  Nelson’s  battalion  at  same 
place  hold  in  readiness  for  transportation,  with  four  days  cooked  pro- 
visions,  with  40  rounds  of  ammunition  in  cartridge  box  and  GO  in  reserve, 
in  light  marching  order,  with  cooking  utensils,  and  two  tents  per  com- 
pany and  two  for  field  and  staff  of  each  batoliom  ^^e^i^^sagc. 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah , Ga. : 

Hold  about  2,500  infantry,  including  Screven’s  battalion,  in  readiness 
for  transportation  to  this  place,  with  four  days’  cooked  provisions,  with 
40  rounds  of  ammunition  in  cartridge  box  and  60  in  reserve,  m light 
marching  order,  with  cooking  utensils,  and  two  tents  per  company  and 
two  for  the  field  and  staff  of  each  regiment  or  battalion.  Kepeat  mes- 

sage.  Have  transportation  ready.  & T BEAUREGARD,  . 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Commanding , <£c.,  Wilmington , Y.  C. : 

In  case  of  necessity  I hope  to  have  an  efficient  force  to  support  you. 
Let  me  know  in  time  your  wishes.  Rep^t  mes^^^^^^^^ 

General , Commanding. 


712 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

Charleston,  December  13, 1862. 

Major  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer,  Dept.  South  Carolina  and  Georgia: 

Sir:  The  questions  asked  me  are: 

First.  When  was  boom  commenced  ? 


It  was  commenced  about  5th  May. 

As  I do  not  know  what  was  the  object  of  the  inquiry  it  is  difficult  to 
conjecture  wliat  additional  facts  may  be  useful;  but  I must  state  that 
neither  the  time  nor  the  amount  of  labor  will  serve  as  an  index  of  what 
might  have  been  the  rate  of  progress  in  construction. 

It  was  a constant  subject  of  mortification  and  remonstrance  that 
either  labor  or  material  were  wanting;  consequently  little  effective 
work  was  done  before  September.  By  way  of  illustration,  in  the  month 
of  May  no  timber  was  received;  in  June  455  logs  were  received,  a large 
portion  of  which  were  unfit  for  use;  in  July  463  logs;  in  August  594 
logs;  in  September  3,622  logs  were  received,  and  there  was  no  excess;!; 
that  is,  they  were  consumed  nearly  as  fast  as  received. 


Second.  How  much  of  it  is  at  present  in  useful  condition  ? 

Two  thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty  yards  of  boom  are  in  dock  ready 
for  use.  Of  that  which  has  been  laid  it  is  supposed  that  one  in  ten  may 
want  repairs. 


Third.  When  would  it  he  completed  if  carried  on  on  the  present  plan  ? 

If  the  means  are  furnished  the  work  requiring  most  time  is  the  con- 
struction of  chains.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  16  feet  of  this  may  be  made 
per  diem  at  each  forge  engaged.  Seven  thousand  feet  of  chain  will  lay 
1,000  yards  of  boom  in  the  manner  proposed;  that  is,  with  a pair  of 
anchors  every  90  feet.  This  amount  could  be  made  in  forty-four  days 
by  ten  forges.  I think  it  can  be  made  in  less  time,  but  time  certainly 
would  be  lost  in  organizing  work,  &c. 

Fourth.  What  proportion  of  raw  material  have  you  on  hand  necessary  to  carry  out 
your  plans  (and  finished  material)  ? 

We  have  about  150  logs,  about  28  tons  cast  iron,  and  16,000  feet  I 
round  iron  for  making  chains. 

With  respect  to  finished  material,  we  have  on  hand  1,122  feet  good 
chain,  suitable  for  mooring;  an  uncertain  amount  of  inferior  chain  that 
would  serve  to  connect  the  lines  of  boom.  We  hope  to  recover  about 

4.500  feet. 

If  a thousand  yards  of  boom  are  to  be  laid  it  will  require  66  anchors; 

1.500  yards  will  require  99  anchors,  allowing  one  up  and  one  down 
stream. 

We  have  in  tile  channel  from  25  to  30  anchors,  but  there  will  proba- 
bly be  some  loss  in  recovering  them. 

I beg  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  light-boat  windlass  is  in- 
adequate to  the  work  required.  Before  it  be  carried  on  again  it  will  be  l 
necessary  to  provide  something  more  powerful.  We  have  suffered  from 
this  deficiency  since  the  beginning  of  the  work.  To  continue  in  the  same 
way  will  only  bring  discredit  on  our  operations,  which  is  not  merited. 
Also  I have  a white  man  employed  as  watchman  over  the  yard  and 
docks  since  the  withdrawal  of  all  the  negroes.  He  cannot  be  held  re- 
sponsible  for  losses.  It  is  my  wish  to  transfer  all  material,  &c.,  to  the 
engineer  department  & soon  as  possible. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


JOHN  R.  CHEVES. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


713 


December  14, 1862. 


General  Beauregard  : 

The  following  dispatch  was  received  from  Governor  Yance  at  Golds- 
borough : 

For  God’s  sake  send  ns  one  regiment  and  some  guns  as  quickly  as  possible.  The 
fight  is  raging  and  Evans  is  overwhelmed. 


I have  sent  one  regiment 
but  one  regiment. 


and  one  battery  of  six  guns.  I have  now 
W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Charleston,  December  14,  1862. 
General  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Petersburg , Va. : 

Orders  given  and  movement  will  begin  at  9 o’clock  this  evening. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  December  14, 1862. 
General  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Petersburg , Va.  : 

Five  thousand  infantry  and  three  good  batteries.  Answer. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  December  14,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  Adams  Bun , 8.  C.: 

The  troops  in  readiness  to  be  sent  here  from  your  district  will  move 
at  the  orders  of  General  Gist. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  December  14,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Put  the  troops  ordered  (about  2,500)  from  your  district  in  motion  for 
this  place  at  once.  Report  when  started. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

Genera l,  Commanding. 


Charleston,  December  14,  1862—5  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  C. : 

Troops  will  be  sent  as  soon  as  possible.  More  than  eighteen  hours 
lost  by  not  receiving  answer  to  dispatch  of  last  night  until  now. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  6\,  December  14,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina , Wilmington , Y.  C. : 
General  : I send  one  of  my  volunteer  aides,  Col.  A.  G.  Rice?  with  a 


714 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XXVI. 


telegraphic  cipher  for  use  between  us  in  cases  of  importance.  You  will 
please  give  him  all  necessary  information  relative  to  your  present  con- 
dition, future  intentions,  and  present  available  means. 

I have  ordered  5,000  men  and  three  light  batteries  (all  excellent  troops) 
to  be  held  in  readiness,  under  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  to  be  sent  to  your 
assistance  whenever  called  for  by  you,  if  they  can  then  be  spared  from 
here. 

Should  the  contingency  contemplated  by  the  War  Department  occur, 
and  my  presence  be  required  by  you,  1 will  hasten  to  join  you,  although 
I have  little  doubt  that  you  will  be  able  to  take  good  care  of  General 
Banks  and  his  associates. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  14, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  0.  Whiting, 

Commanding , <&c.,  Wilmington , N.  C.  : 

General  Gist’s  command  moving  to  your  assistance  9 o’clock  to-night. 

THOMAS  JORDAN. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  252.  J Charleston , December  14,  1862. 

* # # # * * * 

IY.  The  following  transfers  and  rearrangements  of  ordnance  will  be 
made  by  the  proper  staff  officers : 

1st.  One  12-pounder  rifled  siege  gun  will  be  transferred  from  position 
No.  12,  western  lines,  James  Island,  with  100  rounds  of  ammunition,  to 
the  Third  Military  District,  for  disposition  in  the  battery  at  Barnwell 
Rhett’s  place,  Ashepoo.  Also  to  the  same  battery  one  24-pounder  iron 
siege  howitzer,  formerly  in  charge  of  Maj.  Charles  Alston,  jr.,  with  100 
rounds  of  suitable  ammunition. 

2d.  One  12-pounder  rifled  siege  gun  will  be  transferred,  with  100 
rounds  of  ammunition,  from  position  13,  western  lines,  James  Island,  to 
work  at  Wallace’s,  near  Rantowles  Creek. 

These  rifled  pieces  will  be  applied  for  to  the  commanding  general  of 
First  Military  District. 

* * * # # * * 

YI.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist  is  hereby  placed  in  command  of  all  troops 
to  be  detached  from  this  department  to  the  assistance  of  Brig.  Gen.  W. 
H.  C.  Whiting,  at  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  to  whom  General  Gist  will  report 
for  orders. 

YII.  The  troops  will  be  brigaded  as  follows:  First  Brigade,  all  troops 
from  the  First  and  Second  Military  Districts  of  South  Carolina,  with 
one  light  battery  from  First  District,  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens  commanding  ; 
Second  Brigade,  those  from  the  District  of  Georgia,  with  one  light  bat- 
tery from  the  First  Military  District,  senior  colonel  commanding. 

YIII.  The  third  battery  will  be  held  in  reserve  by  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R. 
Gist. 

* # # # * * * 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant  General* 


715 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  15,  1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond , Va. : 

I am  sending  5,000  infantry  and  three  batteries  to  Wilmington,  to  be 
returned  as  soon  as  practicable.  All  quiet  here. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Wilmington,  N.  0.,  December  15, 1862. 

General  Beauregard: 

The  following  dispatch  was  received  from  General  Smith : 

I arrived  here  about  3 p.  m.  Evans  is  about  6 miles  this  side  of  Kinston,  at  Fall- 
ing Creek.  He  estimates  the  enemy  at  30,000.  It  is  stated  by  scouts  that  the  enemy 
are  constantly  receiving  re-enforcements.  Have  you  anything  more  definite  about 
Banks’  fleet  and  force?  Can  you  come  up  in  the  morning  without  inconvenience? 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  15,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Your  troops  have  just  reached  here  (9  o’clock  p.  m.);  delayed  because 
overcrowded  beyond  possible  capacity  of  cars  and  engines.  Who  is 
to  blame?  Troops  have  been  left  on  the  way  to  enable  trains  to  move 

at  all. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington , December  15,  1862. 

General  P.  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Gomdg.  Department  of  South  Carolina , Charleston : 

My  Dear  General  : I am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  promptness 
with  which  you  have  placed  some  troops  at  my  disposal  in  the  event  of 
attack  here.  They  will  be  greatly  needed,  as  you  may  see  from  the 
extracts  from  letters  to  this  department,  herewith  inclosed  for  your 
information,*  selected  from  a lengthy  correspondence  as  to  the  situa- 
tion and  defenses  of  Wilmington.f 

It  is  a most  difficult  problem,  especially  with  my  means.  The  land 
attack  is  my  bugbear,  and  is  the  most  dangerous  for  us. 

Of  course  a naval  demonstration  will  be  made,  but  you  know  I have 
always  insisted  that  we  could  whip  them  on  the  water  if  the  men  will 
stand  manfully  to  their  guns.  Much  information  collected  from  spies 
and  prisoners  leads  me  to  believe  that  Foster  and  Banks  will  make  the 
land  attack.  Prisoners  taken  yesterday  near  Kinston  say  that  Fos- 
ter’s present  attack  in  that  quarter  is  the  preliminary  to  an  advance  on 
this  place.  If  this  be  true,  he  has  made  a strategic  blunder. 

You  will  perceive  that  I have  estimated  10,000  infantry,  six  batteries, 
and  a regiment  of  cavalry  as  the  least  force  I could  say  this  place  would 
be  at  all  safe  with. 

Familiar  with  all  the  localities,  I urged  this  on  the  President  when 


* Not  found. 

t See  Whiting  to  Randolph,  November  14,  and  Whiting  to  Smith,  November  18,  in 

Series  I,  Vol.  XVIII. 


716 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


lie  assigned  me  here,  and  his  reply  was,  “It  is  little  enough,  surely | 
we  will  send  you  all  we  can.”  Up  to  this  time,  however,  we  have  been 
able  to  get  but  three  regiments,  numbering  about  1 ,000  men,  and  two  baU 
teries.  Of  these  I have  sent  off  now  two  regiments  and  one  battery  to 
Evans’  aid.  Banks  may  wait  the  result  of  Foster’s  movement;  may  aL 
tack  at  any  moment;  hence  the  imminent  necessity  of  the  troops  here. 
I fear  Evans  has  been  compelled  to  fall  back  from  Kinston,  the  telegraph 
having  ceased  at  that  point.  Troops,  however,  from  Raleigh,  Weldon, 
and  this  place  have  now  reached  him,  and  his  loss  yesterday  is  reported 
as  trifling. 

Had  1 received  the  amount  of  force  estimated  for  as  necessary  to  the 
defense  here  my  intention  against  the  laud  attack  was  to  light  the 
enemy  the  moment  he  landed  and  to  maneuver  between  him  and  the 
town,  always  having  the  lines  of  field  works  to  retire  into  again. 
These  field  works  are  quite  extensive  and  at  some  distance  from  the 
town ; that  is,  beyond  damaging  range  from  fire.  Seeing  their  extent 
arid  the  total  inadequacy7  of  my  force,  immediately  on  my  arrival  I laid 
out  an  interior  line  of  field  works  within  the  city  limits,  in  addition  to 
batteries  of  the  heaviest  guns  I could  obtain  for  the  river  defense  upon 
the  bluff  overlooking  the  city  wharves.  'These  works  are  nearly  com- 
pleted, and  can  indeed  be  used  at  once.  According,  then,  to  the  num- 
ber of  men  at  my  disposal  I shall  either  meet  the  enemy  outside  where- 
ever  he  may  be  found  or  rest  upon  the  works.  One  thing  you  ought  to 
know.  In  case  of  defeat  there  is  here  no  retreat  open,  and  the  force 
here  must  conquer  or  what  is  left  of  it  must  be  taken.  I have  explained 
this  in  my  letter  to  the  Secretary. 

I will  keep  you  advised  of  everything  both  by  letter  and  telegraph, 
and  yyill  show  Colonel  Rice  all  that  is  possible. 

In  the  mean  time  I understand  that  Gist  is  on  his  way. 

General  G.  W.  Smith  is  at  Goldsborough  to-day. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING. 


Executive  Department, 
Montgomery , A la.,  December  15,  1862. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War,  Richmond: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  introduce  to  you  James  A.  Clendenin,  esq., 
a gentleman  of  character  and  standing  in  this  State,  who  is  the  bearer 
on  my  part  of  a copy  of  a joint  letter  from  the  Governors  of  Georgia, 
Florida,  and  Alabama,  requesting  the  formation  of  a new  military  de- 
partment as  therein  specified. 

Mr.  Clendenin  has  been  engaged  in  a contract  for  the  manufacture  of 
salt  upon  the  coast  of  Florida,  and  his  works  have  been  recently  broken 
up  by  the  enemy;  is  well  acquainted  with  the  country,  and  can  give  you 
full  and  complete  information  of  the  necessity  for  more  efficient  military 
protection. 

Numbers  are  escaping  from  the  operations  of  the  conscript  law,  and 
making  this  coast,  now  under  the  control  of  the  enemy,  their  refuge. 

The  appointme  nt  of  General  Howell  Cobb  (o  the  department  recently 
organized  is  highly  satisfactory,  and  the  extension  of  his  command 
would,  with  the  organization  recommended,  accomplish  all  that  is 
desired. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  GILL  SHORTER, 

Governor  of  Alabama. 


Ciiap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


717 


December  23, 1862. 

I cordially  concur  with  Gov.  Shorter  in  the  expression  that  an  exten- 
sion of  the  boundary  of  Gen.  Cobb’s  department  will  be  satisfactory. 

JOSEPH  E.  SHOWN. 

[Inclosure.] 

Executive  Department, 
Montgomery , Ala.,  November  4,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Sir  : We,  the  Governors  of  Alabama,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  most 
respectfully  unite  in  the  request  that  you  will  order  the  formation  of  a 
new  military  department,  to  be  composed  of  the  counties  of  Henry, 
Dale,  Barbour,  Covington,  Coffee,  and  Pike,  in  Alabama;  of  the  counties 
of  Decatur,  Thomas,  Miller,  Early,  Baker,  Clay,  Calhoun,  Randolph, 
Quitman,  Stewart,  Muscogee,  Chattahoochee,  Mitchell,  and  Dougherty, 
in  Georgia;  and  of  the  counties  of  Leon,  Gadsden,  Wakulla,  Jefferson, 
Madison,  Liberty,  Washington,  Jackson,  Calhoun,  and  Franklin,  in 
Florida.  Thoroughly  acquainted  as  we  are  with  the  geography  and 
resources  of  our  respective  States,  and  with  the  present  military  organ- 
izations in  them, -we  feel  strongly  the  necessity  of  this  new  department. 
It  is  almost  impossible  for  General  Forney,  constantly  engaged  as  he 
is  and  must  be,  in  watching  the  movements  of  the  enemy  before  Mo- 
bile, to  give  the  proper  attention  to  the  counties  in  his  department 
lying  on  the  Apalachicola  River,  200  miles  to  the  east  of  him,  and  un- 
connected by  railroad  or  telegraph ; and  it  is  equally  impossible  for 
General  Finegan,  while  contending  with  the  enemy  in  East  and  South 
Florida,  to  give  the  needed  protection  to  the  counties  of  Middle  Florida, 
about  the  same  distance  to  the  west  of  him.  We  do  not  wish  to  cast  a 
shadow  of  censure  on  either  of  these  generals,  but  only  to  state  that 
neither  can  do  full  justice  to  one  portion  of  his  department,  as  at  pres- 
ent constituted,  without  neglecting  another.  We  would  briefly  call 
Your  Excellency’s  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  new  department  which 
we  propose  is  in  imminent  danger  of  being  overrun  by  the  enemy  very 
soon,  he  being  induced  thereto  by  its  present  defenseless  condition,  and 
its  vast  wealth  in  cotton,  slaves,  cattle,  hogs,  corn,  &c.,  and  embracing, 
as  it  does,  the  important  city  of  Columbus,  in  Georgia,  and  the  capital 
of  Florida,  besides  an  extensive  seaboard,  along  which  thousands  of 
the  citizens  of  our  respective  States  are  now  engaged  in  making  salt 
for  the  use  of  themselves  and  neighbors,  hundreds  of  miles  in  the  inte- 
rior. We  know  the  embarrassments  of  the  Government  with  regard  to 
troops  and  arms,  and  the  previous  action  of  our  States  shows  that  we 
would  be  last  to  add  to  them.  To  supply  troops  to  the  department 
now  proposed  we  respectfully  suggest  that  we  be  authorized  by  Your 
Excellency  to  call  for  six-months’  volunteers,  or  for  such  other  term  as 
you  may  suggest  (the  shorter  the  term  the  more  speedily  we  can  raise 
them,  and  the  danger  is  very  pressing),  from  among  those  not  subject 
to  conscription  and  those  subject  to  conscription  between  the  ages  of 
thirty -five  and  forty-five  years,  each  regiment  to  elect  its  own  officers, 
under  its  State  laws,  then  to  be  tendered  to  the  Confederate  Govern- 
ment, and  be  commanded  by  a brigadier  appointed  by  yourself. 

Hoping  that  this  to  us  very  important  subject  will  meet  Your  Excel- 
lency’s early  and  fa  vorable  consideration,  we  have  the  honor  to  be,  most 
respectfully,  Your  Excellency’s  obedient  servants, 

JNO.  GILL  SHORTER, 

Governor  of  A labama , 


71.8  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

N.  B. — Copy  of  the  above  sent  to  the  Governors  of  Georgia  and 
Florida  for  their  signatures  respectively. 

December  23, 1862. 

I signed  this  petition  on  the  8th  of  November,  and  forwarded  it  by 
mail  to  Governor  Milton  for  his  signature,  with  request  that  he  mail 
it  to  the  President.  I now  again  unite  with  Governor  Shorter  in  the 
request. 

JOSEPH  E.  BBOWN, 

Governor  of  Georgia. 


Confederate  States  of  America, 
Department  of  Justice,  Richmond , December  28,  1862. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Dear  Sir  : Let  me  ask  your  favorable  consideration  to  the  petition 
of  the  Governors  of  Alabama  and  Georgia,  presented  by  James  A. 
Clendenin,  esq.  The  object  ought  to  be  accomplished;  the  protection 
of  the  sections  of  the  country  indicated  certainly  deserves  the  prompt 
attention  and  active  co-operation  of  the  Government.  I am  sure  you 
will  not  fail  to  give  the  petition  at  least  a respectful  hearing. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  resjiectlully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  WATTS. 


Charleston,  December  15,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  0.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  C.: 

Some  troops  left  here  last  night;  balance  will  follow  rapidly.  Be 
prepared  to  make  them  cross  Gape  Fear  Biver.  Cannot  enemy  be 
taken  in  rear  at  New  Berne. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Charleston \ 8.  C.7  December  15,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  13th  instant,  addressed  to  Colonel  Gon- 
zales, has  been  referred  to  me  by  him,  and  I have  indorsed  it  as  follows: 

The  application  for  two  8-incli  columbiads  for  the  work  at  Mayrant’s  is  approved,  hut 
they  cannot  now  he  obtained.  Against  naval  attacks  I much  prefer  detached  bat- 
teries of  two  or  three  guns,  well  protected  by  traverses,  so  as  to  form  a separate  cham- 
ber for  each  gun,  and  the  batteries  being  about  100  or  200  yards  apart,  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  locality. 

I approved  on  the  5th  instant  the  application  of  the  2d  instant  from  General  Trapier 
for  two  light  pieces,  to  be  put  in  position  at  Frazer’s  Point,  opposite  Mayrant’s  Bind’. 
One  12-pounder  smooth-bore  and  one  rifled  gun  (Blakely),  both  on  siege  carriages, 
have  been  ordered  to  bo  sent  from  here  to  General  Trapier  for  the  object  indicated. 

Bespectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD, 

General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXV].]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


719 


Charleston,  December  15, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : In  obedience  to  instructions  I would  respectfully  report 
the  progress  of  the  work  on  marine  torpedo  ram  for  the  week  ending 
December  13. 

During  that  period  the  workmen  have  been  engaged  in  preparing  the 
exterior  of  the  vessel  for  the  calkers.  The  ceiling  of  the  interior  is 
nearly  completed,  and  the  clamps  are  being  put  in  for  the  decking. 
During  this, week  it  is  hoped  that  the  sponsings  will  be  commenced. 

After  many  delays,  consequent  on  the  Government  not  furnishing  the 
engine  and  boiler  proposed  for  the  ram,  I have  at  last  succeeded  in  pro- 
curing the  machinery  of  the  steam-tug  Barton,  of  Savannah,  and  have 
dispatched  workmen  to  bring  the  same  to  this  city. 

The  dimensions  of  this  machinery  (differing  materially  from  that 
originally  proposed)  has  made  it  necessary  to  modify  the  plans,  without, 
however,  making  any  radical  change  in  the  design. 

I am  informed  by  intelligent  mechanics  that  the  machinery  of  the 
Barton  will  give  good  speed  to  the  ram,  and  am  assured  that  it  is  in 
good  condition  and  but  little  worn. 

I have  succeeded  in  collecting  from  various  parts  of  the  country  a 
quantity  of  cast  iron  for  prow  and  other  castings  required.  The  founders 
are  now  engaged  upon  these  works. 

It  would  greatly  facilitate  the  undertaking  if  the  armor  platings  in 
possession  of  the  Navy  Department  in  this  city  could  be  transferred. 

The  workmen  are  now  prepared  to  bend  and  drill  it  to  suit  the  angles 
of  the  sponsings. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers . 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  December  16, 1862 — 8 p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , A.  C. : 

Your  several  dispatches  received.  Balance  of  Gist’s  command  left 
here  at  12  to-day.  Employ  them  as  best  you  can,  as  Smith  and  yourself 
shall  decide.  If  you  have  cavalry,  have  strong  reconnaissances  made 
on  flank  and  rear  of  enemy. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  December  16,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  0.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  N.  C.: 

Concentration  is  soul  of  war.  Send  my  troops  wheresoever  presence 
can  give  victory.  Foster’s  re-enforcements  are  Banks’  command,  of 
course,  and  altogether  cannot  exceed  25,000  men.  If  more,  the  worse 
for  them,  being  mainly  new  Yankee  levies.  If  we  have  concentrated 
troops  enough  for  offensive  I will  come. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  16,  1862. 
General  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Goldsborough , N.  C. : 

What  is  your  strength  and  condition  ? My  re-enforcements  will  be 
with  Whiting  by  the  morning.  Use  cipher. 

G,  T.  BEAUREGARD, 


720 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cn/.r.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  16, 1862 — 1.15  p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Goldsborougli,  A.  G.: 

What  is  amount  of  your  force,  not  including  5,000  I am  sending? 
Enemy  cannot  be  over  25,000,  Banks7  troops  being  mostly  undisciplined. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Richmond,  December  16,  1862. 
General  Beauregard,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 

The  telegraph  operator  at  Goldsborougli  reports  that  the  railroad 
buildings  at  Mount  Olive,  a station  on  the  Wilmington  and  Weldon 
Railroad,  are  reported  by  au  engineer  sent  on  the  road  to  have  been 
burnt  and  the  railroad  torn  up  by  the  enemy.  The  telegraph  line  direct 
to  Wilmington  is  certainly  cut;  of  the  rest  you  must  judge.  The  tone 
of  the  dispatch  shows  alarm  and  the  news  may  be  an  exaggerated  report. 
General  Smith,  when  heard  from,  was  at  Goldsborougli. 

Telegraph  General  Whiting. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  December  16,  1862. 
General  Beauregard,  Charleston,  8.  C.: 

A telegram  from  General  Smith  confirms  the  visit  of  the  enemy  (some 
500  cavalry)  to  the  Mount  Olive  Station,  on  the  Weldon  and  Wilming- 
ton Railroad;  the  burning  of  a turpentine  store  there,  the  cutting  of  the 
telegraph  wires,  and  some  injury,  extent  not  known,  to  the  railroad  track. 
There  was  serious  fighting  at  White  Hall  Bridge,  resulting  in  the  ene- 
my’s being  driven  back  with  very  heavy  loss,  while  ours  was  not  so. 
Re-enforcements  had  not  arrived  either  from  here  or  irom  you.  Cavalry 
much  needed.  Re-enforcements  from  here  must  have  reached  him  be- 
fore this  hour. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  16,  1862. 

Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Governor  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , 8.  G.: 

I need  service  of  Brown’s  regiment  of  reserves  in  the  city  during 
absence  from  department  ol  troops  in  North  Carolina. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


December  16,  1862. 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 

Your  dispatch  received.  General  Gist’s  three  regiments  and  one 
battery  received.  General  Smith  has  all  the  transportation  at  Golds- 
borough.  I have  telegraphed  for  his  orders  and  will  let  you  know.  1 
am  only  afraid  they  will  cut  the  road  between  us  and  Goldsborough. 

* W,  H.  C,  WHITING. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


721 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  16, 1862. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

Dispatches  from  General  Whiting  confirm  your  dispatch.  Reports 
cutting  of  Wilmington  and  Weldon  Railroad  at  Milton.  Have  detached 
a division,  one-half  of  which  already  at  Wilmington;  rest  will  reach 
Whiting  in  morning.  What  is  strength  of  General  Smith  % General 
Cooper  has  cipher. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


December  16,  1862. 

General  Beauregard  : 

It  appears  we  cannot  get  communication  with  Goldsborough.  The 
telegraph  must  be  cut.  I have  ordered  a portion  of  my  cavalry  to  Ke- 
nansville  (see  map),  with  orders  to  observe  the  enemy  beyond  Magnolia, 
where  I have  a telegraph  station.  According  to  orders  I now  report  to 
you.  My  transportation  here  is  very  small  on  the  railroad. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


December  17, 1862. 

General  Beauregard: 

The  enemy  are  burning  all  the  small  bridges  on  the  Wilmington  and 
Weldon  Railroad  as  far  as  Goshen  or  Faison  Depot.  Appears  to  be  a 
cavalry  raid,  reported  600  strong.  This  indicates  that  they  either  fear 
an  advance  by  us  from  that  road  or  they  do  not  propose  to  use  it  in 
attacking  Wilmington.  I have  so  little  cavalry  (three  small  companies) 
that  I can  afford  no  resistance  so  far  from  the  city.  Do  you  hear  from 
G.  W.  [Smith]  ? 

L W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  17,  1862 — 11.30  a.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , A.  C. : 

Heard  nothing  from  G.  W.  [Smith]  for  eighteen  hours,  but  War  De- 
partment says  he  is  being  re-enforced.  Can  you  not  form  junction  with 
him?  Shall  I send  50  wagons  and  teams  by  rail  for  my  troops  or  can 
you  procure  them  1 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  17,  1862 — 11.30  a.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , A.  C. : 

War  Department  reports  serious  fighting  near  Goldsborough.  Enemy 
repulsed  with  heavy  loss;  ours  not  so.  Can  you  not  arm  a train  with 
infantry  and  one  field  piece  and  have  careful  reconnaissance  made  up 
to  burned  bridges  ? In  such  case  platform  should  be  carried  for  dis- 
embarking field  piece  when  required. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


16  R R— VOL  XIY 


722 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  17, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

General  : In  reply  to  the  indorsement  of  the  general  commanding 
on  the  report  of  Dr.  Cheves  concerning  the  boom,  asking  the  following 
questions,  we  have  the  honor  to  state : 

1st.  When  was  this  boom  commenced  ? 

It  was  commenced  about  the  5th  May  last,  but  from  want  of  mate- 
rial and  labor  it  was  not  fairly  under  construction  till  about  1st  Sep- 
tember. 

2d.  How  much  of  it  is  at  present  in  a useful  condition  ?. 

There  are  2,250  yards  of  it  in  dock  in  good  condition ; 1,500  yards  of 
it  laid  in  boom,  one-tenth  of  which  may  need  repairs;  1,122 feet  anchor 
chains  in  store;  4,500  feet  anchor  chains  in  boom,  whi-  h may  be  re- 
covered; raw  material  on  hand,  considered  ready  for  use,  16,000  feet; 
iron  for  making  chains  will  make  5,500  feet.  About  twenty-eight  tons 
cast  iron  will  make  11  anchors.  Twenty-five  to  thirty  anchors  laid,  15 
of  which  can  be  recovered;  150  logs.  The  distance  to  be  laid,  1,500 
yards ; double  chain,  3,000  yards.  Sufficient  boom  to  lay  it,  3,750  yards, 
constructed;  100  anchors  required  for  laying  1,500  yard's  double  chain; 
26  anchors  on  hand ; 21,000  feet  chain  required  for  laying  1,500  yards ; 
6,622  feet  on  hand ; 4,500  feet  can  perhaps  be  recovered,  making  11,122 
feet. 

3d.  When  would  it  he  completed  if  carried  on  on  the  present  plan  I 

Dr.  Cheves  thinks  that  if  material  can  be  procured  as  needed,  in  a 
month  and  a half  ten  forges  can  supply  anchor  chains ; the  boom 
might  be  relaid  in  two  months  from  the  time  of  beginning  to  lay. 

4th.  Can  anything,  in  your  opinion,  justify  the  hope  of  its  being  completed  with 
success  and  in  time? 

The  boom  is  strong  enough  to  resist  the  tide.  The  breaking  we  be- 
lieve not  to  have  been  from  any  direct  strain,  but  by  entangling  for 
want  of  anchorage  to  hold  it  in  position.  The  boom  can  be  retained 
in  position  by  sufficient  anchorage,  which  can  only  be  determined  by 
experiment.  We  can  state  nothing  positive  in  regard  to  the  time  of 
completion,  as  we  have  no  certain  information  that  material  can  be 
procured  when  needed. 

5th.  What  is  its  present  cost  and  what  would  he  its  final  cost  if  completed  on  the 
present  plan  ? 

The  cost  of  the  boom  to  December  15  about  $185,000,  amounts  paid  ; 
accounts  for  the  16,000  feet  iron  and  others  not  yet  presented;  esti- 
mate inclosed.  If  completed  in  two  months,  according  to  third  answer, 
it  will  cost  $93,000,  inclusive  of  $5,000,  estimated  cost  of  recovering 
what  is  now  laid. 

The  boom  could  be  beached  at  considerable  expense  and  time;  the 
only  object  being  to  prevent  the  floats  becoming  water-logged  j but,  as 
Dr.  Cheves  reports,  perhaps  one-tenth  of  it  may  need  repair,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  bring  it  to  the  city,  where  it  could  be  done. 

The  boom",  modified  to  the  plan  of  attaching  the  floats  by  swivel  single 
chain,  will  cost  to  change  and  lay  it  across  the  harbor  about  $48,000, 
including  the  estimate  of  cost  of  removing  the  present  one,  $5,000.  This 
boom  would  not  have  the  strength  of  the  double  one,  but  would  leave 
the  remainder  (1,875  yards)  to  be  used  for  a second  line,  or  at  other 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  723 

points  when  anchors  and  chains  can  be  procured.  There  is  material 
on  hand  sufficient  to  lay  one  line  of  the  boom.  Ample  allowances  for 
contingencies  is  made. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servants, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Major  of  Engineers, 
WM.  H.  ECHOLS, 
Captain  of  Engineers. 

N.  B. — Dr.  Cheves  states  that  the  floats  are  losing  their  buoyancy 
daily,  and  he  apprehends  failure  from  this  cause  more  than  all  others. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va.,  December  18,  1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , 8.  C.  : 

Without  re-enforcements  from  you  General  Smith’s  forces  will  be 
6,000  of  Confederate  troops. 

J.  A.  SEDDONT, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  18, 1862—11  a.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  C.  : 

The  message  of  G.  W.  is : 

I have  nd  cavalry  and  can  find  out  little  or  nothing  of  the  movements  of  the  en- 
emy. The  troops  from  Richmond  expected  here  to-night.  Move  up  the  railroad  to 
a point  this  side  of  Magnolia.  Reconnoiter  as  far  as  you  can.  Use  your  own  judg- 
ment. I will  endeavor  to  keep  you  informed  of  my  movements. 

G.  W.  SMITH. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida., 

Charleston , 8.  C .,  December  18,  1862. 
Dr.  John  R.  Cheyes,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 

Dear  Sir  : Upon  further  and  attentive  consideration  and  investiga- 
tion of  the  questions  and  matters  submitted  in  your  communication  of 
the  9th  instant,  the  commanding  general  cannot  regard  it  as  advisable 
to  attempt  to  complete  the  boom  obstruction  according  to  the  plan  sub- 
mitted in  that  communication,  and  for  these  reasons  : 

1st.  There  is  little  if  any  probability  that  the  number  of  anchors  and 
amount  of  chain  required  (as  you  state  them)  can  be  procured  in  time 
to  place  the  boom  ready  and  in  position  for  the  impending  attack  of 
the  enemy. 

2d.  The  time  requisite  for  establishing  boom  in  position,  after  deficient 
material  shall  be  supplied,  is  stated  by  you  at  two  months.  Any  attack 
of  the  enemy  if  made  this  season  in  all  human  probability  will  be  made 
within  that  period.  Moreover,  in  the  light  of  experience  with  the  work 
on  this  boom,  the  commanding  general  could  not  anticipate  completion 
of  the  work  within  two  months. 

3d.  The  material  already  in  the  boom  or  collected  can  be  most  ad- 


724 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


vantageously  employed  on  other  obstructions $ it  is  therefore  thought 
more  prudent  to  apply  them  in  that  manner  than  to  absorb  them  in 
experiments  in  a most  doubtful  operation. 

The  commanding  general  desires  at  the  same  time  to  assure  you  that 
he  has  had  ample  evidence  of  the  zeal,  indomitable  energy,  and  mani- 
fold resources  with  which  you  have  struggled  to  overcome  the  great 
and  numerous  difficulties  which  you  have  encountered  in  the  construc- 
tion of  the  boom— difficulties  which  under  existing  circumstances  appear 
in  surm  ountable. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Camp  Douglas,  Fla.,  December  18,  1862. 


Captain  Moreno  : 

Dear  Sir  : As  requested,  I hasten  to  report  that  the  scout  that  went 
to  Apalachicola  on  Monday  last  has  just  arrived.  There  were  three 
gunboats  lying  at  the  end  of  the  Strait  Channel  (2J  miles  from  town). 
My  men  went  into  town  at  dawn  of  day  Tuesday.  They  did  not  stay 
long,  but  went  out  to  a house  1 mile  from  town,  where  they  could  see 
any  movement  of  the  boats.  They  had  not  been  there  long  before  the 
Brockenborough,  one  gun  on  board,  hoisted  sail  and  made  way  for  town. 
She  had  reached  about  half  way  when  she  anchored,  some  signals  pass- 
ing between  her  and  the  three  gunboats.  These  signals  were  no  doubt 
the  result  of  a system  of  private  signs  or  signals  from  parties  unknown 
in  the  town.  Upon  this  eight  or  nine  launches  prepared  started  for 
town,  men  numbering  about  250.  My  men  went  to  town  and  showed 
themselves  to  the  enemy  and  then  retired,  as  per  order  of  General  Fin- 
egan,  “ not  to  fire  into  the  enemy  from  Apalachicola.”  They  were  told 
that  the  enemy  was  preparing,  and  had  been  for  some  time,  to  ascend 
the  river.  There  were  three  vessels  (besides  the  three  gunboats)  in  the 
West  Pass  and  one  in  Saint  Joseph’s  Bay. 

The  report  my  pickets  brought  that  one  gunboat  was  up  at  town  was 
unfounded,  there  having  been  a large  launch  there,  which  the  informant 


called  a gunboat. 

Yours,  respectfully, 


C.  THIGPIN. 


General  Orders,  l Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  126.  1 Charleston , S.  C.,  December  18,  1862. 

I.  The  following  orders  regulating  the  administration  of  the  ordnance 
department  and  prescribing  the  duties  of  commanding  officers  in  con- 
nection with  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  is  published  for  strict  observ- 
ance by  all  concerned  : 

1st.  District  ordnance  officers  will  mount,  dismount,  and,  through  the 
quartermaster’s  department,  transport  all  ordnance  within  their  respect- 
ive districts. 

2d.  The  chief  of  ordnance  will  turn  over  to  the  ordnance  officer  of  the 
First  Military  District,  for  the  purposes  mentioned  in  first  clause,  all 
appliances  at  present  in  his  possession.  He  will  also  supply  other  dis- 
tricts with  the  same,  on  requisitions  being  made  therefor,  according  to 
the  necessities  of  the  service. 

3d.  The  chief  of  ordnance  will  habitually  issue  from  his  depot  or 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  725 

thro  ugh  the  Charleston  Arsenal  to  district  ordnance  officers,  on  proper 
requisitions,  such  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  as  may  be  required,  the 
transportation  therefor  to  be  furnished  by  the  quartermaster’s  depart- 
ment in  the  following  manner  : 

For  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  for  the  First  District  the  trans- 
portation will  be  procured  by  the  district  ordnance  officer. 

For  other  districts  they  will  be  placed,  subject  to  the  orders  of  the 
chief  quartermaster,  by  the  chief  of  ordnance  at  his  depot  or  the  arsenal 
for  transportation  as  invoiced. 

4th.  All  ordnance  requisitions  from  commanding  officers  of  troops  in 
the  field  will  show  the  stores  required,  stores  on  hand,  and  stores  to  be 
supplied. 

5th.  All  requisitions  for  infantry  or  cavalry  will  exhibit  the  number 
of  non-commissioned  officers,  musicians,  and  privates;  for  light  artillery, 
will  also  show  the  number  and  caliber  and  description  of  the  guns,  num- 
ber of  caissons,  with  traveling  forge  and  battery  wagon,  if  any.  On 
requisitions  for  ammunition  for  rifled  guns,  the  precise  description  of 
the  gun  will  be  mentioned  under  the  head  of  remarks ; for  instance, 
whether  bronze  or  iron,  banded  or  not  banded,  the  length  and  weight 
of  the  gun,  and  particularly  the  weight  of  the  projectile  used.  In  all 
cases  the  post  or  station  of  the  troops  and  the  date  of  the  requisition 
will  be  specified. 

6th.  District  ordnance  officers  are  charged  with  the  duty  of  receiv- 
ing and  issuing  stores.  They  will  endeavor  to  keep  themselves  informed 
of  supplies  [required]  to  meet  immediate  wants  and  probable  neces- 
sities. 

7th.  District  ordnance  officers  will  see  that  the  requisitions  sent  to 
the  office  of  the  chief  of  ordnance  and  artillery  are  made  out  in  dupli- 
cate and  in  proper  form. 

8th.  Ammunition  will  be  issued  from  depots  according  to  General 
Orders  from  headquarters,  No.  95,  of  100  rounds  to  infantry  and  cav- 
alry and  200  rounds  to  field  artillery ; not  more  than  250  friction  tubes 
per  gun  will  be  issued  to  field  artillery. 

9th.  The  chief  of  ordnance  will  have  the  several  ordnance  district 
depots  inspected  from  time  to  time,  so  that  he  may  be  kept  informed 
of  the  amount  and  condition  of  stores  held  on  hand  or  deficient. 

II.  Paragraph  IV,  General  Orders,  No.  95,  current  series,  from  these 
headquarters,  is  so  amended  as  to  require  monthly  returns  according 
to  prescribed  forms  to  be  made  to  the  chief  of  ordnance  of  the  ordnance 
and  ordnance  stores  in  charge  of  all  commanders  of  heavy  artillery, 
light  and  siege  batteries. 

III.  Paragraph  XVII,  General  Orders,  No.  95,  current  series,  from 
these  headquarters,  is  so  far  modified  that  the  soldier  will  only  be  re- 
quired to  have  and  keep  in  his  cartridge  box  40  rounds  of  ball  car- 
tridges when  in  presence  of  the  enemy  expecting  an  attack  or  when 
about  to  take  the  field;  at  all  other  times  not  more  than  20  rounds  per 
man  will  be  kept  in  the  cartridge  boxes;  in  addition,  one  box  of  a thou- 
sand rounds  will  be  held  on  hand  by  each  company  commander,  and  the 
remainder  of  the  100  rounds  per  man  prescribed*  by  paragraph  XVII, 
General  Orders,  No.  95,  current  series,  from  these  headquarters,  will  be 
carefully  stored  in  regimental  depot;  that  is,  either  in  wagons,  tents, 
huts,  or  other  suitable  shelter.  It  is  enjoined  on  company  commanders 
to  make  daily,  and  regimental  commanders  frequent,  inspections,  to  see 
that  these  orders  are  strictly  observed  and  proper  care  is  taken  of  all 
ammunition  issued  or  in  store. 


726 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


and  unattached  companies  in  this  department  will  be  habitually  turned 
in  at  regimental  or  other  headquarters  to  the  ordnance  sergeant,  who 
will  have  them  properly  boxed  up,  labeled,  and  stored  in  the  nearest 
brigade,  division,  or  district  ordnance  depot,  held  subject  to  be  called 
for  when  required.  A list  of  all  arms  thus  stored  will  be  promptly  fur- 
nished to  the  chief  of  ordnance. 

V.  Paragraph  V,  General  Orders,  No.  24,  War  Department,  Adju- 
tant and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  Richmond,  April  — , 1862,  is  repub- 
lished for  the  information  of  all  concerned,  and  will  be  attentively  ob- 
served in  so  far  as  now  modified  temporarily  in  the  foregoing  paragraph 
I Y of  these  orders : 

V.  Every  commanding  officer  of  a regiment  will  select  from  the  non-commissioned 
officers  of  the  regiment  the  one  best  qualified  for  the  duty  of  ordnance  sergeant. 
Such  non-commissioned  officer  will  have  charge  of  all  the  surplus  ordnance  stores  of 
the  regiment,  and  will  make  returns  of  the  same  to  the  Ordnance  Bureau.  The  arms 
and  accouterments  of  the  sick  and  disabled  of  the  regiment  will  be  turned  over  to 
and  be  accounted  for  by  him ; he  will  exercise  supervision  over  the  arms  and  ammu- 
nition iu  the  bands  of  the  men,  and  report  any  waste  or  damage  to  the  division  ord- 
nance officer  through  the  colonel  of  the  regiment.  All  such  appointments  will  bo  re- 
ported through  the  general  headquarters  to  the  Chief  of  the  Ordnance  Bureau. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  19, 1862 — 10.15  a.  m. 

S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Steamer  Cornubia,  from  Bermuda,  just  arrived  at  .Wilmington. 
Cargo,  blankets,  medicines,  and  shoes.  Captain  says  ship  and  cargo 
belong  to  Government.  It  entered  in  broad  daylight,  blockaders  not 
molesting  her. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  127.  J Charleston , S.  C.,  December  19,  1862. 

I.  The  personal  and  general  staff  of  the  commander  of  the  depart- 
ment are  announced  as  follows : 

Personal  staff.— First  Lieut.  A.  R.  Chisolm,  aide-de-camp;  First  Lieut. 
A.  N.  T.  Beauregard,  aide-de-camp;  Col.  A.  G.  Rice,  volunteer  aide-de- 
camp;  Col.  J.  L.  Manning,  volunteer  aide-de-camp;  Col.  W.  Porclier 
Miles,  volunteer  aide-de-camp;  Capt.  A.  Ferry,  volunteer  aide-de-camp. 

General  staff. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  chief  of  staff  and  assistant 
adjutant- general;  Capt.  Clifton  H.  Smith,  assistant  adjutant-general; 
Capt.  John  F.  O’Brien,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Capt.  John  M.  Otey, 
assistant  adjutant-general;  First  Lieut.  Edmund  Kearney,  aide  de-camp 
and  acting  assistant  adjutant- general ; Capt.  Joseph  Manigault,  assist- 
ant adjutant- general  and  chief  signal  corps;  Lieut.  Col.  A.  Roman, 
assistant  adjutant- general  and  assistant  inspector-general;  Maj.  Henry 
Bryan,  assistant  adjutant-general  and  assistant  inspector-general;  Capt. 
John  F.  Lay,  assistant  adjutant-general  and  assistant  inspector-general; 
Lieut.  A.  M.  Haskell,  acting  assistant  inspector-general;  Maj.  Hutson 
Lee,  chief  quartermaster;  Maj.  E.  A.  Deslonde,  chief  quartermaster  in 
the  pay  department;  Surg.  R.  L.  Brodie,  medical  director;  Surg.  R.  A. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  727 

Kin  loch,  medical  inspector;  Surg.  S.  Choppin,  medical  inspector;  Maj. 
D.  B.  Harris,  chief  engineer;  Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales,  chief  of  artillery  and 
ordnance. 

II.  The  following  officers  are  announced  as  chiefs  of  subsistence  in 
the  States  in  which  they  are  respectively  stationed: 

Maj.  H.  0.  Guerin,  State  of  South  Carolina;  Maj.  J.  L.  Locke,  State 
of  Georgia;  Maj.  A.  A.  Canova,  State  of  Florida. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  December  20,  18G2. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Comdg.  District  of  East  Florida , Tallahassee , Fla. : 

General:  I am  instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  authorize 
you  to  retain  for  the  use  of  the  troops  of  your  command  the  following 
articles,  as  you  request,  namely : 2,000  pounds  cannon  powder,  25  kegs 
rifle  powder,  12  cases  (240)  muskets,  50,000  musket  caps,  540  blankets, 
438  pairs  of  pants,  1,000  pairs  of  shoes,  part  of  the  cargo  of  the  steamer 
Cuba.  The  balance  of  the  goods  you  will  forward  as  soon  as  practica- 
ble to  the  points  designated  by  the  Quartermaster  General  and  the 
other  chiefs  of  bureaus. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CLIFTON  H.  SMITH, 
Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


Camp  Clinch,  December  20,  1862. 
Lieut.  Col.  D.  L.  Clinch,  Waynesville: 

Colonel  : At  the  special  request  of  old  Henry  (who  I wrote  you  had 
come  over  from  the  island)  I again  write  in  relation  to  the  attack  upon 
Charleston.  As  he  was  raised  near  the  city  he  feels  a deep  interest  in 
it.  He  says  they  are  going  to  make  great  efforts  to  take  it;  that  he 
overheardofficer's  say  that  a few  boats  would  engage  the  fort,  while  forty 
would  land  a large  force  somewhere  near  the  city,  and  that  they  ex- 
pected to  take  the  city  with  this  land  force ; a great  many  negroes  would 
tight  with  them ; he  cannot  tell  where  this  place  is  they  are  going  to 
land. 

We  asked  when  Savannah  would  be  attacked.  He  said  the  Yankees 
say  there  is  too  much  Northern  property  in  Savannah  that  would  be 
injured  if  an  attack  was  made  upon  the  city,  and  that  Savannah  was 
different  from  Charleston,  as  Charleston  gave  the  first  offense,  and  before 
they  got  through  with  it  one  stone  shall  not  be  left  upon  another.  He 
says  preparations  were  being  made  to  plant  an  immense  quantity  of  cot- 
ton on  the  island  next  summer,  but  that  one  of  their  spies  returned 
on  Thursday  night  and  reported  that  1 had  come  back  from  Savannah 
and  had  got  permission  to  make  an  attack  upon  the  island ; that  I was 
fixing  up  boats  upon  the  Altainalia,  and  that  the  cars  were  bringing 
more  troops  for  the  attack.  This  spy  stated  he  heard  me  tell  one  ot  the 
officers  these  things.  This  is  a lie,  but  a conversation  I had  with  Major 
Harris  must  have  been  overheard  by  some  accursed  traitor  in  our  camps 
and  communicated  to  the  spy. 


728 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


After  getting  your  approval  to  make  the  attack  upon  the  Pike’s  Bluff 
pickets  I went  quietly  to  work  fixing  the  boats.  The  only  person  I spoke 
to  was  Mr.  William  Oouper.  I thought  it  best  to  get  his  consent  to  use 
the  Hopeton  boats. 

One  night  last  week  I spoke  to  Major  Harris  about  it ; that  conver- 
sation was  undoubtedly  overheard.  So  soon  as  these  things  were  com- 
municated the  Governor  made  them  a speech  and  ordered  everything 
to  leave  the  island.  On  Monday  night,  in  the  hurry  and  confusion  of 
leaving,  he  gave  the  sentinel  the  slip.  His  limbs  are  much  swollen 
from  long  confinement.  As  soon  as  he  can  get  about  I will  send  him 
to  you.  He  says  their  loss  upon  the  Saint  Simon’s  while  we  were  there 
was  some  15  or  18,  and  that  he  knows  it  to  be  the  fact  that  the  buzzards 
destroyed  their  dead  while  they  surrounded  the  place.  He  also  stated 
that  a child  and  3 negroes  were  killed  in  the  scrape  upon  the  Altamaha. 
There  were  no  whites  in  the  boat.  1 have  no  doubt  but  that  the  gun- 
boat that  left  the  sound  Tuesday  took  off  the  last  negro  on  the  island. 
The  most  of  them  were  on  board  before  Henry  left. 

Would  it  not  be  well,  colonel,  to  warn  our  commanders  of  this  land 
attack  against  Charleston  ? 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  M.  HAZZARD, 
Captain  Glynn  Guards. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  21,  1862 — 8.30  p.  m. 
General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  Whiting  calls  urgently  for  one  10-inch  gun.  Send  him  first 
one  intended  for  this  place. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters  District  of  Middle  Florida, 

Quincy , December  22,  1862. 


General  Beauregard: 


General:  Your  communication  of  the  10th  instant  was  received  on 
my  return  to  this  place  on  Saturday,  the  20th  instant. 

If  my  letters  of  the  3d  and  9th  conveyed  the  idea  that  I regarded  the 
danger  of  a movement  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  from  Saint  Mark’s 
merely  for  the  purpose  of  turning  the  batteries  on  the  Apalachicola 
River  as  imminent  I was  misunderstood.  What  I intended  to  sug- 
gest was  this:  That  in  my  opinion  if  the  enemy  ever  made  a serious  in- 
vasion into  this  part  of  the  country  it  would  be  attempted  from  Saint 
Mark’s  or  Shell  Point  or  some  point  in  that  vicinity  rather  than  up  the 
Apalachicola  River.  Such  a movement  on  their  part  would  not  proba- 
bly be  attempted  with  a small  force,  and  would  not  be  resorted  to  merely 
for  the  purpose  of  getting  control  of  the  Apalachicola  River;  but  if  suc- 
cessful, would  certainly  give  them  the  command  of  that  river  as  soon  as 
they  got  possession  of  it  above  the  obstructions.  This  opinion  I have 
seen  no  reason  to  change,  though  I fully  appreciate  the  difficulties  the 
enemy  would  have  to  encounter  in  such  an  undertaking. 

Since  my  communication  to  you  of  the  11th  instant  I have  visited 
and  examined  the  points  on  the  Apalachicola  River  which  it  is  proposed 
to  obstruct  and  fortify.  Rock  Bluff,  on  said  river,  is  about  30  miles  be- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  729 

low  the  junction  of  the  Chattahoochee  and  Flint  Fivers,  and  not  54  miles 
above  the  junction,  as  you  suppose.  The  point  in  the  Narrows  selected 
by  Captain  Moreno  for  placing  the  obstructions  is  about  90  miles,  and 
not,  as  you  suppose,  16  miles  below  the  junction.  I make  these  correc- 
tions in  your  statements,  as  it  is  important  that  these  localities  should 
be  properly  understood  in  deciding  questions  that  will  be  presented  in 
connection  with  these  defenses. 

On  this  visit  I was  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Jones,  of  the  Navy 
(commanding  Confederate  gunboat  Chattahoochee),  and  Lieutenant, 
Latrobe,  of  the  engineer  department,  and  feel  indebted  to  both  of  them 
for  valuable  suggestions.  After  as  thorough  an  examination  as  we 
were  able  to  make  we  were  of  the  opinion  that  the  points  selected  by 
Captain  Moreno  and  approved  by  the  commanding  general  were  the 
best  that  could  be  occupied.  The  most  important  of  these  points  was 
the  one  in  the  Narrows,  about  90  miles  below  the  junction  of  the  Chat- 
tahoochee and  Flint  Fivers.  At  that  point  the  channel  is  narrow,  and 
on  both  sides  of  the  river,  extending  several  miles  in  the  interior,  there 
is  a swamp,  which  cannot  be  traversed  by  infantry.  The  batteries 
placed  there  for  the  protection  of  the  obstructions  cannot  be  turned. 
On  account  of  these  swamps  there  are  serious  difficulties  in  the  erection 
of  batteries,  which,  however,  with  time  and  labor  can  be  overcome.  The 
obstructions  prepared  by  the  commissioners  of  Georgia  have  been  sunk 
at  this  point,  and  Captain  Moreno  is  now  pushing  forward  the  erection 
of  the  batteries  with  all  the  force  and  means  that  can  be  commanded. 
Until  the  battery  is  completed,  or  at  least  until  a portion  of  the  guns 
can  be  placed  in  position,  the  obstructions  would  only  amount  to  tem- 
porary delay  against  a movement  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  up  the  river. 
I shall  provide  in  the  mean  time  for  such  resistance  as  can  be  made  by 
sharpshooters  along  the  banks  of  the  river,  though  I attach  very  little 
importance  to  that  mode  of  resistance  against  gunboats.  In  this  con- 
nection I would  suggest  that  the  gunboat  Chattahoochee,  under  the 
command  of  Lieutenant  Jones,  now  effectually  stopped  from  going  to 
sea  by  the  sinking  of  these  obstructions,  should  be  ordered  down  to  the 
obstructions  for  their  protection  until  the  batteries  can  be  completed. 
The  armament  of  this  boat  is  superior  to  any  guns  we  shall  have  for 
our  batteries.  These  obstructions  in  the  Narrows  constitute,  in  my 
opinion,  the  main  defense  of  the  river.  If  the  enemy  should  be  enabled 
to  silence  our  batteries  there  and  remove  the  obstructions  I should  feel 
very  little  confidence  in  a successful  resistance  at  points  higher  up  the 
river.  After  leaving  the  Narrows  the  river  becomes  much  wider  and 
more  difficult  of  obstructing,  and  there  is  no  poiut  where  the  enemy 
could  not  land  below  obstructions,  and,  with  a sufficient  land  force,  turn 
the  batteries  that  might  be  erected  for  their  protection.  Besides,  ob- 
structions placed  in  the  river  above  this  point  must  be  partial,  as  the 
river  affords  the  only  mode  of  communication  with  batteries  at  the 
Narrows,  and  must  be  kept  open  for  that  reason.  Obstructions  could 
however  be  prepared  and  be  ready  to  be  sunk  when  it  was  no  longer 
necessary  to  keep  up  the  communication.  The  position  of  the  Narrows 
is  in  every  respect  the  important  one,  and  its  defense  should  be  made 
as  complete  as  possible.  I have  therefore  directed  Captain  Moreno  to 
place  there  three  32-pounders,  and  with  the  approval  of  the  command- 
ing general  I would  as  soon  as  possible  erect  another  battery  of  three 
guns  bearing  upon  the  channel  of  the  river  at  the  same  point.  In 
these  two  batteries  I should  place  the  best  and  heaviest  guns  that 
could, be  had  and  concentrate  as  far  as  practicable  our  defense  of  the 
river  at  that  point.  Attaching,  as  I do,  so  much  importance  to  this 


730 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

battery,  I would  respectfully  represent  to  the  commanding’  general  that 
there  is  not  in  my  command  one  artillery  officer  of  experience  whom  1 
could  place  in  command  of  it.  If  he  should  agree  with  me  in  reference 
to  its  importance,  and  could  assign  to  the  post  an  experienced  officer,  j 
with  men  who  had  been  under  fire,  or  in  whom  the  officer  had  eonfi- j 
deuce,  it  would  give  a feeling  of  security  which  cannot  be  felt  with  so 
important  a position  in  the  hands  of  inexperienced  officers  and  untried 
men. 

Kock  Bluff,  about  30  miles  below  the  junction  of  the  Chattahoochee  • 
and  Flint  Fivers,  is  the  point  selected  by  Captain  Moreno  for  his  second  i 
battery  and  obstructions.  I think  it  is  the  best  point  for  a second  bat-  I 
tery,  but  do  not  propose  to  remove  the  present  battery  from  Alum  Bluff 
until  the  important  work  at  the  Narrows  has  been  completed.  As  soon,  i 
however,  as  that  has  been  done  I will  give  prompt  attention  to  the  fur-  . 
ther  defenses,  not  only  of  Apalachicola,  but  also  of  the  Chattahoochee  J 
and  Flint  Fivers. 

Inclosed  I send  you  a communication  from  the  Georgia  commissioners  -j 
in  reference  to  the  obstructions  in  the  Narrows,  accompanied  by  a letter 
from  Captain  Thigpin,*  a detachment  of  whose  company  lately  visited 
the  town  of  Apalachicola.  On  my  recent  visit  I found  that  the  mail 
communication  between  Apalachicola  and  the  interior  was  regularly 
kept  up.  Through  this  means  the  enemy  was  enabled  regularly  and  j 
constantly  to  communicate  not  only  with  Florida,  but  Georgia  and  Ala- 
bama, and  indeed  the  whole  of  the  country.  Newspapers  from  every  j 
part  ot  the  Confederate  States  were  regularly  carried  to  Apalachicola, 
which  was  in  the  virtual  possession  of  the  enemy,  and  a large  portion 
of  whose  population  was  disloyal  to  our  Government.  The  result  was  \ 
that  the  Abolition  fleet  received  our  newspapers  as  well  as  other  iufor-  i 
mation  as  regularly  as  our  own  citizens  in  any  part  of  the  country. 
Fegarding  this  state  of  things  as  highly  injurious  to  our  cause,  I gave 
notice  to  the  mail  contractor,  from  Iticco’s  Bluff,  on  the  Apalachicola, 
to  the  town,  that  his  contract  was  suspended,  and  that  the  mail  would 
no  longer  be  delivered  to  his  carriers.  I also  directed  the  postmasters 
at  Chattahoochee  and  Ficco’s  Bluff  to  forward  to  me  all  letters  ad- 
dressed to  Apalachicola  and  to  detain  in  their  offices  all  newspapers 
addressed  to  that  point.  I trust  that  this  step  will  meet  the  approval 
of  the  commanding  general.  For  the  present  I have  stopped  all  com- 
munication with  Apalachicola,  and  shall  strictly  enforce  that  policy,  at 
least  until  our  river  defenses  are  completed.  It  will  cause  both  incon- 
venience and  injury  to  some  loyal  people  in  that  vicinity,  but  in  my 
judgment  the  public  interest  imperatively  required  it.  I trust  that  in 
a short  time  the  defenses  of  the  river  will  be  in  as  complete  condition 
as  they  can  be  made,  though  it  is  due  to  candor  to  say  that  my  recent 
visit,  with  the  information  of  the  threatened  movement  of  the  enemy  up 
the  river,  has  not  tended  to  confirm  the  confidence  I felt  in  the  success 
of  these  defenses  when  I addressed  General  Beauregard  from  Columbus, 
Ga.  I was  therefore  greatly  gratified  to  receive  to-day  the  generaPs 
telegraph  announcing  his  approval  of  my  request  to  be  authorized  to 
raise  additional  troops  for  the  defense  of  this  district.  I sincerely  hope 
that  the  Government  wiil  not  hesitate  to  grant  the  power  asked  for,  and 
that,  too,  at  an  early  day.  Any  movement  of  the  enemy  in  this  quarter 
will  most  likely  be  made  in  the  winter  months  or  early  spring,  and  hence 
there  is  no  time  to  lose  in  preparing  to  meet  them. 

During  my  absence  I visited  that  portion  of  the  district  lying  be- 


*See  of  December  18,  p.  724. 


731 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

tween  the  Apalachicola  and  Choctawhatchee  Rivers.  Between  the 
populated  portion  of  that  section  and  the  coast  and  bays  is  an  almost 
desert  country  of  nearly  50  miles  in  extent.  There  is  no  reason  to 
apprehend  an  invasion  or  raid  of  the  enemy  in  that  quarter  beyoud  the 
salt-works  on  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay.  This  interest  has  become  an  ex- 
tensive and  important  one.  It  has  already  attracted  the  attention  ot 
the  enemy,  and  two  efforts  have  recently  been  made  by  them  to  break 
up  these  works.  I found  the  few  troops  there  stationed  too  tar  from 
the  coast  to  render  timely  aid.  1 changed  them  to  more  convenient 
posts,  and  have  taken  steps  to  concentrate  the  operation  in  the  salt- 
works within  narrower  territorial  limits.  These  steps,  in  connection 
with  the  action  of  the  Florida  Legislature  authorizing  the  organization 
of  the  salt- workers  for  their  own  defense,  will,  I hope,  enable  me  in  the 
future  to  prevent  any  serious  interruption  in  these  works. 

In  response  to  your  suggestions  of  calling  upon  the  Governors  of 
Georgia  and  Florida  for  troops  incase  of  an  invasion,  I beg  to  remark 
that  the  Legislature  of  Florida,  contrary  to  my  expectation,  failed  to 
pass  any  law  for  the  organization  of  the  militia  of  the  State  to  meet 
such  an  emergency.  I am  not  informed  what  was  the  action  of  the 
Legislature  of  Georgia  on  the  subject;  but  I must  be  permitted  to  re- 
mark that  if  compelled  to  rely  upon  the  militia  called  out  by  the  Gov- 
ernors, after  all  persons  subject  to  conscription  have  been  withdrawn 
from  the  States,  the  reliance  will  be  a very  frail  and  unsatisfactory  one. 
My  ordnance  officer  is  now  engaged  in  obtaining  the  necessary  infor- 
mation to  report  on  the  amount  and  condition  of  the  arms  and  ammuni- 
tion in  this  district,  and  as  soon  as  obtained  I will  forward  it  to  you. 
In  the  mean  time  enough  is  known  to  say  that  we  are  destitute  of  arms, 
except  such  as  are  in  the  hands  of  our  troops,  and  I would  earnestly 
appeal  for  a supply  of  small-arms  in  anticipation  of  additional  troops. 
Whether  authorized  to  raise  troops  as  asked  for  or  compelled  to  rely 
upon  the  militia  called  out  by  the  Governors,  in  either  event  arms  and 
ammunition  would  be  needed  to  be  put  in  their  hands.  To  do  so  in 
time  for  effective  service  they  should  be  here,  and  for  that  reason  I 
ask  to  be  furnished  with  them  as  soon  as  possible. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

HOWELL  COBB, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding , <foc. 


[Inolosure.] 

On  Boat  Indian, 
December  20,  1862 — 11  a.  m. 

General  Cobb  : 

Dear  Sir  : We  beg  leave  to  report  to  you  that  we  accomplished  the 
sinking  of  our  obstructions  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner  yesterday 
evening  at  5 o’clock,  and  we  have  the  best  reason  to  think  that  the  navi- 
gation of  the  river  from  above  or  below  is  now  most  effectually  closed. 
To  keep  it  so  will  be  the  work  of  those  who  may  be  placed  there  to  defend 
the  obstructions.  For  this  purpose  we  beg  leave  to  suggest  the  great 
importance  of  placing  there  at  once  100  or  200  sharpshooters,  to  act  as 
best  they  can  until  Some  guns  are  mounted,  which  latter  will  require, 
we  think,  ten  days  or  two  weeks  to  accomplish.  One  hundred  sharp 
shooters,  well  divided  and  under  such  cover  as  they  may  be  able 
speedily  to  erect,  supported  by  the  gunboat  Chattahoochee,  lying  above, 
the  neck  of  land  made  by  the  river  bend,  would  be  a worthy  means  ot 


782 


COASTS  01"  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


defense  until  the  land  battery  is  completed.  That  you  will  take  such 
steps  as  will  cause  this  gunboat  to  be  brought  down  immediately  we 
urgently  hope.  She  might  be  towed  down  to  her  position  and  her 
machinery  finished  there,  if  practicable,  upon  a further  rise  of  2 feetl 
in  the  riv  er.  The  guns  from  Alum  Bluff4  designed  for  this  place  can  bel 
sent  down  in  advance  of  the  completion  of  the  battery.  The  plan  de-| 
cided  on  for  mounting  them  is  for  McAllister  to  prepare  suitable  timber! 
frame  work  at  Columbus  (which  can  be  speedily  done),  take  them  down 
and  mount  the  guns  (three),  and  then  fill  in  with  sand,  as  is  done  in  the 
trestle  work  on  railroads.  This  is  regarded  as  the  speediest  way  of  get- 
ting them  in  position  on  account  of  the  great  difficulty  of  getting  sand 
enough  (14  miles  distant)  for  immediately  elevating  the  whole  battery J1 
Lumber,  carpenters,  and  materials  are  promptly  available  only  at 
Columbus. 

We  beg  you  to  urge  on  Governor  Milton  to  press  forward  to  that! 
point  50  negroes  immediately,  with  overseers,  to  go  on  with  necessary) 
work.  We  left  50  negroes  there  already  at  work  and  a detachment  of  I 
about  20  men  from  Alum  Bluff4. 

We  would  respectfully  repeat  our  judgment  as  to  the  necessity  of  < 
sending  down  from  Alum  Bluff  100  or  more  men  to  defend  as  sharp- \ 
shooters  any  advance  of  the  enemy  by  gunboat  or  launches  from  Apa-  i 
lachicola. 

We  inclose  you  letter  from  Captain  Thigpin  ; also  newspaper  slips 
from  Columbus  paper. 

We  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  to  you  our  sincerest  regret  and  • 
sympathy  for  the  loss  of  your  lamented  and  distinguished  brother,  \ 
fighting  at  the  outposts  of  danger  and  duty  for  our  common  safety. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  very  truly,  vours,  &c., 

JAS.  M.  CHAMBERS, 

JAS.  F.  BOZEMANT, 

State  Commissioners. 


Circular.]  Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , December  26,  1862. 

In  case  the  proposed  attack  upon  this  harbor  is  known  beforehand 
special  directions  will  be  given  for  the  service  of  the  different  batteries. 
As,  however,  it  may  happen  that  a surprise  may  be  attempted,  or  that 
the  intervening  time  between  the  knowledge  of  the  intention  and  the 
event  may  be  too  short,  the  instructions  hereinafter  contained  will  be 
carefully  attended  to. 

Each  commanding  officer  of  a fort  or  battery  will  give  his  attention 
immediately  to  the  strengthening  of  his  carriages  and  the  complete 
preparation  of  his  material.  Besides  making  the  proper  requisitions  on 
the  staff  departments  let  him  endeavor  to  do  as  much  as  possible  from 
his  own  resources.  While  staff  departments  are  to  a great  extent  crip- 
pled for  want  of  material  and  workmen,  much  can  be  accomplished  by 
ready  expedients  without  their  aid.  Every  carriage  must  be  kept  care- 
fully screwed  up,  and  it  any  are  defective,  made  at  least  temporarily  I 
efficient.  All  the  elevating  screws,  eccentric  wheels,  and  traversing 
gear  must  be  put  in  order  and  kept  so,  and  especial  care  must  be  taken 
to  see  that  a full  supply  of  small  implements  is  constantly  on  hand. 

Ammunition  should  be  examined  and  immediately  apportioned  to  ! 
the  several  guns,  reference  being  had  to  the  orders  heretofore  given  on  \ 
that  subject;  but  where  the  quantity  is  not  sufficient  the  greater  por- 


Chap.  XXYI.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


733 


tion  should  be  given  to  the  heavier  guns,  as  on  them  principally  the 
success  of  the  defense  must  depend. 

Officers  and  men  of  each  command  must  be  kept  on  the  alert  and  in- 
structed to  go  to  battery  at  once  upon  an  alarm,  and  especial  care  must 
be  taken  that  each  battery  is  in  readiness  for  instant  action  as  the  men 
arrive  at  their  guns. 

It  is  hoped  and  believed  that  most  of  these  things  are  habitually  at- 
tended to,  but  as  constant  vigilance  is  our  only  security,  they  cannot  be 
too  forcibly  insisted  upon. 

Upon  observing  a disposition  to  attack  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  the 
nearest  fort  or  battery  will  give  the  alarm.  By  day,  a shotted  gun  and 
dipping  the  flag  will  communicate  the  danger  to  the  other  fortifications 
and  headquarters.  All  commands  will  go  at  once  to  battery,  and  the 
circumstances  of  the  alarm  communicated  to  headquarters  by  telegraph 
or  signal. 

By  night,  a shotted  gun  and  a rocket  will  give  the  intelligence. 

In  whatever  way  the  attack  is  made  by  the  enemy  he  is  to  be  engaged 
as  soon  as  possible  to  do  so  effectually  with  a few  long  range  guns  from 
every  fort  that  will  bear.  The  number  of  these  guns  must  be  left  to  the 
discretion  of  the  commanding  officers,  who  must  see  that  the  fire  is  as 
accurate  as  possible.  They  must  not  engage  too  great  a number,  and 
be  careful  not  unduly  to  excite  their  men  or  strain  their  guns  and  car- 
riages. While  the  long-range  fire  is  valuable,  if  accurate,  to  annoy  the 
enemy  and  force  him  to  develop  his  attack,  it  is  not  to  be  depended  on 
for  more. 

Other  things  being  equal,  it  will  be  well  that  the  guns  to  leeward  are 
first  engaged.  The  remaining  guns  of  the  batteries  will  be  trained  by 
battery  on  different  points  where  the  enemy  must  pass,  care  being 
taken  to  have  the  fire  of  each  battery  concentrated.  As  the  enemy  ap- 
proaches let  the  distance  he  will  be  in  passing  be  accurately  estimated 
by  the  distance  buoys  and  the  elevation  made  to  correspond,  making 
it  too  little  rather  than  too  great  for  direct  fire.  If  the  vessels  are  pass- 
ing rapidly  the  guns  should  be  discharged  by  battery  just  as  the  prows 
of  the  vessels  come  across  the  line  of  sight. 

In  the  case  of  wooden  vessels  the  object  will  be  to  hit  them  near  the 
water-line,  just  abaft  the  smoke-stack.  In  the  case  of  iron-clad  vessels, 
to  hit  the  deck  or  the  turrets  at  the  intersection  with  the  deck,  and 
especially  to  let  all  the  shots  strike  at  once. 

The  first  fire  will  be  concentrated  upon  the  leading  vessels,  and  will 
be  continued  upon  them  as  long  as  the  guns  by  battery  will  bear  well, 
and  especially  if  they  become  entangled  in  obstructions,  even  if  certain 
vessels  engage  to  draw  off  the  attention  of  the  outermost  batteries  and 
remain  behind. 

Should  some  of  the  vessels  succeed  in  passing  the  action  must  then 
pass  into  the  hands  of  commanding  officers  of  batteries.  They  will 
pour  in  their  fire  as  far  as  practicable  by  battery,  and  as  fast  as  it  can 
be  done  with  accuracy  on  whatever  vessels  of  the  enemy  may  be  nearest 

them. 

The  guns  of  the  Beauregard  Battery,  Fort  Moultrie,  Battery  Bee, 
and  the  eastern,  northeastern,  and  northwestern  faces  of  Fort  Sumter 
will  be  used  to  form  the  first  circle  of  fire  to  which  the  enemy  must  be 
subjected,  the  center  being  a little  to  the  eastward  of  a line  between 
the  forts  and  midway.  Every  effort  must  be  made  to  crush  his  vessels 
and  repel  his  attack  within  this  circle,  and  especially  while  he  is  en- 
tangled in  the  obstructions. 

All  the  mortars  of  Fort  Sumter  and  Fort  Moultrie  will  be  trained  on 


734  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI.  j 

the  center  above  indicated.  The  fuses  will  be  of  the  full  length  and 
the  shells  have  large  bursting  charges,  it  being  better  to  have  the  fuses!* 
fail  than  the  shells  to  burst  in  the  air,  and  the  full  effect  of  the  explo-j 
sions  being  desirable  if  successful.  The  mortar  batteries  will  be  fired] 
by  battery  when  the  enemy’s  vessels  are  about  two  ships’  lengths  from 
the  point  on  which  they  are  trained. 

If  the  fleet  is  large  the  mortars  will  be  kept  trained  on  the  samei 
point  and  fired  by  battery  as  rapidly  as  possible  while  the  fleet  is  pass-! 
ing.  If  small,  and  a portion  has  passed  the  first  circle  of  fire,  the  mor-  :i 
tars  of  Fort  Sumter  will  be  trained  to  operate  on  the  second  circle,  the  i 
center  of  which  will  be  at  a point  about  midway  between  Forts  Sumter  I 
and  Ripley  and  to  the  southward  of  the  Middle-Ground  Shoal.  It  will 
be  formed  by  the  heavy  guns  of  Fort  Johnson,  Fort  Ripley,  Castle  li 
Pinckney,  Battery  Bee,  and  the  northwestern  and  western  faces  of  Fort 
Sumter. 

The  guns  of  Forts  Johnson  and  Ripley  and  Castle  Pinckney  will  open 
on  the  leading  vessels  as  they  come  within  easy  range,  care  being  taken 
that  every  shot  finds  its  mark.  Those  of  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Bee  I 
will  continue  upon  the  leading  vessels  as  long  as  they  are  close,  but  if! 
they  elongate  their  distance  the  fire  will  be  concentrated  on  the  vessels  ! 
nearest  them. 

Should  any  vessel  succeed  in  passing  the  second  circle  of  fire  the 
third  will  be  formed  and  put  into  action  by  the  guns  of  White  Point 
Battery  and  Battery  Glover,  with  such  guns  of  Forts  Johnson  and  Rip-  5 
ley  and  Castle  Pinckney  as  will  bear.  Concentration  on  the  leading 
vessels  will  be  the  object  as  before. 

During  the  action  care  will  be  taken  as  far  as  possible  to  prevent 
the  chances  of  shot  from  the  batteries  taking  the  direction  of  our  own  i 
works.  The  best  way  of  doing  this  will  be  to  let  none  miss  the  ene- 
my, and  when  he  is  between  the  works  most  especial  accuracy  will  be 
striven  for. 

The  vessels  of  the  Confederate  JSavy  will  engage  during  the  action,  j 
and  they  may  often  pass  our  batteries.  In  this  case  officers  and  gun- 
ners cannot  be  too  careful  to  avoid  hitting  them.  The  fire  by  battery 
as  a general  thing  will  be  discontinued  at  those  vessels  of  the  enemy 
which  our  ships  engage  closely;  but  if. occasion  offers  endeavors  will 
be  made  to  hit  the  ports  of  the  revolving  turrets  on  the  enemy’s  vessels 
when  turned  from  our  ships,  to  disarrange  and  throw  out  of  gear  the 
machinery  for  closing  the  ports. 

Accurate  fire  by  single  guns  will  be  concentrated  on  the  enemy’s  ves- 
sels if  two  or  more  attack  one  of  ours,  and  should  the  distance  admit 
then  it  will  be  advisable  to  pour  upon  one  of  them  a heavy  fire  by  bat- 
tery. 

The  plunging  fire  from  Fort  Sumter  is  expected  to  be  particularly 
effective,  and  when  single  rifled  guns  are  fired  from  the  barbettes  of  that 
fort  it  will  be  well  to  hit  the  grated  roofs  of  the  turrets  with  square- 
headed bolts,  followed  by  shells  filled  with  molten  iron. 

The  square  headed  bolts  for  the  10  inch  columbiads  and  the  heavier 
guns  will  be  fired  by  battery  when  the  enemy  is  within  close  range. 
Solid  shot  and  bolts  will  be  used  generally  against  iron  clads  during  the 
action. 

The  furnaces  for  melting  iron  and  heating  shot  will  be  kept  in  heat, 
and  heated  projectiles  will  be  used  whenever  occasion  offers  advantage. 

Should  it  happen  that  any  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  become  disabled 
and  endeavor  to  get  out  of  fire  the  outermost  batteries  must  pay  par- 
ticular attention  to  prevent  them,  and  in  case  other  of  the  enemy’s  ships 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  735 

come  to  the  assistance  of  the  disabled  let  every  gnu  and  mortar  which 
will  bear  be  turned  upon  them  by  battery. 

The  great  object  of  the  enemy  will  probably  be  to  run  by,  and  every 
effort  must  be  made  to  crush  him  in  each  successive  circle  of  fire  which 
he  encounters. 

Hog  Island  Channel  will  be  obstructed,  and  the  obstruction  must  be 
guarded  by  the  long  range  guns  of  Fort  Sumter  and  the  columbiad  of 
Battery  Bee  nearest  it. 

It  is  doubtful  whether  the  enemy  will  attempt  to  pass  by  Folly  Chan- 
nel. If  he  does,  a circle  of  fire  will  be  formed  by  the  guns  of  Fort  Bip- 
ley,  Castle  Pinckney,  and  White  Point  Battery. 

The  position  of  torpedoes  will  be  communicated  to  commanding  offi- 
cers, and  the  effort  made  to  drive  the  enemy’s  vessels  upon  them  if  he 
is  taking  other  courses. 

The  obstructions  will  also  be  designated,  and  under  no  circumstances 
will  the  enemy  be  permitted  to  reconnoiter  them. 

The  headquarters  of  the  undersigned  will  be  at  Fort  Sumter,  and 
directions  be  sent  by  telegraph  and  signal  to  the  different  posts  should 
anything  require  special  directions. 

Batteries  Marshall  and  Wagner  will  be  worked  to  the  extent  of  their 
capacity  for  injuring  the  enemy  by  their  commanding  officers,  without 
unduly  exposing  their  commands. 

The  directions  given  above  relate  generally  to  the  defeat  of  an  attack 
by  the  enemy’s  fleet  alone.  Should  a combined  attack  be  made  by  land 
and  water  other  orders  can  be  issued,  as  nothing  of  that  kind  can  be 
done  by  surprise. 

The  present  circular  will  be  studied  and  reflected  upon  by  all  officers 
who  will  be  engaged  in  this  honorable  duqy  of  the  coming  defense. 
With  careful  attention,  coolness,  and  skillful  gunnery  success  is  far 
more  than  probable. 

B.  S.  BIPLEY, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

Official: 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Bichmond,  December  28,  1862. 

General  John  Gill  Shorter,  Montgomery , Ala. : 

The  boundaries  of  General  Cobb’s  district  extend  from  the  Suwannee 
to  Choctawhatchee  Biver,  in  Florida.  He  is  principally  charged  with 
the. defense  of  the  Chattahoochee  and  Apalachicola  Bivers  against  the 
approaches  of  the  enemy’s  boats,  and  his  command  necessarily  em- 
braces both  sides  of  these  rivers. 

S.  COOPEB, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  28, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  Cobb,  Quincy , Fla.  ; 

Suggestions  relative  to  batteries  at  Narrows  are  approved  of.  Ap- 
plication for  gunboat,  as  requested,  has  been  made  to  Navy  Depart- 
ment. Mail  arrangement  is  approved. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD, 

General , Commanding. 


736 


COASTS  OF  S.C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai>.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  28, 1862. 

S.  R.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  Navy , Richmond , Va. : 

General  Cobb  requests  gunboat  Chattahoochee  be  ordered  down  to 
defend  obstructions  in  Apalachicola  River  until  batteries  are  com- 
pleted. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  28, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  0.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  C.: 

War  Department  informs  me  Charleston  will  be  attacked  this  week; 
must  therefore  recall  my  troops.  After  departure  of  Forty-sixth  Geor- 
gia send  regiment  of  troops  from  Savannah,  then  a Carolina  regiment, 
and  so  on.  Select  between  42-pounder  and  10-inch  columbiad  from 
Richmond,  and  send  other  gun  here.  Answer. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  132.  f Charleston , S.  (7.,  December  28,  1862. 

I.  Paragraph  I,  General  Orders,  No.  21,  current  series,  from  these 
headquarters,  dated  May  28,  1862,  is  revoked,  and  the  following  are 
announced  as  the  existing  sub-divisions  of  this  department: 

1st.  The  First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S. 
Ripley  commanding,  embraces  the  works  for  the  defense  of  the  harbor  and 
approaches  to  the  city  of  Charleston,  limited  on  the  east  by  the  South 
Santee  River  and  on  the  west  by  the  Stono  and  Rantowles  Creek. 

2d.  The  Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  Brig.  Gen.  John- 
son Hagood  commanding,  extending  from  the  western  limit  of  the  First 
District  to  the  Ashepoo  River. 

3d.  The  Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  Brig.  Gen.  W.  S. 
Walker  commanding,  is  limited  on  the  east  by  the  Second  Military  Dis- 
trict and  on  the  west  by  the  Savannah  River. 

4th.  The  Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H. 
Trapier  commanding,  is  bounded  on  the  southwest  by  the  South  Santee 
River  and  on  the  northeast  by  the  boundary  line  between  the  States 
of  North  and  South  Carolina. 

5th.  The  District  of  Georgia,  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer  commanding, 
embraces  the  State  of  Georgia,  excluding  the  defenses  of  the  Apalach- 
icola River  and  its  main  affluents. 

6th.  The  District  of  East  Florida,  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan  com- 
manding, including  all  that  portion  of  the  State  of  Florida  lying  east 
of  the  Suwannee  River. 

7th.  The  District  of  Middle  Florida,  Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb  command- 
ing, to  embrace  that  portion  of  Florida  between  the  Suwannee  and 
Choctawhatchee  Rivers,  and  including  all  works  for  the  defense  of  the 
Apalachicola  and  its  main  affluents. 

II.  Each  military  district  will  be  regarded  as  a divisional  organiza- 
tion and  command,  and  the  several  staff  departments  therein  will  be 
organized  accordingly. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Asssistant  Adjutant  General. 


ClIAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE.  737 

Briff  Gen.  H.  Cobb,  . , „ . 

g Comdg.  District  of  Middle  Florida , Quincy : 

have  suggested.  . Moreno  as  to  the  disposition  and  con- 

stmcWoifo?  batteries  and  tg  PrgpHoj  J 

!SK:r5>^^  “*  »“• * ii* 

11=325 SSSS5S 
g;5SS=HSEi=-“ 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, JORDAN, 

f'/iiof  of  Staff. 


Circular. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  8.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla, 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  29, 1862. 


JBastgsflst&ggaggSS 

the  confusion  that  must  inevrtab  y ins«e  irom  anj^cn  ^ attack  0I1 
this  important  juncture,  and  in  view  of  the  further  factthat 

terest  to  suspend  ^ Adjutant  and  Inspector 

1862’  UDtil  th6 

orders  of  the  War  Department  can  be  fully  asceitamed. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregar  : THQMA8  JOBUAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


War  Department,  O.  8.  A., 

Richmond,  Va.,  December  30,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  H.  Cobb,  General,  Commanding,  &e.  : 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  9th  instant  to  the  Adjutant- 


General 


lias  been 


47  R R— VOL  XIV 


738 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  xxvl 


Sg-^sHga 

=si=HSS5“Sa-? 

gs^asE-sss 

SaSIZMr^r'r1  the  latter  to  an  «£,*-££ 

be  do6neabWy  b heD  ^ P® wMSSS^tKght 
mended  by  you!  “CtSteS^tffl  ^ “V™  rec0“ 

mimmmi 

s3S?‘:=SHS= 

«3^?p5S£53«3 

»=Sa=ss3=L^K: 

aswsHr^  sp* z&svsz, 

=s;  sS^iwpsa  ^ 

J.»  tam’lt  JWIldiSttSlf t?S2  ““  “,i'"*K  “ ““ 
servant, h‘gh  couslderatlon  aud  esteem,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.XXVX]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


739 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington , December  31,  1862. 
General  Beauregard,  Commanding: 


My  Dear  General:  I send  you  this  note  by  your  able  brigadier, 
General  Gist,  of  South  Carolina.  He  brings  you  a sketch  of  the  lines 
which  were  arranged  to  defend  Wilmington.  We  are  trying  to  increase 
the  efficiency  of  the  lines. 

I beg  you  will  receive  my  true  and  real  thanks  for  the  promptness 
with  which  you  sent  your  magnificent  troops  to  my  assistance  at  a time 
when  it  was  thought  they  were  needed. 

Though  1 have  been  stationed  here  in  a separate  command,  I regret 
always  that  the  orders  which  had  been  given  to  me  to  report  to  you 
were  not  insisted  on,  for  as  I commenced  this  war  under  you,  so  1 should 
like  to  end  it,  as  far  as  I am  concerned. 

Very  truly,  yours, 


W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Special  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Prov.  Forces,  Dist.  of  E.  Fla., 

No.  1543.  S Lake  City , December  31,  1862. 

I.  Captain  Dickison,  commanding  company  Second  Florida  Cav- 
alry, will  select  a lieutenant  and  20  men,  with  proper  non-commissioned 
officers,  and  three  or  four  days’  rations  for  his  men  and  of  forage  for 
liis  horses,  and  proceed  as  secretly  and  expeditiously  as  possible  across 
the  Saint  John’s  Biver  to  the  vicinity  of  Saint  Augustine. 

II.  Captain  Dickison  may  assume  the  command  of  the  expedition, 
or  place  the  lieutenant  in  command,  and  remain  himself  at  Palatka,  as 
may  in  his  judgment  be  best  for  the  public  service. 

III.  Having  arrived  at  Saint  Augustine,  or  its  vicinity,  the  com- 
manding officer  will  lay  in  wait,  his  troops  well  concealed,  and  capture 
if  possible  any  men  of  the  enemy  or  wagons  going  into  or  coming  out 
of  Saint  Augustine,  and  do  whatever  may  be  in  his  power  to  prevent 
communication  between  the  people  in  the  country  and  the  enemy  in 
Saint  Augustine. 

IV.  The  officer  commanding  the  expedition  will  return,  if  practicable, 
to  Mr.  Christopher’s,  on  the  King’s  Ferry  road,  and  there  supply  him- 
self with  provisions  and  forage,  and  communicate  with  Captain  Dick- 
ison or  the  officer  commanding  at  Palatka,  and,  if  prudent,  return  to 
the  vicinity  of  Saint  Augustine  and  make  another  effort  to  capture 
some  of  the  enemy  and  the  wagons  that  may  be  entering  or  coming 
from  the  town. 

Y.  A report  will  be  made  to  these  headquarters  of  the  expedition, 
and  any  prisoners  captured  will  be  sent  here.  The  utmost  vigilance  to 
prevent  surprise  or  loss  of  men  is  enjoined  on  the  officer  commanding 
the  expedition. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan : 

W.  CALL, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


740 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap. XXVI. 


Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia , and  Florida,  com - 
manded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  December  30,  1862. 


r 

Present  for  duty. 

Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery.* 

[ 

Officers. 

Men. 

u 

s 

m 

o 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Riplev 

First  Military  District 

224 

3,  801 

23 

383 

132 

2,  228 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Hagood 

Second  Military  District 

81 

1,005 

40 

680 

7 

161 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker... 

Third  Military  District 

59 

642 

66 

1,  080 

15 

264 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  . . . 

Fourth  Military  District  . . . 

45 

496 

17 

265 

3 

192 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer  .. 

District  of  Georgia 

248 

3, 428 

85 

1,  504 

' 90 

1,  552 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Finegan 

District  of  East  and  Middle 
Florida.  . 

46 

549 

38 

759 

7 

248 

G-rand  total 

703 

9,  921 

269 

4,671 

254 

4,  645 

Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley 

First  Military  District 

7,113 

8, 208 

10, 184 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Ilagood  

Second  Military  District  . . . . 

2,  026 

2,  392 

2,  945 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker... 

Third  Military  District 

2,  331 

2,  529 

3,  268 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier 

Fourth  Military  District . . . 

1,  097 

1,  2o8 
8,  890 

1,845 

Brig.  Gen  H.  W.  Mercer. . . 

District  of  Georgia 

7, 189 

11,  387 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Finegan 

District  of  East  and  Middle 
Florida. 

1,  597 

1,  882 

2,541 

Grand  total 

21,  353 

25, 159 

32, 170 

* Light  artillery — Effective  total,  2,072  ; aggregate  present,  2,376 ; aggregate  x>resentr 
and  absent,  2,916.  Heavy  artillery — Effective  total,  3,117  ; aggregate  present,  3,590 ^ 
aggregate  preseut  and  absent,  4,577. 

Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  District  of  East  and  Middle  Florida,  Brig.  Gen. 
Joseph  Finegan,  commanding , for  December,  1862. 


Present  for 
duty. 

1 

I 

u 

p, 

+3 

0 

<D 

00  . 

© 43 

S.S 

2 

I 

e 

o 

i 

a 

c 

« 

a 

M 

a a 

bXr-j 

£ a 

feJO 

◄ 

3 

60 

70 

82 

5 

106 

128 

280 

9 

162 

203 

263 

16 

312 

366 

466 

5 

140 

149 

158 

38 

780 

916 

1,  249 

Command. 


First  Special  Battalion  Florida  Infantry,  one  company 

Four  companies  of  Partisan  Ran vers  t 

Three  independent  companies  or  infantry 

Five  companies  of  cavalry 

Dunham’s  battery .* 

Total 


tNo  report  from  Westcotfc’s  company. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  troops  in  the  District  of  Middle  Florida,  commanded 
by  Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb,  for  December,  1862. 


Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

© 

© 

§ 

s 

x 

CO 

© 

© 

m 

o 

i 

X 

<2 

U 

© 

© 

o 

S 

X 

1st  Florida  Special  Battalion,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Hopkins. 

o j TPi 4 /I PftTrolnT  PnlATiftl  Smith 

20 

358 

359 

239 

40 

110 

420 

271 

44 

118 

500 

365 

86 

144 

9 

2 

232 

40 

2d  Jb loricia  v>  avail  y,  v/oiuuei  oululh.- 

Robinson’s  Partisan  Rangers  — ............. 

2 

no 

Grand  totftl  . 

20 

358 

11 

272 

2 

no 

748 

853 

1,  095 

Headquarters  James  Island  and  the  Main, 
Charleston , S.  C .,  January  3,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  Special 
Orders,  No.  252,  department  headquarters,  I proceeded,  in  charge  of 
the  Forty-sixth  Georgia  Volunteers  and  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  to  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  and  upon  my  arrival  reported  to 
Brio-  Gen.  W.  H.  G.  Whiting,  in  command  at  that  place.  The  troops 
ordered  to  report  to  me  from  the  different  districts  in  this  depart- 
ment continued  to  arrive  until  the  19th  ultimo,  being  delayed  on  ac- 
count of  insufficient  railroad  transportation.  I would  respectfully  ask 
the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  the  inclosed  memorandum 
of  my  assistant  adjutant-general  as  to  the  arrival  and  departure  of 
troops  sent  to  Wilmington,  and  in  this  connection  would  remark  that 
the  delays  were  occasioned  by  overloading  the  trains,  by  the  worn-out 
condition  of  the  locomotives,  want  of  wood  and  water  at  proper  stations, 
and  want  of  system  in  running  the  trains.  I am  convinced  that  no 
reliance  can  be  placed  upon  the  railroads  for  the  transportation  of 
troops  to  Wilmington  in  any  reasonable  time  or  from  Wilmington  to 
this  city.  Three  days  elapsed  from  the  reception  of  my  orders  to  re- 
turn before  a single  train  could  be  furnished,  though  General  Whiting’s 
chief  quartermaster  appeared  to  use  every  exertion  to  obtain  transpor- 
tation. My  orders  to  return  were  received  on  the  morning  of  the  27th 
December  last,  and  at  this  time  not  more  than  one-half  of  the  troops, 
say  2,500  men,  have  reached  this  city. 

The  inefficiency  of  the  railroads,  as  at  present  managed,  is  so  apparent 
and  manifest,  that  I feel  constrained  to  remark  that  if  re-enforcements 
to  the  number  of  5,000  or  more  should  at  any  time  be  required  fiom 
this  department  for  the  defense  of  Wilmington  they  cannot  be  placed 
in  position  in  less  than  five  days  unless  changes  are  made  in  the  regu- 
lations of  railroad  transportation.  Such  delays  of  course  would  result 
if  re-enforcements  were  required  for  this  city  also. 

The  commanding  general  might  well  hesitate  to  send  away  the  whole 
or  any  portion  of  his  movable  force  when  the  delays  consequent  upon 
insufficient  transportation  make  it  uncertain  when  these  troops  could 
be  returned  to  him.  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  the  matter  be 
examined  into  and  that  the  evils  be  remedied  as  far  as  may  be  possible; 


742 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

certainly  the  want  of  proper  wood  and  water  stations,  so  manifest  upon 
the  Wilmington  and  Manchester  Railroad,  can  be  remedied. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  GIST, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

[Inoloeare.] 


Hour  of  leaving  Charleston. 

Hour  of  arrival  in  Wilmington. 

Forty-sixth  Georgia  left  at  10  p.  m.  December  14  .... 

Arrived  at  8 a.  m.  December  16. 
Arrived  at  9 a.  m.  December  16. 
Arrived  at  1 p.  m.  December  16. 
Arrived  at  JO  a.  m.  December  16. 
Arrived  at  2p.  m.  December  16. 
Arrived  at  3 a.  m.  December  17. 
Arrived  at  12  m.  December  17. 

Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  left  at  2 a.  m.  December  15 

Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  left  on  morning  of  the  15th. . 
Preston’s  light  battery  left  at  2 a.  m.  of  the  15th 

Watiee’  light  battery  left  at  2 a.  m.  of  the  15th 

Culpeper’s  light  battery  left  on  the  15th  

Sixteenth  South  Carolina  and  Nelson’s  battalion  on  the  15th  .. 

Harrison’s  and  Wilson’s  brigades  left  Savannah  on  the  evening  of 
the  14th $ arrived  in  Charleston  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  ; left  for 
Wilmington  on  the  morning  of  the  16th.  Harrison’s  brigade  reached 
Wilmington  at  8 p.  m.  on  the  18th  and  Wilson’s  brigade  arrived  on  the 
morning  of  the  19th. 

Respectfully, 

MALLORY  P.  KING, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


_ Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  4, 1863. 

W.  H.  0.  Whiting,  ’ ’ * ’ 

Brigadier- General,  Wilmington,  N.  C. : 

Do  you  want  Gist  alone  from  here?  Railroad  too  slow  to  send  so  far 
the  few  troops  left  here  before  knowing  positively  where  enemy  will 
strike. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


_ Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  4, 1863. 

W.  H.  0.  Whiting,  ’ y ’ 

Brigadier -General,  Wilmington , A.  C.: 

Gist  leaves  this  evening.  Troops  sent  to  you  average  about  ninety 
hours  per  thousand  men  to  go  and  return.  We  are  too  weak  to  run 
such  risks,  when  enemy  might  be  only  making  a feint  at  Wilmington 
to  attack  here,  as  has  often  been  long  meditated  by  him. 

When  necessary  use  my  cipher  with  Smith  and  myself. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

4.  j Charleston,  January  4,  1863. 

I.  Brigadier-General  Gist  will  repair  to  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  for  tem- 
porary service  with  Brigadier-General  Whiting.  He  will  take  with  him 
such  of  his  staff  as  he  may  need. 

* * * * * * # 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 


JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Chap.  XXVI.}  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


743 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  6,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga.  : 

Send  back  troops  here  recently  at  Wilmington  properly  provided  for 
the  field  except  means  of  transportation — four  days’  rations  (two  days’ 
cooked) ; also  camp  equipage.  Answer. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  January  7,  1863. 

M.  L.  Bonham, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , S.  C. : 

Dear  Sir  : I deem  it  my  duty  to  acquaint  you  that  the  enemy  is  re- 
ported to  be  assembling  in  heavy  force  at  New  Berne,  N C.,  as  is  sup- 
posed, with  a view  to  move  on  both  Wilmington  and  Weldon  at  the 
same  time.  These  operations,  if  successful,  will  cut  off  our  communi- 
cation with  Virginia  and  the  seat  of  Government.  Charleston  and 
Savannah  may,  however,  be  the  real  point  of  attack';  or  if  not,  after  the 
accomplishment  of  the  enemy’s  purposes  with  respect  to  Wilmington 
and  Weldon,  would  assuredly  become  the  objects  of  a most  formidable 
expedition.  Timely  preparations,  therefore,  should  be  made  for  such 
a contingency,  and  all  the  available  defensive  resources  of  your  State 
should  be  held  in  readiness.  Every  fighting  man  in  South  Carolina  and 
Georgia  should  be  ready  to  spring  to  arms  to  encounter  the  invader, 
and  these  Abolition  mercenaries  should  meet  with  such  a reception  as 
should  make  them  rue  forever  the  day  the  attempt  was  made.  From 
the  seaboard  to  the  mountains  the  alarm  should  be  sounded  to  call  all 
men  within  our  borders  to  be  ready  to  march  at  the  first  signal  to  defend 
their  country  and  the  homes  of  the  dauntless  patriots  now  absent  in 
arms  in  Virginia  and  Tennessee.  On  that  day  it  is  hoped,  under  the 
inspiration  of  the  occasion,  there  will  be  found  neither  laggards  nor 
cowards.  I shall  be  pleased  to  be  informed  as  soon  as  convenient  to 
what  extent  I may  be  able  to  rely  on  assistance  in  such  an  emergency 
as  I have  indicated. 

Respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Forces  on  Sullivan’s  Island, 

January  9,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District : 

General  : In  obedience  to  your  orders  I started  on  Monday,  5th  in- 
stant, to  examine  the  country  and  inspect  the  troops  and  their  positions 
between  Mount  Pleasant  and  South  Santee  River. 

I do  not  think  that, any  demonstrations  against  Charleston  by  troops 
moving  through  Saint  James  Santee  and  Christ  Church  Parishes  are 
to  be  apprehended.  The  facilities  for  defense  against  such  a movement 
are  too  numerous  and  conclusive.  There  are,  however,  great  facilities 
for  plundering  expeditions  from  the  enemy’s  fleet  off  the  bar  or  from 
forces  on  Bull  Island,  and  also  for  the  escape  of  negroes  from  both 
Christ  Church  and  Saint  James  Parishes.  I think  that  these  are  to  be 
mainly  guarded  against  in  the  disposition  of  the  troops.  The  whole  ex- 


744  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

terior  of  the  country  is  either  penetrated  or  touched  at  short  distances 
by  large  creeks  running  in  from  the  deep  water  of  some  one  of  the 
various  bays  which  stretch  from  Charleston  to  the  (Santee  River.  All 
of  these  creeks  must  be  guarded  or  barges  and  small  boats  can  easily 
approach  the  land  or  go  from  the  land  to  the  adjacent  islands  (Bull, 
Dewees’,  &c.)  or  to  the  enemy’s  fleet.  A number  of  negroes  intimately 
acquainted  with  the  net-work  of  bays,  inlets,  creeks,  and  narrows  along 
the  coast  have  deserted  to  the  enemy,  and  are  known  to  have  passed 
and  repassed  frequently  between  the  fleet  or  the  islands  and  the  par- 
ishes of  Christ  Church  and  Saint  James  Santee.  The  defense  of  the 
coast  against  small  incursions  or  the  escape  of  negroes  is  made  still 
more  efficient  by  the  fact  that  for  long  distances  a barge  or  small  boat 
can  land  anywhere  at  high  tide. 

To  patrol  and  guard  the  coast  there  are  three  cavalry  companies  (viz, 
Captains  Aken’s,  Whilden’s,  and  Pinckney’s),  and  twoinfan try  companies 
from  the  Twenty-sixth  Regiment.  The  third  company  is  stationed  at 
Fort  Warren,  high  up  on  the  Santee  River.  There  is  at  McClellanville 
an  artillery  company  in  addition.  This  force  is  greatly  inadequate  to 
patrol  the  coast,  but  as  it  is  all  that  probably  can  be  furnished  Hooked 
only  to  its  judicious  distribution.  Pickets  are  stationed  at  Porcher’s, 
Toomer’s,  Whiteside’s,  at  Palmetto  Point,  Andersonville,  The  Grove, 
Graham’s  Creek,  at  Buck  Hall,  Doc.  Hall,  Colburn’s,  Dupre’s,  Blake’s,  I 
and  McClellanville.  I would  suggest  that  a picket  be  placed  at  Ra- 
bern’s  place,  if  it  be  practicable.  Captain  Alien  discontinued  that 
picket  on  account  of  lack  of  men.  The  duty  is  already  very  severe ; the  ; 
privates  are  on  duty  every  alternate  night.  There  should  be  a day 
picket  at  Buck  Hall,  as  well  as  a night  picket.  There  is  a section  of 
artillery  at  Graham’s  Creek.  I advise  its  removal  to  Andersonville,  as 
the  latter  place  is  much  more  exposed  and  is  also  more  central.  Gra-  ] 
ham’s  Creek  can  be  covered  by  a few  riflemen,  and  needs  only  a few  rifle 
pits.  I would  recommend  the  construction  of  a fixed  battery  on  Blake’s 
place,  South  Santee  River.  Two  or  three  24-pounder  guns  would  cover  • 
the  river  and  close  it  against  all  but  iron-clad  boats.  The  planters  there 
will  gladly  furnish  the  labor,  I am  well  informed.  If  this  were  done, 
.and  a supporting  company  sent  up,  two  out  of  the  four  pieces  of  artil- 
lery now  at  McClellanville  could  easily  be  spared  from  that  place.  A 
pidket  should  be  stationed  at  Benning’s  place,  a few  miles  from  Mount 
Pleasant.  I recommend  that  a company  from  Colonel  Wilson’s  regi- 
ment of  reserves  be  sent  there. 

I would  also  suggest  the  removal  of  all  the  small  boats  from  the 
Wando  River.  They  can  easily  be  carried  from  the  Wando  to  the  beach 
and  made  available  for  the  escape  of  negroes.  The  width  of  land  is 
about  3 miles,  and  on  most  of  the  plantations  there  is  no  white  person. 
Wagons  and  teams  may  readily  be  used  by  the  negroes  to  transport 
boats.  I believe  that  there  are  continual  inducements  to  the  negroes  to 
desert  to  the  enemy,  and  the  promptest  and  most  effectual  precautions  j 
in  my  judgment  should  be  adopted. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding , Sullivan’s  Island. 

[Indorsement  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston , January  12,  18G3. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  department  headquarters.  The  remarks 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


745 


of  Colonel  Keitt  respecting  the  dangers  to  be  apprehended  I consider 
just,  and  think  that  if  possible  the  force  of  cavalry  should  be  increased. 
With  regard  to  the  battery  at  Santee,  1 respectfully  suggest  that  it 
would  be  well  to  have  it  constructed,  putting  one  gun  in  position  and 
having  the  battery  available  for  the  service  of  light  pieces.  It  would 
probably  be  well  to  have  the  work  inclosed,  so  as  to  prevent  the  guns 

from  being  captured  by  a surprise  party.  _ 

It.  S.  RlF-LEx, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 

[Indorsement  No.  2.] 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c. 
Ho  cavalry  force  can  be  disposed  of  at  present  for  the  object  stated. 
A small  work  where  indicated,  not  adequately  supported,  would  only 
invite  attack  on  the  part  of  the  enemy. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  10,  1883. 
Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  Adams  Bun , 8.  C.  : 

Your  troops  recently  returned  from  Wilmington  must  proceed  there 
again  with  all  possible  celerity.  Answer. 

6 THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance, 

Charleston , January  10,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose,  at  the  request  of  the  general 
commanding,  copy  of  a letter  recently  addressed  by  me  to  Colonel  Gor- 
gas  and  his  answer  thereto. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  J.  GONZALES, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance. 

[Inclosures.] 


Hdqrs.  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance, 

Charleston , December  29,  1862. 

Col.  J.  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance , Richmond , Va. : 

Colonel:  I beg  leave  to  inclose  a requisition  for  ordnance  stores 
very  much  needed  in  this  department.  They  can  be  furnished,  I am 
informed  by  my  agent  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  upon  the  inclosed  being  ap- 
proved by  you.  W ill  you  have  the  kindness  to  telegraph  Major  Wright 
to  that  effect.  I avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  lay  before  you  the 
| unsatisfactory  condition  of  the  supply  of  ordnance  stores  for  this  de- 
partment. Enfield  cartridges  I have  none ; my  only  immediate  prospect 
is  in  the  requisition  I inclose.  Colonel  Rains  has  no  lead  at  present  to 
manufacture  more  than  are  wanted,  and  I have  even  calls  from  Florida 
which  I cannot  meet.  For  projectiles  for  large  and  small  rifle  guns  we 


746  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA..  [Chap  XXVX 

are  still  worse  off.  All  the  works  in  this  city  can  turn  out,  as  reported 
to  me,  but  thirty-eight  per  day.  In  Augusta  they  cannot  make  them 
for  the  want  of  flasks  and  of  material ; in  Macon,  Ga.,  they  cannot  make 
them  for  heavy  guns  for  the  want  of  drawings;  thus  I am  with  an  aver- 
age of  less  than  50  rounds  per  rifle  gun  in  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie 
(which  may  be  isolated  and  cut  off  at  any  day  and  obliged  to  stand  a 
siege),  with  12-pounder  rifle  guns  in  position  on  the  water,  liable  to  be 
used  at  any  moment  without  a single  round  for  them,  with  a battery  of 
12-pounder  bronze  rifled  guns,  belonging  to  the  siege  train,  in  the  same 
condition,  and  with  another  battery  of  three  heavy  iron  guns  (caliber 
3.67 ) without  a single  round ; while  for  the  supply  of  all  the  above  wants 
and  those  arising  from  contingent  engagements  on  the  coast  I have 
but  the  prospect  of  thirty-eight  projectiles  per  day,  and  those  only  for 
32  and  42  pounders.  The  number  of  our  heavy  rifled  guns  is  being  in- 
creased as  fast  as  we  can,  and  that  reduces  necessarily  our  average  of 
rounds  per  gun.  I sent  you  a telegram  more  than  a week  ago  asking 
for  some  ordnance  stores  very  much  needed  here.  I beg  to  request 
your  favorable  attention  to  the  same.  I desire  to  request  of  you  so  to  in- 
struct Maj.  F.  L.  Childs  as  regards  the  business  of  this  department  that 
the  least  possible  delay  and  inconvenience  may  be  had  in  supplying  it 
from  the  Charleston  Arsenal.  This  State  particularly  is  dependent 
upon  the  hearty  co-operation  of  this  arsenal ; without  the  power  to  con- 
tract, disburse,  or  manufacture,  and  capable  only  of  issuing  to  troops 
stores  turned  over  by  the  arsenal,  you  will  readily  perceive  that  this 
ordnance  department  is  but  the  reflector  of  the-  actions  of  the  arsenal. 
All  requisitions  on  the  Charleston  Arsenal  now  pass  through  my  office, 
where  they  are  recorded,  and  all  invoices  and  receipts  to  the  officers 
making  them  also  pass  through  my  office,  where  they  are  noted.  This 
saves  much  trouble  to  the  arsenal,  and,  although  it  increases  vastly  my 
labors,  insures  my  perfect  cognizance  of  every  step  in  ordnance.  These 
requisitions  to  me  state  what  stores  are  on  hand  and  what  to  be  supplied, 
but  when  I make  myself  a requisition  on  the  Charleston  Arsenal  for 
my  own  depot  of  ordnance,  to  be  distributed  as  emergencies  may  re- 
quire, I cannot  make  the  same  statement,  but  merely  state  the  fact  that 
they  are  wanted  for  said  depot.  Will  you  be  kind  enough  to  instruct 
the  arsenals  therefore  that  requisitions  from  myself  for  my  depot  require 
but  the  expression  of  the  fact  stated.  They  are  all  signed  by  “com- 
mand of  General  Beauregard,”  as  per  order  December  20,  1862. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  J.  GONZALES, 

Colonel , and  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance. 

Ordnance  Bureau, 
Richmond , January  6,  1863. 

Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales, 

Chf  Arty,  and  Ord .,  Dept.  8.  <7.,  Ga.,  and  Fla.,  Charleston , 8.  C.  : 

Colonel  : Your  letter  of  December  29  is  received.  The  arsenal  at 
Atlanta  is  so  fully  occupied  in  supplying  the  army  in  Tennessee  that 
I cannot  call  upon  it  to  serve  your  department,  but  have  directed  Macon 
and  Columbus,  Ga.,  to  send  each  50,000  cartridges  (caliber  .58)  to  you 
as  soon  as  possible. 

It  would  be  well  to  consider  the  question  of  a supply  of  rifle  project- 
iles before  going  too  far  with  the  rifling  and  banding  of  32-pounders. 
The  want  of  proper  iron  for  casting  these  shells  is  very  serious. 

Send  me  a full  statement  of  all  you  want  and  cannot  get  at  Charles- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


747 


ton,  limiting  your  requisition  to,  say,  150  rounds  per  gun.  I will  do 
all  in  my  power  to  supply  you. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  GORGAS, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Ordnance. 


Battery  Marshall,  January  12,  1863. 
Oapt.  W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I left  Sullivan’s  Island  on  the 
morning  of  the  6th  instant,  in  obedience  to  orders  issued  to  me  to 
proceed  to  Bull  and  the  intermediate  islands  for  specified  purposes. 
Wheu  I reached  Dewees’  Island  I found  two  gunboats  watching  the 
entrance  at  Dewees’  Inlet,  and  two  more  at  Capers’  Inlet.  This,  coupled 
with  reports  that  reached  me  of  the  landing  of  a large  number  of  the 
enemy  on  Capers’  Island,  caused  me  to  proceed  with  caution.  I left  my 
command  to  collect  what  cattle  they  could  on  Dewees’  and  went  on  with 
a few  men  to  Capers’  Island.  There  were  2 men,  probably  negroes, 
seen  there.  The  gunboats  moving  off  on  the  8th,  I crossed  my  command 
over  to  Capers’  Landing,  on  the  back  part  of  the  island,  and,  although 
it  was  utterly  impossible  for  the  movement  to  be  seen  from  out  at  sea, 
I had  not  landed  over  an  hour  before  a gunboat  at  Bull  Inlet  com- 
menced shelling.  I went  out  to  the  front  of  the  island  to  reconnoiter, 
and  on  my  way  shot  a hog,  which  I left  on  the  ground,  and  on  return- 
ing, in  about  twenty  minutes,  I found  the  hog  gone  and  tracks  leading 
away  from  the  spot.  Both  of  these  circumstances  showed  that  I was 
closely  watched  (by  negroes  probably).  Being  anxious  to  take  them 
by  surprise  in  some  way,  I left  Capers’  Island  at  midnight  on  the  9th, 
leaving  fires  burning,  and  going  off  as  quietly  as  possible  to  Bull 
Island.  Landing  before  daylight,  I marched  rapidly  to  most  of  the 
houses  on  the  island,  and  although  I found  fresh  tracks,  which  I could 
see  by  the  moonlight,  and  traces  of  recent  fires,  there  was  no  one  to  be 
found.  Before  day  I posted  a line  of  sentinels  entirely  across  the  island 
and  concealed  the  rest  of  my  command.  Soon  after  daylight  two  m6n 
were  seen  apparently  following  up  the  tracks  of  my  party.  These  men, 
however,  unfortunately  made  their  escape.  A gunboat  lay  in  the  bay 
back  of  the  island ; a schooner  lay  off  the  east  end,  and  a bark  off'  the 
bar.  On  this  and  on  both  my  previous  visits  to  this  island  I had 
abundant  evidence  of  men  having  very  recently  been  on  shore,  but  I 
am  perfectly  convinced  that  while  they  have  such  watchful  sentinels  as 
the  runaway  negroes  no  surprise  can  be  effected.  These  negroes  can 
be,  I suppose,  removed  by  allowing  a force  to  remain  for  some  time  on 
the  island,  until  they  can  either  hunt  them  out  of  their  hiding  places  or 
by  cutting  off*  their  communication  with  their  friends  force  them  after 
a time  to  give  themselves  up  to  avoid  starvation.  The  island  offers 
great  facilities  for  the  maintenance  of  a small  force  for  a long  time 
against  any  number  of  men  that  they  can  probably  spare  from  their 
vessels,  and  such  a force  could  feed  it  self  from  the  hogs,  goats,  &c.,  now 
running  wild  on  the  island  in  case  of  their  being  temporarily  cut  off. 
With  regard  to  the  cattle  and  horses  on  the  different  islands,  I am  sorry 
to  say  that  I have  been  able  to  do  but  little.  I found  it  impossible  to 
take  the  cattle  alive,  and  therefore  shot  what  I could  and  sent  them  in 
to  the  commissary.  There  are  difficulties  attendant  on  this  that  I did 
not  foresee  before  trial ; for  instance,  the  fact  that  the  cattle  being  very 
wild  are  frequently  shot  at  long  ranges,  and  running  off  some  distance 


748 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


after  being  shot  are  not  found  until  unfit  for  use  ; also  ttie  difficulty  of 
getting  a sufficient  quantity  killed  at  once  to  make  it  worth  while  send- 
ing home  a barge  with  the  beef.  The  horses  and  mules  I found  on  in- 
vestigation to  be  generally  of  an  inferior  quality.  The  majority  of 
them,  eight  or  nine,  are  on  Dewees’  Island,  and  can  be  easily  taken  at 
any  time  if  it  is  desired,  but  I do  not  think  that  they  could  be  made  of 
use  in  the  quartermaster’s  department,  although  their  salable  value 
may  be  something.  Finding  that  a longer  stay  on  these  islands  unless 
for  a considerable  time  would  not  be  profitable,  I left  Bull  Island  on 
the  night  of  the  10th,  but  the  night  proving  stormy  and  dark,  I did  not 
get  all  my  boats  and  men  home  until  late  on  the  night  of  the  11th.  I 
regret  that  I have  not  been  able  to  do  more  than  I have,  but  hope  that 
the  thorough  knowledge  that  I have  acquired  of  all  the  above-named 
islands  may  be  of  some  use  hereafter;  and  respectfully  requesting  that 
if  it  is  thought  proper  to  send  any  further  expedition  I may  be  sent 
with  it,  I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  T.  HASKELL,  Jr., 
Captain , C.  S.  Regiment , Infantry . 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  13.  J Charleston , January  12,  1863. 

I.  The  forces  in  Christ  Church,  Saint  Thomas,  and  Saint  James 
Santee,  together  with  those  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  will  constitute  one 
command,  under  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, who  will  make  his  headquarters  on  Sullivan’s  Island  or  at  Mount 
Pleasant. 

II.  Colonel  Keitt  will  give  particular  attention  to  the  disposition  of 
the  troops  of  his  command  on  the  main  for  the  protection  of  the  ex- 
tended coast  from  Mount  Pleasant  to  the  Santee,  and  also  for  the  sup- 
port of  Sullivan’s  Island. 

III.  Theforces  on  Sullivan’s  Island  will  constitute  one  command,  under 
Col.  William  Butler,  who  will  report  to  and  through  Colonel  Keitt, 
but  who  may  be  authorized  by  Colouel  Keitt  to  report  and  communi- 
cate on  all  matters  relating  to  artillery  and  ordnance  directly  to  these 
headquarters. 

By  ordey  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley : 

B.  H.  READ, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  13, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Authentic  from  New  York  says  Naglee’s  expedition  consists  of  12,000 
men,  well  fitted  out,  intended  probably  for  North  Carolina.  Six  iron- 
clads are  being  got  ready  for  meditated  attack  on  Charleston.  Hope 
Neptune  will  take  good  care  of  them. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington , January  13,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C.  : 

General  Gist  has  asked  for  six  wagons  to  a regiment;  can  they  not 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


749 


be  sent  on  at  once?  Five  of  the  enemy’s  steamers  are  engaging  Fort 
Caswell.  Fort  replying  slowly.  No  other  fleetoff^  ^ WHITING. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  13, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  C. : 

Do  not  think  Abolitionists  will  make  much,  if  any,  attack  without 
iron-clads.  Latter  are  not  much  to  be  feared  at  present  on  account  ot 

condition.  I send  maps  to-day.  G T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington , January  13,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston  : 

Firing  lias  just  ceased.  H & WHITING. 


General  Orders, 
No.  7. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 
Charlotte , 8.  G\,  January  14,  1863. 

I.  Pursuant  to  orders  from  the  War  Department,  hereafter  persons 
liable  to  conscription  will  be  allowed  to  join  any  particular  company 
and  regiment  requiring  recruits  in  this  command. 

All  persons  within  the  conscript  ages  who  offer  themselves  for  serv- 
ice will  be  allowed  to  volunteer  and  will  receive  all  the  benefits  secured 
by  law  to  volunteers  ; they  must,  however,  in  all  cases  enter  organiza- 
tions already  in  existence,  as  no  authority  can  be  granted  to  form  new 
companies  or  regiments.  Persons  volunteering  in  this  way  will  not  be 
sent  to  camps  of  instruction,  but  will  at  once  join  the  corps  to  which 
thev  may  attach  themselves. 

IX.  The  commanding  general  can  but  hope  that  under  the  circum- 
stances there  will  be  no  laggards;  that  all  able-bodied  denizens  as  well 
as  citizens  will  come  forward  to  join  and  swell  the  ranks  of  the  brave 
and  patriotic  army  of  the  country  already  in  the  field.  The  sooner  this 
is  done  by  all  classes  having  the  least  interest  at  stake  the  sooner  the 
blessings  and  the  occupations  of  peace  will  come  again  to  our  homes; 
the  sooner  our  wanton  enemy  will  be  baffled  in  his  avowed  purposes  ot 
subjugation  and  spoliation  and  forced  to  make  peace. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard: 

J THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  January  15,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District , Charleston : 

General:  The  commanding  general  wishes  you  to  organize  and 
train  at  least  six  boarding  boat  parties,  with  a view  to  attacking  at 
night  any  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  that  may  succeed  in  penetrating  the 
harbor.  The  men  should  be  armed  with  revolvers  if  practicable,  and 
provided  with  blankets  with  which  to  close  all  apertures;  also  with  iron 
wedges  and  sledges  to  stop  the  tower  from  revolving,  with  bottles  of 


750  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

burning  fluid  to  throw  into  the  tower,  with  leather  bags  of  powder  to 
throw  into  the  smoke-stack,  and  with  ladders  of  about  12  feet  in  length 
to  storm  the  tower  in  case  of  need.  The  boats  should  he  provided  with 
muffled  oars,  with  water-tight  casks  secured  under  the  seats  to  give 
buoyancy  in  case  of  injury  to  the  boats  from  any  cause.  The  men 
should  each  likewise  be  furnished  with  a life  preserver. 

For  such  a service  it  were  best  to  call  for  volunteers. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  State  of  South  Carolina, 
Columbia , January  15,  1803. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Commanding , &c.: 

General  : On  my  return  yesterday  I found  your  lerter  of  the  7th  in 
reference  to  the  movements  of  the  enemy  and  their  probable  attack 
upon  our  coast.  You  say:  “I  shall  be  pleased  to  be  informed  as  soon 
as  convenient  to  what  extent  I may  be  able  to  rely  on  assistance  in  such 
an  emergency  as  I have  indicated. ??  You  have  eight  regiments  of  Re- 
serves in  service,  and  I find  that  the  forces  at  the  disposal  of  the  State 
consist  of  the  First  or  Charleston  Regiment  of  Reserves  and  the  Fourth 
and  Tenth  Regiments  of  Reserves,  embracing  those  from  sixteen  to 
eighteen  and  from  fifty  to  sixty-five,  under  resolutions  of  the  Council. 
This  force  cannot  be  a strong  one,  and  in  my  judgment,  except  those 
from  sixteen  to  eighteen,  cannot  afford  a great  many  active  and  efficient 
soldiers. 

You  see  the  strength  of  the  regiments  of  Reserves  already  in  service* 
the  others,  I suppose,  may  be  somewhat  larger.  I shall  take  pleasure 
in  sending  to  your  aid  all  the  troops  that  can  be  furnished,  but  my  im- 
pression is  that  it  will  be  difficult  to  get  over  10,000  men  out  of 'both 
corps. 

I am  unable  to  give  you  any  information,  I regret  to  say,  as  to  the 
ability  of  the  State  to  arm  this  Second  Corps  of  Reserves  if  called  out 
this  information  not  being  left  accessible  to  me  by  the  Chief  of  the  Mili- 
t?r,Ti^^Partment'  * procure  it  as  soon  as  practicable,  however,  and 
shall  afford  you  every  aid  in  my  power  in  defending  the  State. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  BONHAM. 

I can  hear  of  no  arms  for  the  Second  Corps  of  Reserves. 


Richmond,  January  16,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding , Savannah , Ga. : 

General:  In  reply  to  your  communication  of  3d  ultimo,  with  the 
indorsement  of  General  Beauregard  thereupon,  I am  directed  by  the 
Secretary  of  War  to  say  it  was  referred  to  the  Chief  of  Ordnance,  who 
reports  as  follows : 

The  within  statement  exhibits  all  the  artillery  sent  to  the  department  of  General 
.Beauregard  lately;  more  will  be  sent  as  it  can  be  spared.  General  Beauregard  must 
make  such  disposition  of  it  as  he  deems  best. 

I he  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  has  received  full  three-fourths  of 
the  heavy  armament  prepared  within  the  last  three  months:  Fifteen  10- inch  colum- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  751 

biads,  two  42-pounder  rifled  and  barbette,  two  Napoleons,  two  Ellsworth  rifles  (cap- 
tured), one  3.67-inch  rifled  and  barbette,  six  10-inch  mortars.  r 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

C.  H.  LEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  State  of  South  Carolina, 

* Columbia , January  17,  18G3. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Commanding , &c. : 

General  : Since  writing  you  I have  had  an  interview  with  Colonel 
Hayne,  late  of  the  Council.  He  tells  me  that  there  are  few  arms  be- 
longing to  the  State  not  in  the  hands  of  the  Reserves ; indeed  they  have 
taken  all  except  those  deposited  at  each  Court-House,  enough  to  arm 
only  a single  company  for  the  protection  of  the  district.  I stated  in 
my  last  that  the  Fourth  and  Tenth  Regiments  of  the  First  Corps  of 
Reserves  were  perhaps  larger  than  those  you  have  in  service.  He  calls 
to  my  mind  that  the  conscripts  up  to  forty  have  been  taken  out  of  them 
which  will  make  them  much  smaller. 

Your  letter  of  the  7th  instant  makes  me  anxious.  I trust  that  the 
Confederate  Government  will  not  lose  sight  of  the  necessity  of  re-en- 
forcing you,  as  they  have,  I suppose,  a larger  proportion  of  the  voting 
population  of  South  Carolina  in  the  Army  than  of  any  State  in  the 
Confederacy,  having  her  organized  troops  from  thirty-five  to  fifty.  I 
shall  be  gratified  to  hear  from  you  as  early  as  practicable  anything 
affecting  the  interests  of  the  State,  as  also  the  earliest  news  of  the 
approach  of  the  enemy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  BORHAM. 


Headquarters  District 
[General  Jordan:] 


of  Middle  Florida, 
January  17,  1863. 


General:  Under  my  directions  Captain  Williams,  one  of  my  volun- 
teer aides,  has  made  a thorough  examination  of  the  country  between 
the  Saint  Mark’s  and  Suwannee  Rivers.  I inclose  a copy  of  his  report 
as  it  contains  facts  in  connection  with  the  salt-works  and  the  men  en- 
gaged in  them  which  should  be  known  to  the  commanding  general. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

HOWELL  COBB, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Division. 


[Incloeure.] 


Tallahassee,  January  11, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  Cobb, 

Commanding  Middle  District  of  Florida : 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  your  order  of  the  22d  ultimo  I proceeded  to 
make  an  examination  of  the  country  lying  between  the  Saint  Mark’s 
and  the  Suwannee  Rivers,  and  report  the  following  as  the  result  of  mv 
observation : J 

First,  in  regard  to  ^the  points,  if  any,  at  which  the  enemy  could  land 
lorces  with  a view  to  a raid  or  invasions  into  the  interior,”  I would 
state  that  from  an  examination  of  the  coast  I am  satisfied  that  the  fol- 
lowing points  are  the  only  ones  at  which  the  enemy  could  make  a 


752  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

practical  landing  for  purposes  of  invasion,  to  wit : Old  Port  Leon,  on 
the  Saint  Mark’s  Eiver,  the  Saint  Mark’s  Light-House,  Deadman’s  Bay, 
and  the  mouth  or  landings  on  the  Suwannee  Eiver.  These  are  the  only 
points  from  which,  in  my  opinion,  the  enemy  could  make  an  advance 
into  the  country.  In  regard  to  the  communication  or  route  into  the 
interior  from  these  places,  I would  state  that  from  Old  Port  Leon,  on 
the  Saint  Mark’s  Eiver,  there  is  a fine  road  to  Newport,  in  Wakulla 
County,  which,  although  somewhat  out  of  repair,  could  nevertheless 
be  easily  re-established  so  as  to  afford  an  excellent  way  for  an  army. 
The  obstructions  in  the  Saint  Mark’s  Eiver  below  Old  Port  Leon  are 
not  formidable'  and  could  be  easily  removed  by  the  enemy.  That  point 
is  accessible  to  gunboats  or  transports  carrying  from  8 to  10  feet  water. 
From  the  Saint  Mark’s  Light-House  there  are  two  roads  or  routes  to 
Newport,  one  which  passes  over  the  East  Eiver  and  the  other  which 
passes  round  the  head  of  the  river.  The  first  is  impracticable  at  pres- 
ent, owing  to  the  fact  that  the  bridge  over  the  river  has  been  destroyed 
or  has  fallen  to  decay,  though  it  could  be  very  easily  restored,  as  the 
stream  is  quite  narrow.  The  route  around  the  head  of  the  river  is  only 
practicable  in  dry  weather,  if  indeed  at  any  time,  to  a force  of  any  con- 
sequence or  magnitude,  then  only  with  guides  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  country.  Although  an  invasion  from  this  point  is  possible,  it  is 
hardly  probable  that  an  enemy  would  select  a place  of  this  character 
if  at  all  informed  of  the  nature  of  the  country.  At  Deadman’s  Bay, 
in  the  county  of  Taylor,  there  is  a fine  landing,  at  which  gunboats  and 
transports  could  easily  approach,  and  from  Deadman’s  Bay  there  is  a 
good  road  to  Madison,  in  the  interior,  about  65  or  70  miles  from  the 
coast.  There  are  no  natural  obstructions  on  this  route  or  points  that 
could  be  made  very  available  in  defense,  the  country  being  level  and 
the  soil  firm.  At  the  mouth  of  the  Suwannee  Eiver  and  at  the  various 
landings  on  said  river  an  enemy  could  effect  a landing,  and  from  that  i 
point  penetrate  the  country  into  the  interior.  The  river  itself  is  navi- 
gable to  within  a few  miles  of  the  railroad  bridge  of  the  Tennessee  and  j 
Georgia  Eailroad  and  even  up  to  the  bridge;  with  light-draught  gun- 
boats, to  within  a short  distance  of  the  bridge.  Vessels  drawing  from  5J 
to  7J  feet  of  water  could  penetrate  the  country,  and  there  are  numerous 
landings  along  the  banks  where  a debarkation  could  be  effect  ed.  With 
the  exception  of  these  points  mentioned  there  are  no  other  places  from 
which  an  intelligent  enemy  would  attempt  an  invasion  of  the  country 
into  the  interior.  The  general  topographical  appearance  of  the  coast 
presents  a low  marshy  country,  subject  to  overflow,  and  covered  with 
impenetrable  swamps  and  marshes,  extending  from  to  4 miles  from 
the  coast.  There  is  no  convenient  or  accessible  point  at  which  the 
enemy  could  land,  the  shoals  stretching  out  to  a great  distance ; and 
even  if  a landing  were  made,  the  country  could  not  be  penetrated  from 
these  portions  of  the  coast  for  the  reasons  above  given.  I would  sug- : 
gest  as  an  additional  precaution  that  vedettes  be  stationed  at  Dead- 
man’s Bay,  which,  as  I have  stated,  is  a convenient  point  at  which  the 
enemy  could  land  and  make  a raid  or  incursion  into  the  country.  The 
other  points,  I believe,  are  sufficiently  observed.  It  is  suggested  that 
the  bridge  over  East  Eiver,  to  which  I have  referred,  on  the  most  prac- 
ticable road  to  the  light  house,  be  reconstructed  or  repaired,  thereby 
facilitating  communication  with  that  point.  This  bridge  could  easily 
be  destroyed  in  case  of  an  invasion  from  that  point. 

In  reference  to  the  extent  of  the  salt-makers’  operations,  “what  ar-j 
rangements  now  exist  for  their  defense,  and  what  additional  onesi 
should  be  made,”  I have  ascertained  that  the  principal  locations  of  salt* 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


753 


workers  are  on  East  River  and  the  Ocella  Slough,  from  1 to  4 miles 
from  the  coast;  a few  at  the  mouth  of  the  Finholloway  River,  and  a 
large  number  at  Dog  Island  and  the  coast  adjacent,  and  also  at  Horse- 
shoe Bay.  in  the  county  of  Taylor.  The  aggregate  amount  of  persons 
engaged  In  the  salt-making  business  on  our  coast  is  about  500,  and  a 
large  number  of  purchasers  from  neighboring  States  are  constantly 
visiting  and  returning  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  salt.  The  arrange- 
ments that  now  exist  for  the  protection  of  these  works  are  such  as  are 
merely  incidental  to  the  general  protection  and  observation  of  the 
coast.  Cavalry  companies  are  stationed  at  Newport  and  Blue  Creek, 
in  Taylor  County,  within  2 or  3 miles  of  the  salt-works,  and  I would 
suggest  the  stationing  of  a company  at  or  near  Horseshoe  Bay.  These 
are  the  only  x>racticable  means  or  provisions  for  the  defense  of  these 
works  that  can  be  made  at  present.  The  salt- workers  cannot,  I think, 
be  concentrated  or  brought  into  narrow  territorial  limits  without  dam- 
age to  their  business.  The  coast  and  its  approaches  are  of  such  a 
character  that  but  a limited  amount  of  this  business  can  be  carried  on 
successfully  at  any  given  point,  and  this  difficulty  is  increased  by  the 
difficulty  of  obtaining  wood,  &c.  Besides  this,  much  of  the  land  on 
the  coast  is  held  by  private  individuals,  who  will  of  course  consult 
their  own  interest  in  the  disposal  and  use  of  salt-making  locations 
which  they  own.  I have  consulted  with  Lieut.  William  Fisher,  the 
officer  appointed  by  the  Governor  to  organize  the  salt  workers  for  their 
own  defense,  and  refer  you  to  his  report  to  the  Governor  (a  copy  of 
which  I herewith  inclose,  also  a communication  addressed  to  myself) 
for  information  relative  to  the  arrangements  proposed  to  be  made  for 
the  co-operation  with  the  regular  forces  in  their  own  defense  and  that 
of  the  country.  I presume  his  recommendation  and  suggestions  will 
be  respected  and  followed  by  the  State  Government  as  the  most  avail- 
able and  practical  means  that  can  be  adopted  under  the  circumstances. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

JOS.  JOHN  WILLIAMS. 


[Sub-inclosures . ] 

Tallahassee,  January  9,  1863. 
His  Excellency  the  Governor  of  Florida  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  herewith  to  report  that  I have  enrolled  and 
organized  into  companies  all  the  salt  makers  on  the  coast  between  the 
Saint  Mark’s  and  the  Suwannee  Rivers.  I have  given  them  rules  of 
discipline  and  appointed  places  of  rendezvous  in  case  of  attack.  There 
are  498  men  able  for  duty,  and  among  the  whole  number  only  forty- 
three  guns  in  good  condition,  and  very  little  ammunition. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  FISHER, 

First  Lieutenant  of  Organized  Salt-makers. 

P.  S. — I suppose  there  are  300  of  these  men  under  forty  years,  and 
many  of  them  deserters  from  the  Army. 

Tallahassee,  Fla.,  January  10,  1863. 

Capt.  J.  J.  Williams: 

Sir  : The  salt-makers  between  the  Saint  Mark’s  and  Suwannee  Rivers 
are  almost  destitute  of  arms  or  ammunition,  consequently  their  means 
of  defense  is  very  limited.  They  have  been  formed  into  companies, 

48  R R — VOL  XIV 


754  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

and  ordered,  in  case  of  attack,  to  co-operate  with  the  military  stationed 
in  their  vicinity.  I think  their  numbers  are  sufficient  for  self-defense 
if  they  were  properly  supplied  with  means. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  FISHER, 

First  Lieutenant , Commanding  Salt-makers. 


Circular.]  Headquarters  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , S.  <7-,  January  18,  1863. 

As  a check  on  exaggerated  reports  concerning  the  enemy’s  forces 
which  may  soon  be  in  your  district,  and  to  guide  you  and  your  officers 
when  questioning  spies,  deserters,  and  others  touching  the  enemy,  a 
table  is  appended,  showing  the  organization  habitually  in  use  in  the 
Federal  Army.  Their  brigades  consist  of  four  regiments,  of  625  men, 
2,500 ; divisions  consist  of  three  brigades,  7,500 ; army  corps  or  wings 
not  to  exceed  four  divisions,  or  30,000 ; cavalry,  one  brigade  of  four  reg- 
iments, or  2,500 ; artillery  in  the  proportion  of  three  pieces  for  every 
1,000  infantry.  Under  this  system  in  each  corps  there  would  be  5 
major-generals  and  12  brigadiers,  or  17  general  officers ; but  brigadiers 
generally  command  divisions  and  colonels  brigades  in  their  service. 

Should  any  officer  of  your  command  improperly  or  unduly  exaggerate 
the  force  of  the  enemy  in  your  front  he  should  either  be  arrested  or 
made  to  verify  his  information  by  a close  personal  reconnaissance  of  the 
enemy.  Exaggerated  rumors  are  apt  to  demoralize  new  troops,  who 
incline  to  regard  numbers  as  an  indication  of  strength  and  of  ultimate 
success,  being  ignorant  of  the  decisive  weight  of  discipline,  mobility, 
and  celerity  of  movement  in  military  operations. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

THOMAS  JORDAN,  Chief  of  Staff . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  23, 1863. 

Approximate  statement  of  rifled  guns  in  South  Carolina. 


Number 
of  guns. 

Shot. 

Shell. 

Cartridges. 

Caliber. 

42-ponnder  rifled  handed  gun 

10 

494 

65 

267 

32-pounder  rifled  handed  gun 

11 

622 

258 

1, 050 

32-pounder  rifled  gun 

5 

24-pounder  rifled  gun 

g 

418 

133 

961 

12-pounder  rifled  gun 

4 

220 

246 

12-pounder  rifled  bronze  gun  

4 

None. . 

None. . 

Vnnft 

4.  62 

6-pounder  rifled  bronze  gun 

4 

* 

3.  58 

Wronght-iron  banded  gun 

1 

None 

None  i 

3 A 

20-pounder  Parrott  gun 

1 

. do  " 

do 

do 

3.  67 

20-pounder  Parrott  gun  (weaker  gun  than 

3 

...do  .. 

...do  .. 

— do 

3.  67 

the  above) . 

10-pounder  Parrott  gun 

2 

t 

t | 

t 

3. 

6-pounder  iron-banded  gun 

2 

None. . 

None. . 

3.  67 

"Whitworth  gun 

1 

100 

100* 

t\r% 

Not  ascertained. 

6-pounder  Blakely  gun  

1 

X 

t 

ADDENDUM. 

12-pounder  old  English  siege  (rifled),  on  the 

3 

None. . 

None. . 

Non© 

ooast. 

Total 

60 

1,854 

556  i 

2,524 

* In  all,  about  300. 

tin  all, 400. 

x 

Very  few. 

Remarks. — Besides  the  within  rifled  guns  there  are  in  Georgetown,  S.  C.,  two  12-ponnder  banded  rifled 
guns,  received  from  Richmond,  and  two  6-pounder  rifled  Blakely  guns. 

In  Georgia  there  are  one  32-pounder  rifled,  one  30-pounder  Parrott,  two  24-pounder  Blakely,  and  a 
few  field  G-pounders.  There  are  in  Florida,  as  far  as  is  known,  a few  3-incb  rifled  guns. 


Chap.  XXyi.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


755 


Colonel  Gorgas  is  most  earnestly  requested  to  provide  the  promised 
150  rounds  per  each  of  the  above  guns,  and  above  all  to  send  the  pro- 
jectiles for  the  12-pounder  and  6-pounder  bronze,  the  20-pounder  Par- 
rott, the  ammunition  for  which  was  not  sent  with  the  guns  from  Rich- 
mond, although  packed  and  addressed  in  the  presence  of  Major  Alston, 
and  the  3.67  caliber  guns. 

Respectfully, 

A.  J.  GONZALES, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  25,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Abolition  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  reported  four  frigates,  four  gunboats, 
and  forty  transports  ; latter  about  double  usual  number.  This  may  in- 
dicate future  movements  on  Charleston  or  Savannah.  My  forces  are 
still  at  Wilmington. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  25,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Ab#lition  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  reported  four  frigates,  four  gunboats, 
and  fortv  transports.  Be  on  alert  in  case  of  any  movement  of  enemy. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  25,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding  Fourth  Military  District , Georgetown , S.  C.  : 

Dear  General  : Your  letter  of  the  23d  instant  has  been  received. 
1 hoped  to  be  able  to  keep  the  conscript  reserves  in  the  service  at 
the  expiration  of  their  present  term,  but  the  Secretary  of  War  has 
decided,  I believe,  that  they  shall  go  to  filling  up  the  old  regiments 
now  in  the  field.  Should  it  be  otherwise,  I will  be  glad  to  avail  myself 
of  the  services  of  the  officers  mentioned  by  you  as  far  as  in  my  power 
will  lie. 

A planter  from  All  Saints  Parish  informs  me  that  a considerable  quan- 
tity of  smuggling  trade  is  carried  on  through  MoralPs  Inlet,  South 
Branch,  in  schooners  of  about  100  tons,  for  cotton,  which  he  believes  is 
sent  to  Yankee  land  in  return  for  Yankee  goods,  which  pay  no  duty ; if 
so,  it  must  be  stopped  summarily  ; but  if  the  cotton  be  intended  for 
European  markets,  then  it  is  all  right,  provided  the  imports  pay  duty 
regularly  to  the  collector  of  that  district.  Will  you  please  investigate 
this  matter.  He  says  also  that  our  cavalry  pickets  make  no  night 
patrols  in  that  part  of  the  parish,  or  in  fact  along  that  whole  coast ; it 
would  be  well  to  inquire  into  that  also.  I am  sorry  to  hear  that  u sur- 
prise” cannot  take  place;  you  must  try  it  with  artillery  if  the  localities 
are  favorable.  It  would  be  better  to  have  too  many  pieces  (rifled  and 
howitzers)  than  not  enough. 

Yours,  truly, 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


756 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  28, 1863. 
H.  W.  Mercer,  Brigadier- General,  Pocotaligo , S.  G. : 

No  iron-clads  can  be  in  Georgia  waters ; would  be  more  required  else- 
where now;  moreover,  would  have  come  close  up  to  fort;  must  be 
shams. 

Communicate  this  to  Major  Bryan. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  30, 1863. 

Maj.  Henry  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Savannah,  Ga.: 

Enemy’s  gunboats  may  be  iron-clad  of  inferior  quality.  At  Drewry’s 
Bluff  monitor  came  to  600  yards.  I regret  having  no  heavier  guns  for 
Genesis  Point. 

G.  T.  BEAUKEGARD. 


Charleston,  January  30,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard: 

General  : I have  received  from  Colonel  Yates — • 

Another  boat  came  up  and  driven  back.  Shall  I retire  with  my  guns?  One  man 
wounded  on  our  side.  Enemy’s  loss  heavy. 

I replied : 

Have  guns  enough  in  position  to  protect  prize.  Chesterfield  will  be  with  you  as 
soon  as  possible.  Fear  not  until  morning.  As  soon  as  prize  is  safe  or  destroyed,  if 
compelled  to  destroy,  retire.  On  no  account  must  she  be  recaptured . 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY. 


Charleston,  January  30,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Commanding : 

General:  Your  note  received.  Have  received  a dispatch  from 
Colonel  Yates  telling  me  that  there  were  two  more  boats  in  Stono  ana 
saying  he  was  out  of  ammunition;  would  blow  up  the  Smith  and 
retire.  I telegraphed  in  return  not  to  destroy  her  until  the  last;  I 
would  send  ammunition  and  boat  at  once.  I have  accordingly  started 
the  Sumter,  light-draught  boat,  which  can  get  through  Wappoo  at  any 
tide,  with  forty  8-inch  shell  and  cartridges  and  a guard.  1 hope  she  will 
be  alongside  the  Isaac  Smith  in  three  hours,  and  take  the  flood  tide  with 
her  up  to  Fort  Pemberton.  She  could  not  tow  the  Smith  on  the  ebb  or 
I would  have  had  her  through  at  once.  I hope  it  will  be  all  right. 

Very  respectfully, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General, 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


757 


Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Gewgia,  and  Florida , 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  January  31,  l«t>3. 


Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

i 

sa 

o 

0 

s 

€ 

o 

& 

O 

& 

S 

c 

© 

50 

O 

0 

© 

£ 

First  District  of  South  Carolina 

Second  District  of  South  Carolina 

Third  District  of  South  Carolina 

Fourth  District  of  South  Carolina 

District  of  Georgia  

District  of  East  Florida  

District  of  Middle  Florida 

214 

87 

150 

87 

99 

24 

36 

2,  745 
879 
1,  373 
906 
1,  279 
222 
357 

21 

35 

72 

13 

93 

20 

11 

443 
581 
1, 223 
237 
1,554 
418 
272 

116 

9 

11 

6 

123 

5 

3 

1,755 

171 

208 

175 

1,856 

140 

110 

5,  526 
1,  808 
3, 161 
1,535 
5,  252 
810 
751 

6, 384 
2, 120 
3,  584 
1, 796 
5,974 
927 
870 

7,  989 
2, 700 
4, 660 
2, 161 
7,  344 
1, 261 
1,110 

Grand  total 

697  7,761 

265 

4, 728 

273 

4,415  | 18,843 

21, 655 

27, 225 

Note.— Heavy  artillery  included  with  light  artillery  in  the  First  District  of  South  Carolina  and  the 
District  of  Georgia. 


Charleston,  February  1, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  Mercer  reports  serious  attack  with  iron-clad  turret  on  bat- 
tery Genesis  Point,  Ogeechee  River;  Major  Gallie,  commander,  killed, 
and  32-pounder  disabled.  Garrison  in  good  spirits.  Ten  forty-five  a.  m. 
indications  of  attack  on  Thunderbolt  Battery;  also  musketry  heard 
from  pickets  ; also  reports  General  Hunter  in  command  at  Port  Royal, 
and  his  intention  to  attack  Savannah  as  weakest  point.  General  Mercer 
would  be  materially  assisted  at  such  juncture  by  an  officer  like  Henry 
C Wayne.  Can  he  not  be  made  brigadier  and  ordered  there  by  tele- 
graph \ The  subtraction  of  over  2,000  of  General  Mercer’s  infantry,  now 
at  Wilmington,  may  prove  mischievous.  & ^ BEATJBEGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah ,,  Ga. : 

General:  I have  ordered  nine  Rains  torpedoes  to  be  sent  to  you 
forthwith,  to  be  put  in  the  channel  of  the  Ogeechee  within  range  of  Fort 
McAllister.  I hope  they  will  be  found  to  answer,  for  notwithstanding 
the  great  importance  of  that  work  and  of  saving  the  Nashville,  which  I 
consider  the  sole  cause  of  the  attacks  of  the  enemy  ip  that  Quarter,  it  is 
utterly  out  of  my  power  to  send  a heavy  gun  to  be  added  to  the  arma- 
ment of  Fort  McAllister.  I have  ordered  two  rifled  24-pounders  and 
one  smooth-bore  24  pounder  to  be  sent  to  you  from  here  for  the  battery 
on  the  Altamaha.  Meanwhile  you  will  send  at  once  a naval  32-pounder 
from  the  lines  around  Savannah  to  that  work.  You  will  also  send  to  the 
same  locality  a 24-pounder  and  siege  carriage,  to  be  returned  as  soon  as 


758  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID,  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

the  guns  ordered  from  here  shall  have  arrived  at  their  point  of  destina- 
tion. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , February  1,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  District , Charleston , IS.  C. : 

General:  I find  that  I require  as  soon  as  possible  the  following 
pieces  for  batteries  at  Red  Bluff  and  on  the  Altamaha,  to  wit : One 
rifled  24-pounder  and  two  smooth-bore  24-pounders,  on  siege  carriages 
if  practicable,  for  the  battery  at  Red  Bluff,  and  two  rifled  24-pounders  and 
one  smooth-bore  24-pounder  for  the  battery  on  the  Altamaha;  also  with 
siege  carriages  if  practicable.  Their  places  on  the  lines  can  be  replaced 
with  the  guns  (8-inch)  taken  on  board  of  the  Isaac  Smith.  Should  you 
be  able  to  spare  the  24-pounders  called  for  you  will  please  order  them 
to  be  reported  at  once  to  the  chief  of  artillery  and  ordnance  for  dis- 
tribution and  transportation,  as  already  stated. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


Charleston  Arsenal,  S.  C.,  February  1,  1863. 

Col.  J.  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance , Richmond , Va. : 

Colonel  : In  further  reference  to  your  letter  of  the  6th  ultimo,  con- 
cerning Colonel  Gonzales7  complaint  of  an  insufficient  supply  of  Enfield 
cartridges,  I have  to  state  that  Lieut.  A.  T.  Cunningham,  ordnance 
officer  at  Savannah,  has  450,000  small-arm  cartridges,  of  which  150,000 
are  Enfield ; and  the  troops  in  the  District  of  Georgia  have  been  sup- 
plied with  70  rounds  per  man.  Also  that  the  State  of  South  Carolina 
has  1,500,000  cartridges  or  more  on  hand,  the  larger  portion  of  which 
are  Enfield,  which  would  doubtless  be  issued  on  an  emergency. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  L.  CHILDS, 

Major , Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

February  6,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  to  show  how  unfounded 
are  the  complaints  of  the  want  of  ammunition  in  the  department  of  Gen- 
eral Beauregard. 

J.  GORGAS, 
Colonel , Chief  of  Ordnance. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  2, 1863. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  Whiting  reports  vessels  passing  NTew  River  southward.  Four- 


759 


Chap.  XXVI.  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

teen  passed  here  yesterday.  Last  evening  twenty-two  blockaders  were 
in  sight:  this  morning  only  thirteen  are  seen.  One  monitor  reported 
in  Great  Ogeechee  and  one  in  Yernon  River,  Georgia;  two  more  are 
supposed  to  be  at  Hilton  Head.  All  this  would  indicate  an  attack  on 
Savannah  or  that  Foster  is  going  to  re-enforce  Banks.  Under  hrst 
supposition  I must  have  my  troops  back  from  Wilmington  with  addi- 
tional, or  Savannah  may  be  taken.  ^ T BEAUREGARD, 

General.  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  February  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  District , Charleston , S.  0.  : 

General  : The  movements  of  the  enemy  seem  to  indicate  Savannah 
as  their  future  objective  point.  The  battery  at  Genesis  Point,  on  the 
Great  Ogeechee,  has  twice  been  unsuccessfully  attacked  with  an  iron- 
clad (a  monitor),  four  gunboats,  and  one  mortar  boat,  to  which  the  bat- 
tery could  oppose  only  two  effective  guns — an  8-inch  columbiad  and  a 
32-pounder  rifled.  The  result  must  be  very  encouraging  to  us  for  the 
defenses  of  this  harbor.  I desire  sending  to  Genesis  Point  (if  it  can 
possibly  be  spared  from  this  district)  one  42-pounder  rifled,  with  some 
ammunition,  &c.,  complete.  You  will,  then,  if  it  can  be  done,  send  one 
to  the  railroad  depot  for  Savannah  as  soon  as  practicable. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  BEAIJBEGAED) 

General.  Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Fa.,  February  3,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C . : 

I order  General  Whiting  to  return  you  a brigade  and  to  hold  another 
ready  for  transportation.  I have  telegraphed  Governor  Bonham  to  urge 
the  immediate  passage  of  a law  to  retain  the  reserve  regiments,  or,  fail 
ing  that,  to  retain  them  as  militia.  You  had  better  urge  the  same 

COurSe-  J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Fa.,  February  3,  1863. 


General  R.  E.  Lee,  Fredericksburg , Fa.  : 

General  Beauregard  expects  an  early  attack.  I must  return  his  troops 
sent  to  Wilmington.  I shall  telegraph  General  French,  m command  at 
Goldsborough,  to  replace  them  as  far  as  practicable  with  re-enforcements. 
I give  you  the  information  that  you  may  consider  the  necessities  oi  the 
situation  and  judge  as  to  the  advisability  of  sending  any  troops  toward 


North  Carolina. 


J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


760 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  3, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Two  more  rifled  guns  (32-pounders  or  24-pounders)  are  much  needed  at 
Genesis  Point.  Am  informed  there  are  some  at  arsenal  here  for  other 
points  out  of  this  department.  Can  they  be  obtained  ! Cannot  services 
of  General  Wayne  be  had  to  assist  General  Mercer? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  3, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

British  war  steamer  Cadmus  arrived  yesterday  off  this  port.  Consul 
Bunch  is  ordered  to  embark  with  his  family  as  soon  as  possible.  United 
States  New  Ironsides  is  among  blockaders.  It  is  believed  on  good  au- 
thority this  place  is  to  be  attacked  soon,  instead  of  Savannah,  as  already 
reported  probable  to  War  Department.  My  troops  sent  to  Wilmington, 
with  more  besides,  are  indispensable  for  safety  of  Charleston  or  Savan- 
nah. Some  more  heavy  guns  would  add  greatly  to  their  defense.  No 
time  should  be  lost.  Now  or  never.  Time  of  eight  reserve  State  regi- 
ments expire  in  few  days.  Can  they  not  be  kept  in  service  thirty  days 
longer  ! Have  already  reported  di faculty  to  finish  torpedo  ram  for 
want  of  materials.  Government  is  building  three  gunboats  and  State 
one,  which  cannot  be  finished  for  same  reason.  Why  not  concentrate, 
as  already  suggested  once,  all  labor  and  materials  on  one  at  time  ? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  3, 1863. 

M.  L.  Bonham, 

Governor  of  State  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , S.  C. : 

British  war  steamer  Cadmus  arrived  yesterday  off  this  port.  Consul 
Bunch  is  ordered  to  embark  with  his  family  as  soon  as  possible.  United 
States  New  Ironsides  is  among  blockaders ; two  or  more  monitors  are 
believed  south  of  here.  It  is  reported  Charleston  or  Savannah  is  to  be 
attacked  soon.  Time  of  reserves  soon  out.  Can  they  not  be  kept 
thirty  days  longer!  My  applications  for  negro  labor  still  unanswered. 
A little  more  earth  thrown  up  may  save  much  property  and  many  val- 
uable lives. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  3,  1863. 

W.  S.  Walker, 

Brigadier- General,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Report  is  that  Charleston  or  Savannah  will  soon  be  attacked.  Gen- 
eral desires  watchfulness,  especially  in  observing  enemy^s  movements  at 
Hilton  Head. 

A.  N.  TOUTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Ohaf.  XXYT.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


761 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  3,  1863. 

H.  W.  Mercer, 

Brigadier- General,  Savannah,  Ga . : 

Good  authority  reports  meditated  attack  soon  on  Charleston  and 
Savannah ; be  prepared.  New  Ironsides  outside  with  blockaders.  Pas- 
saic and  Montauk  must  be  with  you.  Send  me  one  of  their  15  inch  shells 
for  my  office.  Get  both  projectiles  for  your  rifle-gun. 

G.  T.  BEATJEEGABD. 


Charleston,  February  3,  1863. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris,  Chief  Engineer  Department : 

Major:  In  reply  to  your  communication  of  this  date  and  in  response 
to  your  inquiries  as  to  the  progress  of  work  on  marine  torpedo  ram  I 
would  beg  respectfully  to  state  that  the  vessel  proper  is  far  advanced 
toward  completion,  and  that  the  only  cause  of  delay  is  in  the  iron  work. 
The  engine  complete  is  now  being  placed  in  the  vessel.  A large  portion 
of  the  patterns  for  casting  the  prow  and  torpedo  machinery  have  been 
completed,  and  an  ample  supply  of  cast  iron  and  wood  (for  fuel)  have 
been  furnished  Messrs.  Cameron  & Co.  The  works  belonging  to  this 
concern  (arsenal  works)  have  recently  been  transferred  to  the  Govern- 
ment, and  I have  been  notified  by  Messrs.  Cameron  & Co.  that  any 
further  orders  in  reference  to  the  work  must  be  addressed  to  Major 
Childs.  I therefore  communicated  with  Major  Childs  on  the  subject, 
but  have  received  no  reply  to  my  communication.  If  the  undertaking 
is  to  be  accomplished  rapidly  it  is" indispensably  necessary  that  the  work 
at  the  arsenal  should  be  prosecuted  with  more  vigor  than  heretofore, 
and  as  I am  entirely  without  any  authority  to  control  that  establish- 
ment I must  request  you,  major,  to  present  this  matter  to  the  atten- 
tion of  the  commanding  general. 

Another  cause  of  serious  delay  to  the  work  is  the  non-supply  of  iron 
for  armor.  I am  in  receipt  of  a copy  of  a telegram  from  the  War  De- 
partment, stating  that  the  Etowah  Works  engaged  to  roll  the  iron  plates, 
i and  that  the  order  to  do  so  was  given  some  time  back.  The  Navy  De- 
partment declines  transferring  the  iron  from  the  gunboat  to  the  ram. 
If  this  could  have  been  done  when  requested  last  December  the  iron 
would  have  been  drilled  and  bent,  ready  to  go  on  the  boat.  The  work 
on  the  ram  is  far  in  advance  of  auy  other  vessel.  The  material  neces- 
sary to  its  completion  is  now  in  Charleston;  it  cannot  be  used  on  the 
other  vessels  for  months,  and  may  be  resupplied  to  them  from  the 
Etowah  Works  in  time  to  meet  their  wants.  No  one  can  be  more  anx- 
ious than  I am  to  press  the  work  to  rapid  completion,  but  being  abso- 
lutely without  any  authority  to  control  the  work-shops,  and  without  the 
means  of  obtaining  an  immediate  supply  of  iron,  my  hands  are  almost 
tied  and  I am  left  dependent  on  the  support  of  others.  I would  now 
respectfully  ask  the  means  or  the  authority  to  procure  the  means  for 
the  rapid  accomplishment  of  undertaking. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  major,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

EEANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers, 


762 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Military  District, 

Georgetown , 8.  C.,  February  3,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  &c.,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  earthwork  on  Santee 
ready  to  receive  its  armament.  The  guns,  an  18-pounder  and  a 12- 
pounder,  are  here,  and  could  be  placed  in  battery  in  twelve  hours  j but 
I regret  to  say  I have  not  in  my  command  the  troops  necessary  to  man 
them.  Captain  Warley’s  company,  garrisoning  Battery  White  (nine 
guns),  has  but  53  men  for  duty.  Captain  Ward’s  company,  a detach- 
ment from  which  garrisons  the  battery  at  Frazer’s  Point,  is  not  able  to 
man  more  than  a single  section  of  his  battery.  This  condition  of  things 
is  owing  in  part  to  the  fact  that  there  is  at  present  a good  deal  of  sick- 
ness among  the  troops,  and  in  part  also  to  the  fact  that  very  many 
details  have  to  be  made  for  duty  in  the  commissary  and  quartermaster’s 
departments  and  in  the  hospital,  our  entire  population  almost  being  in 
the  army. 

The  cavalry  arm  is  also  insufficient  properly  to  perform  the  duties 
required  of  it.  The  disbanding  of  the  regiments  of  reserves,  the  only 
infantry  force  in  this  military  district,  has  rendered  it  necessary  for  me 
to  withdraw  a portion  of  the  cavalry  from  the  outpost  for  the  purpose 
of  performing  the  necessary  guard  duty  in  this  town,  the  depot  of  all 
the  quartermaster,  commissary,  and  ordnance  stores  of  the  district. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TRAPIER, 
Brigadier-General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  4,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  N.  C.  : 

Send  Georgia  troops  back  immediately  if  practicable. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Fredericksburg,  Va.,  January  [February]  4,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

Sir:  I have  received  your  dispatch  of  yesterday  in  reference  to  the 
propriety  of  sending  re-enforcements  from  this  army  to  North  Carolina 
to  replace  those  recalled  to  Charleston.  I will  do  so  if  you  deem  the 
exigency  requires  it,  and  I should  like  to  be  informed  as  to  the  number 
of  troops  withdrawn  to  Charleston.  As  far  as  I can  judge  I think  it 
probable  that  an  attempt  will  be  made  on  Charleston.  Demonstrations 
have  been  made  on  Genesis  Point  and  North  Carolina,  apparently  with 
a view  of  attracting  attention  elsewhere,  and  I notice  the  new  Iron- 
sides, Montauk,  and  Passaic  are  in  Beaufort  Harbor.  A fourth  iron- 
clad is  also  mentioned  to  have  been  in  the  attack  on  Genesis  Point, 
Ogeechee  River,  Georgia.  I do  not  know  what  are  the  indications  of 
an  attack  upon  Wilmington.  The  iron-clads  seem  to  have  passed 
south  of  the  Cape  Fear,  and  the  last  reports  I saw  of  the  sailing  of 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


763 


General  Foster  left  me  in  doubt  as  to  whether  he  was  bound  for  the 
Cape  Fear  River  or  farther  south.  I see  it  stated  too  in  the  Northern 
, papers  that  75,000  troops  from  this  army  have  reached  North  Carolina, 
and  that  re-enforcements  were  being  sent  from  it  to  General  Bragg. 
These  were  made  use  of  as  arguments  why  General  Hooker  can  move 
upon  Richmond.  General  Hooker  has  many  strong  reasons  to  induce 
him  to  take  this  step,  and  if  he  believes  that  but  a feeble  resistance  can 
be  made  to  his  advance  he  will  be  likely  to  do  so.  I think  this  was  one 
of  the  main  causes  that  impelled  General  Burnside  to  make  his  last 
attempt  on  the  20th  ultimo,  in  which,1  as  far  as  I can  see,  it  was  fortu- 
nate for  him  that  he  was  balked  by  the  storm.  I am  trying  to  be  pre- 
pared for  any  movement  that  may  be  made  by  General  Hooker,  but  if 
the  pressure  on  Wilmington  is  the  more  urgent  it  should  be  re-enforced. 
I would  suggest  that  the  troops  now  in  North  Carolina  should  be  con- 
centrated as  near  as  possible  to  Wilmington,  leaving  their  places  to  be 
supplied,  if  necessary,  from  here.  I beg  leave  also  to  suggest  that  your 
directions  by  telegraph  for  the  movement  of  troops  which  you  desire  to 
t conceal  be  sent  in  cipher,  as  I have  found  that  otherwise  they  invaria- 
bly become  known.  There  are  persons  who  frequent  the  telegraph  office 
with  no  evil  purpose  but  from  curiosity  to  learn  the  news ; others  are 
near  to  catch  what  transpires,  and  thus  information  is  spread  and 
reaches  wrong  ears. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  esteem,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Fa.,  February  4,  1863. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding , &c. : 

Sir  : Yours  of  this  date  is  just  received.  My  dispatch  on  yesterday 
was  intended  to  keep  you  advised  of  the  apprehended  movements  of 
the  enemy,  and  to  submit  to  your  judgment  the  propriety  of  either 
moving  or  making  preparations  for  moving  some  portion  of  your  forces 
either  here  or  toward  North  Carolina.  I did  not  mean  even  to  recom- 
mend such  present  movement,  for  my  own  judgment,  unless  controlled 
by  later  advices  or  the  result  of  your  convictions  on  the  intelligence 
| received,  would  not  have  dictated  such  movement.  Had  I felt  any 
necessity  for  pressing  my  own  conclusions  upon  you  I should  have 
simply  suggested  that  you  hold  2,000  or  3,000  men  (a  brigade)  in  readi- 
ness to  move  promptly  to  this  city  to  replace  General  Wise’s,  which  in 
I case  of  any  sudden  movement  by  the  enemy  into  North  Carolina  or 
j toward  Petersburg  I should  have  moved  thither,  and  there  to  await 
| further  developments  and  more  certain  intelligence.  I do  not  myself 
! anticipate  any  serious  movement  just  now  either  into  North  Carolina 
or  against  Wilmington,  though  a feint  toward  the  latter  place  is  prob- 
able and  a real  attack  possible ; but  I think  a formidable  attack  by  sea, 
and  perhaps  by  land  too,  is  about  to  be  made  on  Charleston. 

The  presence  of  so  many  of  the  iron-clads  in  Beaufort,  S.  C. ; the  sail- 
ing lately  of  many  transports  with  troops  from  the  North  Carolina  ports 
| southward,  and  the  slight  attacks  recently  essayed  against  Savannah, 
which  last  were  probably  only  for  a diversion,  all  induce  the  conclusion 
that  Charleston  is  the  real  object  of  attack.  In  addition,  the  late  attack 
on  the  blockading  squadron  and  the  known  inability  of  the  enemy  to 
keep  up  their  blockade  with  wooden  vessels,  which  alone  can  lie  ‘off 


764 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.}  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


the  harbor,  would  naturally  inspire  a determination  to  assail  the  city 
and  destroy  the  gunboats  which  had  proved  so  formidable  to  them. 
When  to  these  general  considerations  was  added  the  fact  that  an  En- 
glish ship  of-war  had  come  in  and  taken  off  the  consul  and  his  family,  a 
measure  which  the  consul  had  mentioned  in  confidence  to  a friend  was 
certainly  to  precede  an  attack,  it  did  not  surprise  me  to  learn  from 
General  Beauregard  that  the  attack  was  imminent,  and  the  crisis,  in  his 
own  language,  upon  him.  Besides  telegraphing  you  I ordered  General 
Whiting  to  forward  one  brigade  of  the  troops  sent  him  from  Charleston 
at  once  and  hold  another  ready  for  transportation,  and  directed  Gen- 
eral French  to  replace,  as  far  as  the  safety  of  his  line  would  allow,  the 
troops  to  General  Whiting. 

It  adds  to  the  embarrassment  of  General  Beauregard’s  position  that 
eight  reserve  South  Carolina  regiments  go  out  of  service,  by  expiration 
of  their  time,  in  a day  or  two.  I telegraphed  the  Governor  of  South 
Carolina  to  urge  their  retention  for  thirty  days,  or  until  after  the  attack, 
by  an  act  of  the  Legislature  (now  in  session) ; or,  failing  in  that,  to  hold 
them  for  a short  time  as  militia.  I trust  this  will  be  done.  The  Gov- 
ernor is  urgent  for  re-enforcements  ; but  I do  not  see  from  what  quarter 
they  can  be  spared.  The  utmost  we  can  do  is  to  send  back  all  heretofore 
forwarded  to  Wilmington.  I fully  appreciate  the  probabilities  of  hos- 
tile movements  at  an  early  day  by  the  army  opposed  to  you.  The  recent 
change  of  commanders  and  the  pressure  of  Northern  opinion  both  almost 
assure  this ; but  some  brief  delay  must,  I suppose,  ensue  before  either 
the  state  of  the  Federal  Army  (under  its  new  commander)  or  the  con- 
dition of  the  roads  will  allow  advance.  Whether  that  delay  is  likely 
to  be  such  as  to  justify  the  temporary  withdrawal  of  any  considerable 
body  of  your  troops  you  can  best  determine,  and  it  certainly  is  not  my 
purpose  to  overrule  your  well-considered  conclusions.  You  will  remem- 
ber, however,  that,  considering  the  line  to  Wilmington  as  really  one 
line  for  the  defense  of  the  capital  and  the  whole  department  under  your 
command',  I feel  anxious  to  keep  you  advised  of  all  movements  which 
may  affect  its  security  and  to  invoke  the  aid  of  your  counsel  in  regard 
to  the  disposition  of  troops  for  its  defense. 

I have  just  ordered,  under  the  direction  of  the  President,  General 
D.  H.  Hill  to  duty  in  North  Carolina.  General  Smith  is  at  present 
here  and  will  probably  remain  some  time.  I note  and  will  observe 
your  suggestion  as  to  the  use  of  a cipher.  A simple  one,  with  which  I 
am  familiar,  is  to  use  the  letter  before  the  one  meant;  thus  z for  a,  a 
for  b,  and  so  on.  You  will  readily  make  it  out,  and  I shall  use  that. 

With  high  esteem,  most  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  4,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  G. : 

Savannah  more  threatened  at  present  by  land.  Georgia  troops  re- 
quired first.  Gist  will  come  with  Charleston  troops.  Grand  attack  oil 
Charleston  to  be  made  soon  as  ten  iron-clads  shall  have  arrived.  Seven 
are  south  of  Fort  Monroe,  including  two  in  Ogeechee.  Yankee  officers 
say  they  will  soon  test  iron  against  bricks.  Tell  Gist  Cole’s  Island 
cannot  yet  be  occupied. 

G.  T.  BE  A (JREGARD. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


765 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  4, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Good  information  says  Federal  officers  boast  they  will  test  relative 
value  of  iron  and  brick  walls  early  this  month,  soon  as  they  shall  ha,ve 
eight  or  ten  iron -clads  South.  They  report  seven  within  reach  of  point 
of  destination,  meaning  probably  Charleston.  Eesult  at  Genesis  Point 
is  encouraging.  Volleys  only  should  be  fired  against  turrets.  Am 
putting  Eaius  torpedoes  in  every  direction.  I require  more  heavy 
guns  for  interior  line  of  works. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  4,  1863. 

H.  W.  Mercer,  Brigadier- General,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Monitors  can  only  be  injured  by  weight  of  metal  striking  them;  hence 
necessity  of  firing  bolts,  if  practicable,  and  by  volleys.  Look  out  Isle 
Hope  does  not  change  its  name.  How  is  Causeway  Battery  and  one 
on  Eosedew  Island?  Organize  your  siege  train  soon  as  possible. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Charleston,  February  4, 1863. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War : 

Had  already  telegraphed  Governor  Bonham  to  keep  reserves  thirty 
days  longer. 

Gtneral  Branch  [French?]  telegraphs  me  as  follows: 

Thirty  transports  sailed  south  on  30th  from  Beaufort,  N.  C.  Many  transports  still 
in  that  harbor,  with  artillery  and  horses  embarked. 

On  the  31st,  gunboats  sailed.  It  is  evident  they  are  intended  for 
Charleston  or  Savannah,  probably  the  latter.  Owing  to  recent  demon- 
strations in  that  quarter  I must  again  request  services  of  General 
Wayne,  Georgia,  or  other  competent  brigadier- general. 

J ’ 8 ’ G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


[Indorsement  No.  1.] 


Commended  to  the  attention  of  the  President,  especially  in  reference 
to  the  request  for  another  brigadier. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary. 


[Indorsement  No.  2.] 

Who  is  General  Branch?  Who  is  Brigadier-General  Wayne?  Is 
General  Lawton  for  duty  ? Is  there  anything  known  of  General  Gard- 
ner? Where  is  Ex-Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker?  Is  he  candidate  for 
appointment  ? 


JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 


766 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ch*p.  XXVL 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

February  5,  1863. 


His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 


Mr.  President  : Your  Excellency’s  letter  of  the  4th  instant  has  just 
been  received.* 

I yesterday  addressed  a communication  to  the  Secretary  of  War, 
giving  the  reasons  which  rendered  it  probable  that  an  attack  would  be 
made  upon  Charleston.  In  addition  I will  state  that  the  fall  of  Savan- 
nah will  not  carry  with  it  the  advantages  to  the  United  States  Govern- 
ment which  would  result  from  their  possession  of  Charleston.  It  is  to 
be  expected  then  that  demonstrations  will  be  made  against  the  former 
city  to  attract  there  re-enforcements. 

As  soon  as  the  point  of  attack  is  ascertained  I would  recommend  that 
all  the  troops  which  can  be  spared  from  the  city  not  in  danger  should 
be  rapidly  thrown  to  the  other,  as  it  is  clear  that  both  cities  cannot  bo 
attacked  at  the  same  time.  Attempts  will  be  made  to  deceive  by  ad- 
vancing against  the  point  not  intended  for  the  real  attack  such  gun- 
boats, vessels,  and  troops  as  will  not  be  required  against  the  other,  and 
care  and  discrimination  will  be  required  to  discover  the  feint.  As  far 
as  I can  learn  at  this  distance  it  seems  that  the  iron-clad  gunboats  of 
the  enemy  are  mostly  south  of  the  Cape  Fear  Fiver,  and  that  General 
Foster,  with  his  troops,  has  gone  south  too.  I do  not  think  therefore 
that  Wilmington  is  at  present  in  danger  of  being  attacked,  though  no 
doubt  efforts  will  be  made  to  detain  all  of  our  troops  there ; they  can, 
however,  I think  with  safety,  be  detached  to  Charleston. 

Should  a sufficient  force  not  be  left  in  North  Carolina  to  guard  our 
lines,  which  cannot  under  the  circumstances  be  seriously  threatened, 
some  regiments  of  General  Wise’s  brigade  might  be  temporarily  ordered 
to  take  their  place.  In  case  of  necessity  troops  from  this  army  can  be 
sent  to  Bichmond,  and  if  you  think  the  exigencies  of  the  South  more 
pressing  than  here  I will  send  them  at  once. 

In  my  letter  of  yesterday  to  the  Secretary  of  War  I stated  the  rea- 
sons why  I thought  we  might  expect  the  advance  of  General  Hooker. 
The  weather  to  day  is  unfavorable  for  his  movement,  and  it  may  prove 
so  for  some  time. 

It  appears  to  me  that  if  either  Charleston  or  Savannah  is  attacked 
the  rest  of  the  coast  may  be  stripped  pretty  bare  of  troops  without  im- 
prudence. 

The  troops  of  this  army  are  ready  to  move  at  a moment’s  warning, 
and  all  I require  is  notice  where  they  are  wanted. 

I presume  but  few  of  the  enemy’s  troops  are  left  in  North  Carolina  j 
perhaps  not  more  than  enough  to  guard  his  positions. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  5,  1863. 

H.  W.  Mercer,  Brigadier-  General , Savannah , Ga. : 

Enemy’s  attack  on  Genesis  Point  must  be  intended  to  get  possession 
of  steamey  Nashville.  Can’t  she  be  sent  off?  Have  ordered  you  two 


See  pp.  1019,1020. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  767 

rifled  24-pounders  and  one  8-incli  columbiad  for  where  most  needed, 
probably  Carston’s,  Rosedew,  and  Genesis. 

F G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  February^  5,  1863. 

Maj.  Hutson  Lee, 

Chief  Quartermaster,  &e.,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Major  : I am  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  order  that  if 
any  large  supplies  of  Government  stores  be  on  hand  here  or  at  Savan- 
nah the  same  be  removed  on  the  line  of  railroads  to  some  convenient 
point,  such  as  Columbia,  S.  C.,  or  Augusta,  Ga. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  TOUTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp . 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  February  5, 1863. 
H.  W.  Mercer,  Brigadier -General,  Savannah , Ga. : 

One  24-pounder  rifled  and  two  24-pounders  smooth-bore  sent  you  to- 
day, on  siege  carriages,  are  for  battery  on  Altamaha. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  6, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  N.  C.: 

If  enemy  did  not  attack  when  he  had  all  his  forces  at  New  Berne  he 
will  not  do  so  with  a part.  They  are  certainly  moving  south.  There 
are  many  transports  at  Port  Royal . 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  February  6, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff  : 

General  : In  obedience  to  the  instructions  of  General  Beauregard 
I called  upon  Capt.  D.  N.  Ingraham,  flag-officer  of  this  station,  and  de- 
livered to  him  the  following  message : 

General  Beauregard  desires  you  to  make  inquiry  as  to  which  of  the  gunboats  now 
building  is  furthest  advanced  toward  completion,  in  order  to  take  proper  steps  toward 
concentrating  the  working  force  and  material. 


Captain  Ingraham  replies: 

I have  already  made  a selection  and  have  ordered  the  hands  to  the  boat  selected. 


I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers. 


768 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  February  7,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

State  Legislature  refuses  to  allow  eight  regiments  reserves  to  remain 
longer  in  service.  Shall  their  conscripts  be  retained?  My  troops  from 
Wilmington  have  become  more  indispensable  than  ever.  Enemy  evi- 
dently meditates  an  attack  on  Charleston  or  Savannah. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

{Indorsement.] 

February  8,  1863. 

Retain  the  conscripts  of  the  reserve  regiments.  General  Whiting 
telegraphs  he  has  returned  to  you  your  two  brigades.  He  is  now  tele- 
graphed to  send  back  all  the  force  received  from  you. 

S.  C. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  7,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  C.: 

Would  like  to  have  all  my  troops  soon  as  you  can  spare  them;  ap- 
pearances of  an  early  attack  here  or  Savannah  are  daily  more  threaten- 
ing. Their  field  transportation  is  indispensable,  for  I hope  to  get  more 
troops  soon. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  7,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 


Enemy’s  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  on  5th  instant  reported  four  steam 
frigates,  thirteen  gunboats,  and  fifty -three  transports — ships,  steamers, 
brigs,  and  schooners. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  8, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Cannot  a reliable  brigadier-general  be  sent  to  assist  General  Mercer, 
who  commands  District  of  Georgia.  I have  no  choice  except  that  he 
be  competent;  otherwise  consequences  of  serious  attack  by  enemy  may 
be  disastrous.  Case  is  urgent. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  8,  1863. 


M.  L.  Bonham, 

Governor  of  State  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , S.  C. : 


Every  indication  is  that  Charleston  or  Savannah  will  soon  be  attacked 
by  an  overwhelming  force.  Not  much  assistance  can  be  expected  from 
Confederate  Government,  and  no  chance  of  even  temporary  success 
should  at  this  moment  be  allowed  the  enemy. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


(3hai*.  tXYl)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— ^-CONFEDERATE.  769 

IIdqrs.  Dept  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , February  8,  1863. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer,  &c.,  Charleston , 8.  C.  : 

Major  : Tbe  movements  of  the  enemy  indicating  an  early  attack  on 
this  city  or  Savannah,  I must  again  call  your  attention  to  the  condition 
of  the  bridge  at  Bee’s  Ferry  for  the  passage  of  our  troops  in  that  direc- 
tion across  the  Ashley  in  case  of  necessity.  Also  to  the  one  ordered 
; some  time  ago  across  Wappoo  Cut,  near  the  Stono.  It  should  be  put 
in  position  as  soon  as  the  navigation  of  the  Cut  shall  have  been  ob- 
structed  with  torpedoes,  &c.,  as  already  directed.  You  are  authorized 
to  make  such  changes  in  the  location  of  the  torpedoes  (Bains’)  ordered 
I to  be  put  in  position  in  and  about  the  harbor  of  Charleston  as  your 
| soundings  and  examinations  will  indicate  to  be  necessary  for  the  end 
j in  view.  Immediately  alter  putting  them  in  position  you  will  advise 
Brigadier-General  Eipley  and  Commodore  Ingraham  of  their  location. 
Have  as  many  Bains  torpedoes  made  for  this  place  and  Savannah  as 
practicable,  and  have  them  placed  in  position  as  fast  as  made. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAtJEEGABD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  6\,  February  8,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  B.  S.  Bipley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District , Charleston , 8.  C. : 

General:  The  recent  attack  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  monitor  Mon- 
I tauk  on  the  battery  at  Genesis  Point  (the  first  day  at  about  1 mile  and 
the  second  at  about  800  or  1,000  yards)  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the 
! enemy  is  not  so  confident  of  the  invulnerability  of  this  kind  of  naval 
vessel;  but  I conclude  also  that  the  attack  on  Sumter,  whenever  it 
takes  place,  will  probably  be  made  at  long  range  with  their  heaviest 
I guns  and  mortars.  This  being  admitted,  they  will  necessarily  attack 
I it  where  it  is  weakest — 4.  e .,  the  gorge,  southeast  angle,  and  east  face — 
taking  their  position  close  along  the  eastern  shore  of  Morris  Island, 
after  having  silenced  Battery  Wagner.  By  adopting  this  plan  their 
steamers,  gunboats,  &c.,  would  be,  moreover,  farther  removed  from 
the  batteries  of  Sullivan’s  Island.  The  enemy  may  also  establish  sand 
rifled  and  mortar  batteries  on  the  sand  hills  along  the  sea  shore  of  Morris 
j Island  at  the  distance  of  from  1 to  2 miles  from  Sumter,  as  was  done 
in  the  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski  last  year.  He  might  possibly  send 
one  or  more  monitors  during  the  night  to  take  a position  in  the  small 
channel  north  of  Cummings  Point,  within  close  range,  to  batter  down 
! the  gorge  of  Sumter  and  endeavor  to  blow  up  the  magazines.  That 
j mode  of  attack  being  the  one  most  to  be  apprehended  should  be  guarded 
I against,  as  well  as  our  limited  means  will  permit,  first  by  transferring 
as  many  heavy  rifled  guns  as  can  be  spared  from  the  other  faces  of  the 
j fort  to  the  gorge  angle  and  face  already  referred  to,  and  the  Brooke 
; rifled  gun,  now  on  its  way  here  from  Bichmond,  must  likewise  be  put 
there,  substituting  in  its  place  at  Fort  Johnson  the  10-inch  now  expected 
i from  that  city,  so  locating  it  as  to  fire  toward  Morris  Island  when  re- 
quired; secondly,  a strong  field  work  should  be  thrown  up  (as  soon  as 
sufficient  labor  can  be  procured)  on  Cummings  Point,  open  in  the  gorge 

49  R R — YOL  XIV 


I 


770 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  ANU  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  X&vl. 


toward  Fort  Sumter,  to  act  besides  as  a kind  of  traverse  to  this  work 
from  the  lire  of  the  batteries  located  by  the  enemy  along  the  sea-shore  of 
Morris  Island.  The  Cummings  Point  Battery  should  be  armed  with  the 
heaviest  and  longest-range  guns  we  may  be  able  to  obtain  for  that  pur- 
pose. 

The  introduction  of  heavy  rifled  guns  and  iron-clad  steamers  in  the 
attack  of  masonry  forts  has  greatly  changed  the  conditions  of  the 
problem  applicable  to  Fort  Sumter  when  it  was  built,  and  we  must  now 
use  the  few  and  imperfect  means  at  our  command  to  increase  its  de- 
fensive features  as  far  as  practicable.  The  chief  engineers  of  this  de- 
partment and  of  the  State  will  be  ordered  to  report  to  you  at  once  to 
confer  with  you,  so  as  to  carry  out  the  views  expressed  by  me  in  this 
letter. 

Major  Harris,  chief  engineer,  has  received  my  instructions  relative 
to  locating  some  Pains  torpedoes  about  Cummings  Point  and  within 
the  harbor,  independently  of  the  electrical  torpedoes  under  the  charge 
of  Mr.  Waldron. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Barnwell  Court-House,  February  9,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard: 

General:  Fort  Sumter  is  the  key  to  Charleston.  The  safety  of  that 
city  depends  upon  its  relention  by  our  forces  or  its  entire  and  utter  de- 
struction rather  than  it  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Are 
you  perfectly  assured  of  the  fidelity  of  the  troops,  not  the  officers,  of 
that  fortification?  Grave  and  fearful  doubts  are  felt  here  and  else- 
where upon  this  point,  and  you  may  depend  upon  what  I say  to  you 
when  I say  that  they  are  not  timid  apprehensions  or  vague  suspicions. 
With  this  intimation,  which  may  be  regarded  as  a positive  warning  to 
you,  you  know  the  best  measures  to  adopt  without  further  sugges- 
tions from  any  source  to  ascertain  both  as  to  the  truth  of  these  appre- 
hensions and  the  remedy  against  so  direful  a calamity  as  a surrender 
of  the  post  to  the  enemy  at  the  earliest  time  after  an  attack  is  made 
upon  it  by  them.  I beg  of  you,  general,  to  inquire  and  ascertain  as 
far  as  possible  and  before  it  is  too  late  what  foundation  there  may  be 
for  this  apprehension  of  mutiny  and  treason  among  the  soldiers  of  that 
fort.  I again  assure  you  that  there  is  foundation  for  it.  The  facts 
given  to  me  were  stated  with  much  simplicity,  but  evident  truthful- 
ness. Look  to  it,  I pray  you,  for  other  momentous  consequences  be- 
sides the  fate  of  Charleston  depend  upon  this  matter.  If  these  few 
lines  of  caution  and  admonition  will  not  avail  nothing  further  would, 
and  I therefore  close  with  the  highest  considerations  of  respect  and 
confidence  in  all  of  your  attributes  and  qualities  as  a man  and  a general. 

H. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  February  10,  1863. 

I am  informed  by  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley  that  the  matter  referred  to 
in  this  communication  lias  already  been  thoroughly  investigated  and 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  771 

proved  to  be  groundless.  General  Pemberton  also  informed  me  to  tbe 
same  effect. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  9, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.: 

General  Whiting  telegraphs  as  follows: 

Thirty  sail,  said  to  have  taken  20,000  men,  have  left  with  sealed  orders  during  past 
ten  days;  fifteen  sail  now  in  Beaufort,  seven  of  these  armed.  No  iron-clads  there 
now.  Rumored  that  sixty  sail  and  25,000  men  are  still  at  New  Berne.  Very  few  at 
jMorehead  City. 

This  intelligence  confirms  enemy’s  intention  to  attack  at  concerted 
moment  Charleston  or  Savannah.  In  such  case  re-enforcements  will 
be  required  in  this  department.  See  my  letter  of  October  3 last. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  9,  1863. 

H.  W.  Mercer, 

Brigadier- General,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Send  all  15-inch  shell  thrown  by  enemy  at  Fort  McAllister  to  Charles- 
ton. 

By  order  of  General  Beauregard: 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

— 

Hdqrs.  Third  District  of  South  Carolina, 

Pocotaligo , February  10,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard: 

General  : A very  probable  and  feasible  programme  of  the  enemy’s 
operations  would  be  to  take  the  entire  force  at  their  command  for  the 
purpose  of  occupying  the  railroad  and  destroying  it,  and  after  its  de- 
struction to  use  the  same  force  for  operating  on  Savannah.  In  that 
event  the  iorce  at  my  command  would  be  altogether  too  small  for  an 
effective  resistance.  When  General  Lee  commanded  this  department 
there  were  11,000  troops  between  the  Ashepoo  and  Savannah  Rivers 
(my  present  district)  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  a less  formidable  attack 
than  this  threatens  to  be. 

When  the  reserves  leave  I will  have  an  aggregate  force  of  less  than 
3,000  men,  so  widely  scattered  over  a long  line  of  defense  that  they  could 
be  beaten  in  detail  before  being  concentrated.  Everything  points  to  a 
most  formidable  attack,  and  I ofifer  these  suggestions  that  my  position 
may  be  thoroughly  understood,  and  that  the  necessary  re-enforcements 
may  be  ready  to  assist  me  in  case  of  attack.  1 should  judge  the  most 
likely  points  of  attack  are  Red  Bluff  and  Coosa whatchie.  In  event  of 
the  former  I respectfully  submit  that  troops  should  be  ready  in  Savan- 
nah to  cross  the  river  and  march  down  the  Screven’s  Ferry  road.  In 
that  event  I should  think  it  advisable  to  have  works  near  the  river  on 
this  side,  under  which  we  could  retire  and  check  the  advance  of  the  en- 
emy if  we  were  driven  from  our  first  position. 


772 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  HID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV: 


I have  never  been  able  to  control  the  force  necessary  for  such  an  ur 
dertaking.  General  Mercer  could  have  it  done. 

Yours,  very  sincerely  and  respectfully, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 


SAVANNAn,  February  14,  1863. 
Verbal  instructions  were  this  day  given  at  Pocotaligo  to  General 
Hagood  and  Walker  relative  to  their  future  movements  in  case  of  ai 
attack  by  a strong  force  of  the  enemy,  and  they  were  ordered  to  furnisl 
my  headquarters  with  a report  of  said  instructions. 

G.  T.  B., 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  10, 1863. 

Col.  W.  Porcher  Miles, 

Member  af  Congress , Richmond , Va. : 

Dear  Colonel  : Yours  of  the  3d  and  5th  instant*  have  been  received 

I believe  that  even  the  blind  can  now  see  what  the  enemy’s  intention 
are  or  were  before  our  naval  onslaught  upon  their  fleet  here.  If  the;; 
had  intended  seriously  to  attack  Wilmington  and  the  railroads  you  re 
fer  to  they  would  have  done  so  before  withdrawing  part  if  not  most  o 
their  forces  from  New  Berne  and  whilst  they  had  two  iron-clads,  the  Pas 
siac  and  Montauk,  at  Beaufort,  N.  C.  But  these  and  six  or  seven  other1 
having  gone  southward  with  a large  part  of  their  land  force  it  become* 
evident  that  Charleston  or  Savannah  was  their  objective  point,  probably 
the  former,  before  the  attack  on  their  fleet,  as  already  stated,  lor  Savaii 
nah  is  only  comparatively  a secondary  place,  the  river  being  narrow  anc 
shallow  canuot  admit  of  so  many  monitors  for  an  attack.  The  port  is 
moreover,  already  thoroughly  blockaded  by  the  enemy’s  possession  o; 
Fort  Pulaski,  whereas  Charleston  is  still  open  to  the  under- water  com 
merce  of  Europe.  Again  a serious  attack  on  Savannah  would  not  havt 
been  preceded  by  demonstrations  in  that  quarter  like  those  on  Genesis 
Point.  That  they  may  be  at  a loss  now  what  to  do  is  probable,  for  thej 
may  be  somewhat  disappointed  in  their  monitors  and  may  think  oui 
strength  here  much  greater  than  it  is. 

In  the  present  uncertainty  of  knowing  what  they  intend  doing,  if  it 
be  dangerous  to  leave  Wilmingtou  without  a proper  complement  oJ 
troops,  how  is  it  with  regard  to  Charleston,  that  warlike  Mecca  of  the 
Abolitionists,  when  it  takes  about  one  week  to  transport  5,000  men  from 
Wilmington  to  that  city? 

I am  aware  the  problem  is  difficult  to  solve,  but  the  great  secret  of 
war  is  to  know  when  and  what  to  give  up  in  order  to  save  more  impor- 
tant points. 

My  duty  is  to  defend  Charleston  and  Savannah ; hence  I may  think 
them  more  important  than  they  really  are ; but  with  the  present  con- 
dition of  our  railroad,  if  we  are  to  await  for  the  defense  of  either  of  those 
cities  the  departure  of  troops  from  Virginia  after  the  enemy  shall  have 
commenced  their  attack,  Wilmington,  Goldsborough,  and  Weldon  might 
as  well  be  in  their  possession  beforehand. 


Not  found. 


IAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


773 


At  all  events  my  friends  may  rest  assured  that  the  defense  of  Charles- 
m with  or  without  additional  troops  shall  be  worthy  of  a few  pages  in 
le  history  of  this  revolution.  The  enemy  may  destroy  this  city,  but 
ley  shall  not  take  it  so  long  as  I have  any  troops  to  defend  it  with. 

I will  let  yon  know  by  telegraph  when  the  hour  of  trial  shall  have 
rrived,  and*' then  I will'  be  happy  to  have  you  once  more  near  me. 
[ean while  hurry  on  the  heavy  ordnance  and  ammunition  as  rapidly  as 
ossible  via  Raleigh,  for  the  other  route  is  too  slow  and  uncertain. 

By  the  by,  I discharged  a few  days  ago  my  mounted  orderly,  the  fam- 
n s Aaron  Jones,  for  neglect  of  duty,  but  could  not  resist  his  appeal, 
hich  was,  u General,  I enlisted  purposely  to  be  with  you,  and  I would 
ither  die  under  you  than  live  under  any  other  general.”  I scolded  him 
nd  let  him  off. 

Yours,  truly, 

’ G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  February  11,  1863. 

irig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Commanding  District  of  Fast  Florida,  Lake  City : 

General  : You  have  doubtless  _seen  in  the  newspapers  of  the  day 
le  successful  results  of  the  plan  for  the  capture  of  the  U.  S.  steamer 
*aac  Smith  in  the  Stono  River,  and  I am  instructed  to  inquire  whether 
; may  be  practicable  for  you  to  do  something  of  a similar  character  in 
ae  Saint  Mary’s  River,  should  the  enemy  continue  to  send  his  gun- 
oats  into  that  stream  ? 

The  plan  which  was  carried  out  so  successfully  by  Colonel  Yates  was 
he  establishment  of  field  guns  in  favorable  positions  on  both  banks 
f the  river.  The  gunboat  was  allowed  to  pass  all  these  batteries  in 
er  ascent  without  drawing  fire  and  until  close  under  the  guns  of  the 
attery  highest  up  the  stream,  and  hence  when  falling  back  had  to  run 
be  gauntlet  of  all  the  artillery  and  the  fire  of  sharpshooters  with 
hich  the  banks  were  lined. 

| You  are  authorized  to  place  yourself  in  communication  with  Colonel 
Jinch,  commanding  the  troops  on  the  border  of  the  District  of  Georgia, 
nd  arrange  with  him  for  his  co-operation  and  assistance  under  your 

rders. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  February  11,  1863. 

General  : Upon  reflection  I prefer  the  10-inch  columbiad  in  the 
outheast  angle  of  Fort  Sumter  should  remain  where  it  is;  that  the 
Irooke  gun  (about  to  arrive)  should  be  x>laced  on  the  right  or  left  of 
t,  and  a 42-pounder  rifled  on  the  left  or  outlie  right  of  it,  according  to 
he  position  selected  for  the  Brooke  gun.  Should  these  guns  require 
raverses  between  them,  so  as  better  to  isolate  and  protect  them,  this 
Precaution  must  not  be  omitted.  With  Generals  Foster  and  Seymour 
n command  pf  a part  of  the  enemy’s  forces  intended  to  operate  against 
Charleston  we  must  expect  the  weak  point  of  Fort  Sumter  to  be  known 


774 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


to  them,  and  that  they  will  advocate  the  mode  of  attack  indicated  in 
my  letter  of  8tli  iustant ; hence  the  urgent  necessity  of  placing  as  many 
heavy  guns  in  position  (or  preparing  beforehand  as  many  platforms  for 
them)  as  time  and  our  limited  means  will  permit. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  February  12,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , T 7 a. : 

At  the  time  Wilmington  was  hard  pressed  I sent  there  temporarily 
the  only  42-pounder  rifle  in  Fort  Moultrie.  I also  allowed  a 10-inch  in 
transitu  for  here  to  be  retained  there,  and  am  informed  another  10-inch 
for  this  place  has  just  been  ordered  back  from  Florence,  S.  0.,  to  Wil- 
mington. I have  to  request  that  my  42-pounder  and  the  latter  10-inch 
be  ordered  here  at  once,  for  there  can  now  be  no  doubt  the  enemy  will 
attack  here  in  preference  to  Wilmington. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  12,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Fort  Sumter  reports  no  blockaders  in  sight  since  morning.  Reported 
from  Goldsborough  that  Foster  and  staff  left  New  Berne  on  31st  for 
Port  Royal.  It  is  reported  from  'Wilmington  that  all  transports  and 
troops  have  left  Morehead  City  southward.  All  my  troops  have  not 
yet  reached  here.  Strong  re-enforcements  should  be  ordered  here  at 
once.  Four  brigades  might  safely  be  sent  from  North  Carolina.  French 
steamer  Milan  expected  here  to-morrow,  which  indicates  attack  here. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  12,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  N.  C.: 

Send  back  immediately  all  my  troops  and  batteries,  with  my  42- 
pounder  rifle  from  Fort  Moultrie.  Attack  will  not  long  be  delayed,  I 
think. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters  Forces, 

Camp  Young , Ga.,  February  12,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff,  &c.: 

General:  In  obedience  to  instructions  requiring  me  to  report  the 
length  of  time,  &c.,  occupied  by  my  command  in  traveling  by  rail  from 
Wilmington  to  Savannah  is  respectfully  submitted. 

On  Wednesday  evening,  the  4th  instant,  at  live  o’clock,  I received 


CHAI'.XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


775 


orders  to  move  my  command  from  Masonborough,8  miles  from  Wilming- 
ton, to  Savannah,  the  division  quartermaster,  Major  Green,  of  Brigadier- 
General  Gist’s  staff,  having  arranged  for  the  transportation  by  railroad 
from.  Wilmington. 

In  obedience  to  orders  the  Twenty-fifth  Georgia  Regiment  \^as  in 
Wilmington  ready  to  take  fhe  cars  at  10  o’clock  p.  m.  of  the  4th,  and 
the  Twenty-ninth  and  Thirtieth  Georgia  Regiments  (the  remainder  of 
the  command)  on  the  following  day  at  12  m. 

Three  hours  after  the  arrival  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Regiment  at  the  depot 
at  Wilmington  the  train  upon  which  that  regiment  was  placed  attempted 
to  leave,  but  in  consequence  of  the  weakness  of  the  engine  could  not 
proceed.  The  three  rear  cars  of  this  train  were  then  detached  by  the 
managers  of  the  road  and  the  balance  proceeded  toward  Florence,  at 
which  point  they  arrived  about  6 o’clock  p.  m.  on  the  6th  instant,  and 
they  would  not  have  reached  that  place  at  that  time  had  not  an  engine 
of  the  Northeastern  Railroad,  which  had  been  waiting  at  Florence  to 
carry  this  train  to  Charleston,  been  sent  down  the  road  toward  Wil- 
mington in  order  to  bring  up  the  train.  The  three  cars  detached  as 
above  stated  did  not  leave  Wilmington  till  about  10  o’clock  on  the 
night  of  the  5th,  at  which  time  a train  composed  of  these  cars  and  enough 
others  to  carry  300  men  of  the  Thirtieth  Regiment  left.  This  train  suf- 
fered no  delay  except  that  caused  by  a defective  engine,  and  arrived  at 
Florence  at  12  m.  on  the  6th.  After  a delay  of  three  hours  at  Florence 
of  each  of  the  above-mentioned  trains  they  left  that  place  for  Charles- 
ton respectively  at  3 and  9 p.  m.  on  the  6th,  and  arrived  at  Charleston 
about  8 a.  m.  on  the  7th,  both  arriving  about  the  same  time.  After  ar- 
riving at  Charleston  these  troops  were  forwarded  without  delay  to  Sa- 
vannah, where  they  arrived  at  1 a.  m.  on  the  8th.  The  balance  of  the 
command,  to  wit,  Twenty-ninth  Georgia  Regiment  and  about  300  men 
of  the  Thirtieth  Georgia,  were  kept  at  the  depot  at  Wilmington  waiting 
transportation  from  the  time  of  their  arrival  there,  to  wit,  at  noon  of 
the  5th  until  2 a.  m.  of  the  6th,  at  which  time  they  were  placed  on 
board  of  two  trains  and  were  kept  waiting  without  any  ostensible  reason 
until  9.30  a.  m.  of  the  same  day,  when  they  left,  and  arrived  at  Florence 
at  9 a.  m.  of  the  7th.  This  train  was  delayed  something  more  than  an 
hour  by  the  running  off  the  track  of  a freight  train  going  toward  Wil- 
mington. The  rest  of  the  detention  after  leaving  Wilmington  was 
caused  by  weakness  of  the  engines,  they  at  times  appearing  to  be  too 
weak  to  move  the  trains  at  all.  The  troops  of  these  two  last  trains  left 
Florence  at  11  a.  m.  ofi  the  7th ; arrived  at  Charleston  about  11  p.  m. 
Left  Charleston  at  2.30  p.  m.  on  8th  instant  and  reached  Savannah  about 
11  p.  m.  same  day.  The  delay  in  Charleston  was  unavoidable,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  time  of  arrival  there,  the  want  *of  transportation  of 
baggage  through  Charleston  at  night,  and  the  necessity  of  procuring 
provisions  for  the  troops  there,  they  have  been  without  rations  for 
twenty-four  hours  by  reason  of  the  delays  in  Wilmington  and  the 
detentions  beyond  Florence. 

The  first  train,  which  left  Wilmington  with  eight  companies  of  the 
Twenty-fifth  Regiment,  was  passed  by  the  second  train,  which  left  Wil- 
mington about  seventeen  hours  after  the  first,  at  Fair  Bluff,  only  40 
miles  from  Wilmington;  and  the  engine  which  left  Florence  after  the 
| second  train  arrived  there  to  bring  up  the  first  train  met  the  first  train 
only  about  12  miles  from  Fair  Bluff*. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  C.  WILSON, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Georgia  Brigade . 


770  COASTS  OF  S.  a,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap. XXVI. 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

No.  6.  f Charleston , February  12,  1863. 

I.  Tlie  following  are  announced  as  the  existing  sub-divisions  of  this 
military  district  until  otherwise  ordered : 

1st.  jjrames  Island  and  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish,  to  be  known  as  Gist’s 
command,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Gist,  with  his  headquarters 
within  the  limits  of  his  command. 

2d.  Sullivan’s  Island  and  the  main-land  between  Cooper  Kiver  and  the 
Santee,  to  be  known  as  Keitt’s  command,  commanded  by  Col.  L.  M. 
Keitt,  with  his  headquarters  either  at  Mount  Pleasant  or  on  Sullivan’s 
Island,  as  he  may  deem  best  for  the  interests  and  administration  of  his 
command. 

3d.  Morris  Island,  commanded  by  Col,  B.  F.  Graham. 

4th.  Fort  Sumter,  commanded  by  Col.  Alfred  Bhett. 

II.  Commanding  officers  of  the  above-named  sub-divisions  are  charged 
with  the  thorough  administration  of  their  respective  commands  and  a 
strict  compliance  with  existing  orders  from  these  headquarters  and  from 
the  headquarters  of  the  department,  as  well  as  all  orders  and  regulations 
from  the  Secretary  of  War. 

III.  The  commanding  officers  of  the  first  and  second  sub-di visions 
will  cause  to  be  established  a medical  examining  board  for  furloughs 
and  discharges,  to  meet  at  or  near  their  headquarters  or  at  such  other 
point  within  the  limits  of  their  commands  as  may  best  suit  the  conveni- 
ence of  their  troops,  as  prescribed  iu  General  Orders,  No.  83,  Headquarters 
of  the  Department,  October  22,  1862,  and  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  these 
commanding  officers  to  grant  such  furloughs  and  discharges  as  may  be 
recommended  and  signed  in  due  form  by  the  examining  board  and  ap- 
proved by  the  senior  surgeons  of  their  sub  divisions,  as  presented  in 
General  Orders,  No.  83,  already  mentioned. 

The  sub-divisions  of  Fort  Sumter  and  Morris  Island  are  already  pro- 
vided for  in  Special  Orders,  No.  72,  from  these  headquarters,  which  are 
still  in  force.  Castle  Pinckney  and  the  city  of  Charleston  will  send  their 
applicants  for  furloughs  and  discharges  to  the  central  board  in  this  city, 
and  their  furloughs  and  discharges  ,will  be  granted  at  these  headquar- 
ters, as  well  as  those  from  Morris  Island  and  Fort  Sumter. 

IV.  The  troops  in  this  city  and  at  Castle  Pinckney  and  Fort  Bipley 
will  report  direct  to  these  headquarters  through  their  respective  com- 
manding officers,  except  in  cases  where  parts  of  regiments  or  battalions 
are  detached  and  the  report  concerns  matters  of  regimental  organiza- 
tion, when  the  report  will  be  made  to  their  regimental  or  battalion  com- 
manders. 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Bipley : 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  February  13,  1863. 
General  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , Y C.  > 

Your  course  is  approved.  Guns  are  on  the  way.  You  are  authorized 
to  lend  all  possible  aid  either  in  men  or  guns  that  you  can  venture  to 
spare  to  General  Beauregard.  I believe  an  attack  on  Charleston  almost 
certain  at  an  early  day. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War, 


CiiAiv  XXVI.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


777 


Executive  Department,  G.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  February  1 3,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

Dear  Sir  : The  Secretary  of  War  has  received  information  direct  from 
Kew  Berne  and  Wilmington  in  general  confirmation  of  the  telegrams  from 
Charleston.  He  had  already  instructed  General  Whiting  in  relation  to 
the  guns  and  such  forces  as  he  could  spare,  and  General  French  to  move 
his  troops,  so  as  to  place  and  keep  them  in  supporting  condition  ; all  in 
accordance  with  your  views  as  expressed  some  days  ago.  The  Secretary 
believes  that  the  attack  is  to  be  made  on  Charleston. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P ’ JAMES  CHESNUT,  Jr., 

Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp. 

If  the  enemy  is  strong  enough  it  may  not  be  improbable  that  the 
blockading  fleet  has  gone  to  Port  Koyal  to  convey  troops,  &c.,  to  Bull  s 
Bay  with  a view  of  a strong  demonstration  at  that  point,  that  he  may 
more  readily  take  the  railroad.  Respectfully  suggested. 


Charleston,  S.  C.  February  13, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Eight  blockaders  returned  yesterday  afternoon  ; New  Ironsides  also. 
I leave  to-day  for  Savannah  on  inspection  tour.^  BEAUREGAED 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Savannah , Ga.,  February  13,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staffs  &c.,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

General:  In  compliance  with  instructions  received  I have  the  honor 
to  make  the  following  report  relative  to  the  n*te  of  travel  of  my  com- 
mand from  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  to  Savannah,  Ga. 

The  Thirty  second  Georgia  Regiment  left  Wilmington,  JN.  C.,  on  Sat- 
urday, the  7th  instant,  at  2 o’clock  p.  m.,  and  arrived  in  Charleston,  S. 

I C.  on  Sunday,  the  8th  instant,  at  6 p.  m.  Left  Charleston  on  Monday, 
the  9th  instant,  between  10  and  11  a.  m.,  and  arrived  in  Savannah,  Ga., 
11  p.  m.  of  the  same  day.  This  regiment  was  delayed  in  Charleston  tor 

want  of  transportation,  as  heretofore  reported. 

The  Forty-seventh  Georgia  Regiment  left  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  at  12 
m.  on  Sunday,  the  8th  instant,  and  arrived  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  at  10 
a.  m.  on  Monday,  the  9th  instant.  Left  Charleston,  S.  C.,  at  5.30  p.  m. 
on  Monday,  the  9th  instant,  and  arrived  at  Savannah,  Ga.,  at  2.30  a. 
m.  on  Tuesday,  the  10th  instant. 

The  Fourth  Louisiana  Battalion  left  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  at  5 p.  m. 
ou  Sundav,  the  8th  instant;  reached  Charleston,  S.  C.,  at  6 p.  m.  on 
Monday,  the  9th  instant.  Left  Charleston,  S.  C.,  at  10  a.  m.  ou  Tues- 
day, the  10th  instant,  and  reached  Savannah  7 p.  m.,  on  the  same  day. 

1 Tlie  delay  of  this  battalion  in  Charleston  was  owing  to  the  tact  that 
transportation  was  not  ready  on  the  Charleston  hnd  Savannah  Railroad. 
Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

J 1 GKO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel,  Commanding  Brigade . 


778 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  14, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Ya. : 

Steamers  Ruby,  Leopard,  and  T.  D.  Wagner  arrived,  and  Douglas 
left  safely  during  last  night.  Have  called  attention  of  foreign  consuls 
formally  to  fact. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Savannah,  February  16,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

Everything  indicates  an  early  attack  on.  Charleston  or  Savannah, 
probably  former.  Enemy  is  accumulating  a large  force  at  Port  Royal; 
several  iron-clads  are  there.  General  Whiting  reports  only  5,000  men 
at  New  Berne  and  two  companies  at  Morehead  City.  I hope  to  be  re- 
enforced in  time.  General  Walker  lias  not  yet  reported.  The  services 
of  one  or  two  brigadiers  here  are  still  considered  indispensable. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


He  adquarters, 
Wilmington , February  16,  1863. 

General  Ripley,  Charleston : 

Clingman’s  brigade  is  moving  to  Beauregard’s  aid.  Sent  off  two  regi- 
ments to-day.  Others  will  follow  as  soon  as  transportation  is  ready. 

W.  B.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Military  Dist.  of  Soi^th  Carolina, 

Pocotaligo , February  16,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Savannah , Ga.: 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a characteristic  report  from  Private  J.  J. 
Magee,  of  the  Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen  and  Horse  Artillery,  detailed 
as  scout,  and  calling  your  attention  to  the  address,  courage,  and  zeal 
displayed  by  him. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier- Genera  l,  Comma n ding. 


[Indorsement.] 


Let  Private  Magee’s  name  be  mentioned  in  orders  for  courage,  zeal, 
and  address. 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 


Camp  Rutledge  Mounted  Riflemen  and  Horse  Arty., 

Pocotaligo , S.  C.,  February  14,  1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  your 
instructions  I visited  Hilton  Head  Island  on  the  night  of  the  11th,  and 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


779 


succeeded  in  capturing  and  bringing  off  safely  one  Caleb  Jones,  a native 
of  the  State  of  Maine  and  member  of  ihe  Ninth  Maine  Regiment.  Am 
indebted  to  the  courtesy,  of  Capt.  John  H.  Mickler,  Eleventh  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers,  for  the  use  of  a small  boat  and  3 of  his  men— 

Wells,  Gelston,  and  Reynolds — who  accompanied  me.  Leaviiif,  Dlu 
ton,  passed  down  May  River  to  Calibogue  Sound ; lay  on  oars  opposite 
Spanish  Wells;  made  observations.  At  9 p.  m.  a dense  fog  arose, 
crossed  Calibogue,  guided  by  stars;  landed  with  Private  Gelston,  and 
sent  boat  back  to  Bluffton.  At  daylight  on  12th  made  observations  of 
pickets,  posts,  &c. ; took  shelter  iu  narrow  belt  of  woods  between  old 
field  and  beach  100  yards  from  Baynard’s  house,  concealed  by  briers 
and  vines.  About  8 a,  m.  the  new  guard  passed  ( t ) on  beach  within  10 
feet,  and  8 on  field  within  30  feet  of  me.  Men  on  beach  discovered 
tracks  where  I landed,  but  having  taken  the  precaution  to  *a  k back- 
ward it  caused  no  uneasiness.  One  called  attention  to  old  guard  tracks, 
which  all  agreed  were  the  same  as  the  first. 

Frequently  during  the  day  parties  of  3 or  4 soldiers  passed  on  the 
field. side  unarmed;  also  several  negro  girls.  About  3 p.  m.  the  prisoner 
left  his  post  (at  Baynard’s),  where  there  were  5 pickets  besides  him- 
self and  2 or  more  members  of  the  signal  corps,  came  into  the  bushes, 
and  stopped  iu  a gully  within  10  feet  of  me,  took  ofi  coat  and  shirt,  sat 

down  to  examine  latter.  . J ^ ^ __ 

With  one  finger  on  lips  to  caution  silence,  pointed  repeater  and  or- 
dered him  to  come  to  me.  He  was  terribly  frightened,  begged  not  to 
shoot  him;  started  to  run;  ordered  to  stop,  which  he  did  at  once; 
beffffed  for  life;  in  half  minute  more  was  lying  concealed  in  custody, 
with  understanding  would  be  well  treated  if  behave,  or  brains  blown 
out  if  did  not.  Several  persons  passed  in  30  feet  atterward.  Lay  m 
same  place  from  3 to  9 p.  m,  then  hooted  like  an  owl. .Scat ; came 
across;  all  aboard;  off  safe;  opposite  post  halted  by  picket,  toj^  ^oys 
to  pull  faster;  muffled  oars;  soon  out  of  range.  Two  large  balls  of 
fire  displayed  from  observatory  on  house-top,  one  over  other,  but  so 

far  as  could  judge  no  pursuit  was  made.  ^ 171  , 

Left  Hilton  Head  at  9 p.  m.  on  13th;  8 miles  m boat,  17  horseback, 
took  train  at  Hardeeville,  and  reported  prisoner  at  headquarters  at 

10.30  a.  m.  14th. 

Respectfully  submitted.  MAr™ 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  16, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , 8.  G. : 

I have  ordered  two  or  three  good  regiments  to  report  to  you  from 
Charleston;  also.one  from  here;  latter  temporally  for  defense  ot  Red 
Bluff,  thence  railroad  bridge  if  necessary.  I think  enemy  may  try  you 

before  going  to  Charleston.  G T BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  February  17,  1863. 

H.  C.  Guerin,  ~ 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Major:  Brigadier-General  Clingmau’s  brigade  has  been  added  to 


780 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


the  command,  and  at  least  another  brigade  may  be  expected.  Events 
indicate  an  early  attack  by  the  enemy  by  land  and  water  on  a formida- 
ble scale,  to  meet  which  troops  will  doubtless  be  accumulated  in  the 
State  at  least  100  per  cent,  more  than  the  habitual  force  in  it  since  last 
September.  It  is  the  wish  therefore  of  the  commanding  general  that 
you  should  make  all  preparations  practicable  for  their  subsistence,  and, 
further,  that  efficient  provisions  should  be  made  to  guard  against  casual- 
ties, and  especially  the  cutting  oil  by  the  enemy  of  any  of  our  avenues 
of  supply. 

It  would  be  well  to  consult  with  Major  Lee  and  arrange  for  the  most 
efficient  means  of  transportation  practicable. 

Will  it  not  be  best  to  secure  an  abundant  supply  of  rice  and  sweet 
potatoes,  sugar  also,  as  suggested  by  Chief  of  Subsistence  Bureau,  to 
be  issued  iit  lieu  of  meat. 

All  that  can  be  done  to  provide  for  possible  exigencies  the  command- 
ing general  will  expect  that  you  will  do.  Communicate  directly  with 
your  chief  of  bureau  if  necessary. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  17,  18C3. 
Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  ’ 

Commanding  First  Military  District , Charleston , S.  C.  : 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker, 

Commanding  Pocotaligo , S.  C. : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  state  that 
he  had  forgotten  that  Captain  Elliott  was  your  inspector  of  batteries 
when  he  referred  in  his  last  to  your  ordnance  officer.  Your  under- 
standing of  the  gun  platforms  is  correct.  The  general  hopes  that  the 
troops  temporarily  ordered  to  you  from  the  First  Military  District  will 
enable  you  to  supply  artillerists  to  your  batteries,  and  additional  regi- 
ments may  possibly  be  sent  you.  The  general  desires  to  call  your 
attention  particularly  to  Boyd’s  Neck  Landing,  from  where  it  is  prob- 
able the  enemy  will  attempt  to  operate.  He  requests  also  that  you 
have  prepared  for  him  on  his  return  to  Charleston  a full  sketch  of  j our 
district  of  half  inch  to  one  inch  to  the  mile  (that  he  has  been  so  long 
and  anxiously  waiting  for);  no  finished  drawing  is  needed,  but  simplv 
an  outline  sketch,  showing  roads,  towns  (in  large  letters),  creeks,  aud* 
principal  marshes,  as  well  as  the  location  of  your  main  batteries:  the 
latter  lettered  A,  B,  C,  &c.,  from  the  Savannah  River  toward  the  Ash- 
epoo.  Without  a sketch  of  that  kind  the  general  will  find  it  impossible 
to  give  you  any  definite  orders  relative  to  your  district  in  case  of  any 
sudden  emergency.  I am  directed  also  to  remind  you  of  the  depots  of 
provisions  that  he  referred  to  in  conversation  when  last  at  Pocotaligo, 
and  to  add  that  Generals  Hagood  and  Mercer  must  be  kept  posted  up 
as  to  important  movements  of  the  enemy  in  your  district. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  TOTJTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  17,  1803. 
General  Beauregard,  Savannah , Ga.: 

One  10-inch  gun  here  to  be  disposed  of;  another  expected  to-night, 


Chap.  2tXVt]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  781 


Place  at  Fort  Johnson  not 
once  at  Fort  Ripley. 


ready  for  ten  days.  Can  be  mounted  at 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  17,  1863. 
General  Beauregard,  Savannah,  Ga.  ; 

Three  regiments  of  Clingman’s  brigade  arrived.  Ripley  suggests 
that  two  of  them  be  sent  to  Walker,  as  the  regiments  on  James  island 
have  detached  heavy  details  of  trained  men  on  artillery  service.  Chug- 
man,  with  remainder,  to  be  held  r.eady  at  railroad  bridge  ready  to 
move.  Meantime  order  for  transportation  given. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


SAVANNAH,  February  17,  1863 — 8.45  p.  m. 
Governor  Joseph  E.  Brown,  MilledgeviUe , Ga.: 

I have  ordered  all  State  troops  sent  here  to  be  subsisted.  The  arms 
you  refer  to  will  soon  be  here.  I hope  to  give  the  Abolitionists  a warm 

reUel>t'°U-  G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  17,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff , &e.,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Issue  my  proclamation  ; then  call  on  city  authorities  to  remove  non- 
combatants.  Recall  all  officers  and  soldiers  on  fuiiougli.  Order  move- 
able  troops  held  in  readiness;  provisions  not  issued  but  ready.  Pub- 
lish call  on  people  for  negroes  for  thirty  days.  Send  one  battery  with 
troops  to  General  Walker.  Attend  to  commissary  department.  Tell 
Ripley  prepare  shield  of  iron,  wood,  cotton,  or  cables  to  southeast  angle 
Sumter  : also  a covered  wav  from  Cummings  Point  to  Fort  Wagner. 

’ G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


PROCLAMATION. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  February  17,  1863. 

It  has  become  my  solemn  duty  to  inform  the  authorities  and  citizens 
of  Charleston  and  Savannah  that  the  movements  of  the  enemy’s  fleet 
indicate  an  early  land  and  naval  attack  on  one  or  both  of  these  cities, 
and  to  urge  that  all  persons  unable  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  strug- 
gle shall  retire. 

It  is  hoped  that  this  temporary  separation  of  some  of  you  from  your 
homes  will  be  made  without  alarm  or  undue  haste,  thus  showing  that 
the  only  feeling  that  animates  you  in  this  hour  o t supreme  trial  is  the 


782 


COASTS  OF  8.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


regret  of  being  unable  to  participate  in  the  defense  of  your  homes, 
your  altars,  and  the  graves  of  your  kindred. 

Carolinians  and  Georgians!  the  hour  is  at  hand  to  prove  your  devo- 
tion to  your  country’s  cause.  Let  all  able-bodied  men,  from  the  sea- 
board to  the  mountains,  rush  to  arms.  Be  not  exacting  in  the  choice  of 
weapons;  pikes  and  scythes  will  do  for  exterminating  your  enemies, 
spades  and  shovels  for  protecting  your  friends. 

To  arms,  fellow  citizens ! Come  to  share  with  us  our  dangers,  our 
brilliant  success,  or  our  glorious  death. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

Official : 

Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff.  < 


Circular.]  Hdqrs.  Department  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , S.  C .,  February  17,  1863. 

Circumstances  have  deprived  the  commanding  general  during  the 
last  forty  days  of  the  number  of  negro  laborers  necessary  for  the  com- 
pletion of  the  works  for  the  defense  of  Charleston,  in  default  of  which 
I am  now  instructed  to  call  on  the  planters  of  South  Carolina,  who  have 
ever  been  found  alive  to  the  impulses  of  duty,  to  send  to  Charleston  to 
Maj.  D.  B.  Harris,  chief  engineer,  with  the  utmost  dispatch,  at  least 
3,000  able-bodied  laborers,  with  spades  and  shovels.  The  negroes  will 
be  positively  returned  with  their  tools  in  thirty  days ; it  is  hoped  sooner. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 
Brigadier - General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  44.  ) Charleston , February  17,  18G3. 

I.  Brigadier-General  Clingman,  with  his  brigade,  now  arriving  in 
this  city,  will  report  to  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  commanding  First 
Military  District,  who  will  detach  from  his  own  command  two  regiments 
of  infantry,  with  orders  to  report  to  Brigadier-General  Walker  at  Poco- 
taligo. 

**###*# 

VIII.  All  movable  troops  that  are  not  specially  assigned  to  garrisons 
of  works  or  to  heavy  guns  in  position  will  be  held  ready  to  move  in 
light  marching  order  at  short  notice.  Three  days’  rations  will  be  issued 
and  held  uncooked  for  emergencies. 

IX.  Brigadier-General  Ripley  will  detach  an  efficient  field  battery 
from  his  command  and  direct  it  to  report  to  Brigadier-General  Walker 
at  Pocotaligo  as  soon  as  practicable,  with  the  proper  amount  of  ammu- 
nition for  the  field. 

* * * # * * # 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


783 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 

Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  com- 
manded by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  February  17,  1863. 


Commanding  officer. 


Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Hagood 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier 

Maj.  C.  Alston,  jr 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Finegan 

Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

4-j 

P 

CD 

8 

a 

© 

CO 

© 

g a 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

Troops. 

Officers. 

Men. 

© 

cS 

b/C 

© 

So 

be 

« ! 

l-M  © 

02 

-g  & 
SfC* 

© (3 
« 
bt 

be  I 

i ^ ! 

Heavy. 

r© 

£ 

First  Military  District  of 

332 

4,  960 

6,  442 

8,136 

224 

42 

South  Carolina. 

1,  986 

2,573 

Second  Military  District  , 

120 

1,  600 

7 

8 

of  South  Carolina. 

Thir  1 Military  District  of 

223 

2,  704 

3,  571 

4,  725 

3 

15 

South  Carolina. 

1,741 

2,  277 

10 

Fourth  Military  District 

112 

1,304 

9 

of  South  Carolina. 

235 

279 

12 

City  of  Charleston  siege 

11 

187 

train. 

District  of  Georgia 

262 

4,  851 

6, 108 

7,  473 

125 

36 

District  of  East  Florida. . . 

38 

780 

915 

1,  249 

3 

12 

District  of  Middle  Florida. 

30 

628 

734 

952 

1, 128 

1 

17, 014 

21,732 

27,  664 

371 

135 

Note. Infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  so  reported  on  return  tbat  they  cannot  be  separated. 


NOTES  FROM  ORIGINAL  RETURN. 


Effective  total  for  the  defense  of  Charleston,  including  First,  Second,  and  Third  Military 

Districts . 


Infantry 

Cavalry 

Light  artillery .. 
Heavy  artillery 

Total 


5, 859 

2. 556 
8*23 

1.557 

10, 795 


In  District  of  Georgia  there  are  ten  heavy  pieces  not  in  position  and 
twenty-five  light  pieces  not  in  service.  No  reason  assigned. 

In  District  of  East  Florida  there  are  two  6-pounders  not  yet  issued 
in  store. 


Effective  total  for  the  defense  of  Savannah,  District  of  Georgia. 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Light  artillery - 

Heavy  artillery 


1, 543 
1,  725 
493 
1, 703 


Total 


5, 464 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  18,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , (fee.,  Richmond : 

Shall  I call  on  Governors  of  Georgia  and  South  Carolina  for  all  the 
State  troops  and  militia  they  can  furnish  for  the  defense  of  Savannah 
and  Charleston.  If  so,  how  many  days?  Please  answer  immediately. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


784 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AXD  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  XXVI 


[Indorsement.] 


Inform  as  to  action  taken  with  regard  to  militia  of  South  Carolina, 
also  Governor  Brown’s  statement  in  relation  to  sending  two  regiments 
and  not  having  other  force.  If  Gem  ral  Beauregard  can  get  troops  of 
any  kind  let  him  do  it.  Six  months  is  the  lixed  time  of  militia. 

J.  D. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  18,  18G3. 
Governor  Joseph  E.  Beown,  Milled geville,  Ga. : 

Enemy  collecting  large  land  and  naval  forces  at  Port  Royal  to  attack 
this  place  or  Charleston.  Can  any  State  troops  or  militia  be  furnished 
for  the  defense  of  Savannah ; if  so,  how  many  ? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters  State  of  South  Carolina, 

Columbia , S.  <7.,  February  18,  18G3. 

Whereas  the  Abolitionists  are  threatening  to  invade  our  soil  with  a 
formidable  army,  and  whereas  the  most  effective  method  of  defending 
our  firesides,  our  wives,  and  our  children  is  to  meet  the  ruthless  invader 
at  the  threshold : 

Now,  therefore,  I,  M.  L.  Bonham,  Governor  and  Commander-in-Chief, 
by  virtue  of  the  authority  in  me  vested  by  the  constitution  and  the  acts 
of  the  General  Assembly  to  call  into  active  service  all  or  such  portion 
of  the  militia  as  I may  deem  necessary  to  repel  invasion,  do  issue  this 
my  proclamation,  calling  upon  the  patriotic  citizens  of  the  State  to  lend 
a prompt  and  willing  obedience  to  the  orders  of  the  Adjutant-General, 
this  day  issued,  ordering  a portion  of  the  troops  at  once  into  the  field, 
and  the  remainder  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  march  at  a mo- 
ment’s warning. 

Given  under  my  hand  and  seal  of  the  State  at  Columbia  this  18th  day 
of  February,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and 
sixty- three. 

M.  L.  BONHAM. 

W.  R.  Huntt, 

Deputy  Secretary  of  State. 


General  Orders,  ) State  of  S.  C.,  Adjt.  & Insp.  Gen.’s  Off., 

No.  10.  ( Columbia , February  18,  18G3. 

To  carry  into  effect  the  foregoing  proclamation  it  is  hereby  ordered: 

1.  That  the  commanding  officers  of  each  and  all  the  militiaVegiments 
of  this  State  convene  at  their  places  of  regimental  parade  on  Tuesday, 
the  24tli  day  of  February  instant.  All  persons  within  their  respective 
regiments  between  the  ages  of  sixteen  and  eighteen  and  between  forty 
and  fifty  years,  except  such  persons  as  are  exempted  from  ordinary 
militia  duty  and  from  actual  service  beyond  the  districts  in  which  they 
reside  by  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  the  General  Assembly  for  “the 
better  organization  of  the  militia,  and  for  other  purposes,”  ratified  on 
the  Gth  day  of  February  instant,  and  forthwith  proceed  to  organize  the 


785 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

persons  so  ordered  to  be  convened  into  companies  of  not  less  than  76 
and  not  more  than  100  men,  exclusive  of  commissioned  officers,  electing 
their  company  officers,  namely,  one  captain  and  three  ‘^tenants. 

II.  That  the  companies  organized  within  the  limits  of  the  F°urth  Bri- 
gade are  ordered  to  rendezvous  at  Charleston  on  Thursday,  the  26th 
instant;  those  within  the  limits  of  the  Tenth  Regiment  (Edgefield),  the 
Thirtv-ninth  Regiment  (Newberry  and  Lexington),  the  Fourteenth  Regi- 
ment (Orangeburg),  and  the  Fifteenth  Regiment  (Lexington  and  Orange- 
burg:') will  rendezvous  at  the  most  convenient  points  on  the  Blue  Ridge 
Railroad  and  the  Greenville  and  Columbia  Railroad,  so  as  to  move  on 
Fridav  morning,  the  27th  instant,  for  Charleston.  . 

Ill  The  commanding  officers  of  the  companies  are  hereby  authorized 
to  issue  certificates  of  transportation  for  their  respective  commands,  and 
the  troops  hereby  ordered  to  rendezvous  will  provide  themselves  with 
clothing,  blankets,  and  three  days’  rations. 

IV.  After  the  companies  shall  have  arrived  in  camp  they  will  organ- 
ize into  battalions  and  regiments  by  the  election  of  field  officers,  under 

orders  hereafter  to  be  issued.  ^ , , , 

V.  The  remaining  companies  hereby  ordered  to  be  organized  will  hold 

themselves  in  readiness  to  move  at  the  shortest  notice. 

VI  The  commanding  officers  of  the  regiments  will  immediately,  alter 
the  companies  have  been  organized,  cause  accurate  rolls  thereof  to  be 
made  out  in  duplicate  and  return  one  copy  forthwith  to  this  office, 
together  with  a roster  of  the  company  officers. 

VII.  The  commanding  officers  of  regiments  now  m commission  are 
charged  with  the  extension  of  this  order  without  further  notice,  and 
also  with  the  organization  of  the  companies.  . , _ _ , 

This  will  not  interfere  with  the  organization  required  under  General 
Orders,  No.  8,  heretofore  issued. 

By  order  of  the  Governor : A 0 GAELINGT0N, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of  South  Carolina. 


General  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

il  1 Columbia , February  18,  1868. 

I.  The  troops  ordered  to  rendezvous  by  General  Orders,  No.  10,  from 
this  office,  are  called  into  service  for  the  term  of  three  months  unless 

S°II.  The  organization  directed  by  General  Orders,  No.  10,  will  include 
all  persons  between  the  ages  therein  stated  now  holding  offices  in  the 
militia,  as  well  as  those  who  may  be  elected  in  pursuance  of  GeneraL 
Orders,  No.  8,  heretofore  issued  from  this  office. 

By  order  of  the  Governor : A.  q,  GARLIKGTON, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of  South  Carolina. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  18, 1863. 

General  Beauregard,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Governor  Bonham  has  called  out  three  regiments.  Secretary  and 
President  promise  all  practicable  troops  and  ordnance.  Another  10- 

50  R R— vol  xiv 


786  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

inch  columbiad  is  ready  to  be  sent  and  7-inch  rifle  nearly  ready.  One 
brigade  will  follow  Clingman’s  and  another  held  ready. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  18, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff \ Charleston , S.  C. : 

Mount  that  10-inch  temporarily  at  Fort  Ripley;  have  platform  pre 
pared  for  it  immediately  at  Fort  Johnson,  as  already  directed. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  45.  f Charleston , February  18,  1863. 

I.  It  may  possibly  become  absolutely  necessary  to  diminish  the  ration 
of  bacon,  when  issued,  to  four  ounces;  in  which  event  there  will  be 
substituted  one-fifth  of  a pound  of  sugar,  this  being  in  addition  to  the 
sugar  or  molasses  now  issued,  to  wit,  six  pounds  of  sugar  to  the  hundred 
rations,  or  one  gill  of  molasses  per  man  in  lieu  of  the  regular  sngar  ra- 
tion. The  intrepid  Army  of  the  Potomac  now  receive  this  ration. 

Officers  of  the  subsistence  department,  however,  will  be  expected  to 
exhaust  all  possible  efforts  to  secure  subsistence,  and  will  be  held  to  a 
rigid  accountability  for  any  want  of  energy,  efficiency,  or  intelligent 
development  of  the  resources  of  the  country. 

* # # # # # # 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  19, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff ’ Ac.,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

Order  another  detached  battery  on  Cummings  Point,  each  armed  with 
two  heavy  rifled  guns  and  one  Dahlgren ; latter  guns  from  east  face 
replaced  with  rifled  guns.  Make  display  of  troops  on  south  end  of 
Morris  Island.  Fire  few  rockets  there  at  night.  Fire  salute  from  vari- 
ous points  of  island  on  22d  with  heavy  shells  properly  arranged. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Va.,  February  20,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

From  communication  had  with  the  Governors  of  South  Carolina  and 
Georgia  we  have  reason  to  believe  the  former  could  not  organize  and 
furnish  militia  for  many  weeks  and  the  latter  can  only  aid  with  two 
regiments,  which  we  have  hastened  to  arm.  If  you  have  special  reason 
to  believe  that  effective  aid  could  be  derived  from  either  by  the  call 
proposed  report,  that  the  President  may  determine. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War . 


Chap. 


XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


787 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  20,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

Governor  Bonham  has  promised  three  regiments  State  Reserves,  Gov- 
ernor Brown  two  regiments,  and  General  Mercer  says  over  ^,000  inde- 
pendent volunteers  can  be  obtained  for  the  emergency . It  is  probable 
more  could  be  had  in  this  State  and  South  Carolina.  It  they  could  be 
armed  they  would  answer  well  behind  fortification BEAUREGARD. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  20, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Focotaligo , S.  C. : 

Cooke’s  brigade  is  ordered  to  report  to  you  in  place  of  troops  from 
First  District.  Post  it  to  best  advantage.  ^ BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Wilmington,  February  20,  1863. 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston: 

I have  sent  you  Cooke’s  brigade,  a good  one;  600  went  this  morning ; 
600  will  go  this  evening.  Keep  the  transportation  well  m motion. 
Keep  me  advised.  w H ^ WHITING 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  20,  1863. 

General  Beauregard,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Clingman’s  brigade  arrived.  Cooke’s  brigade  will  follow.  Ransom’s 
is  held  ready,  subject  however  to  needs  ^qkdaK 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  43. 


Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 
Richmond , Va .,  February  20,  1863. 

# * * * * * * 
XXIII.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  B.  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Con- 
federate States,  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Charleston,  ^.  C.,  and 
report  to  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  commanding,  for  assignment  to 
duty.  „ 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


U.  S.  Steam  Frigate  New  Ironsides, 
Off  Charleston , February  21,  1863. 


To  the  commanding  general  of  the  military  forces  within  the  waters  of 

Charleston  Harbor : 

General:  Having  been  charged  by  Admiral  DuPcrnt,  the  com- 


788  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

mander-in-chief  of  the  U.  S.  naval  forces  upon  this  coast,  with  the  duty 
of  delivering  a letter  from  Lord  Lyons,  the  British  embassador  at  Wash- 
ington, to  the  commander  of  the  English  war  ship  Petrel,  at  anchor  in 
Charleston  Harbor,  which  was  sent  by  an  officer  from  the  English  em- 
bassy direct  to  Port  Eoyal,  I have  the  honor  to  represent  to  you  that 
for  this  purpose  only  I sent  in  to-day  the  U.  S.  steamer  Flambeau,  Com- 
mander J.  H.  Upshur.  That  officer  informs  me  that  in  obedience  to  my 
orders  he  proceeded  to  the  entrance  of  Charleston  Harbor,  observing  all 
the  forms  and  precautions  appropriate  to  such  an  occasion,  hoisting  the 
white  flag  at  the  fore,  firing  two  blank  cartridges  to  attract  attention, 
and,  taking  up  a position  sufficiently  near  only  to  insure  the  recognition 
of  the  flag  of  truce,  anchored  his  vessel.  Very  soon  afterward  a shot 
was  fired  deliberately  at  him  from  a battery  on  shore  and  then  three 
others  successively,  each  of  which  struck  very  near  his  ship. 

As  I entertain  not  a doubt  that  this  originated  in  some  mistake,  which 
I can  neither  account  for  nor  guard  against,  and  as  by  an  arrangement 
entered  into  between  Commander  Upshur  and  the  officers  who  met  him 
under  that  flag  of  truce  I may  have  occasion  to  send  in  a flag  ot  truce 
again  in  a few  days,  I have  felt  it  my  duty  to  call  your  attention  to  this 
occurrence,  not  doubting  that  you  will  be  glad  to  avail  yourself  of  this 
occasion  to  explain  it,  and  to  point  out  to  me,  if  such  there  may  have 
been,  any  irregularities  on  my  part  which  authorized  such  a violation 
of  the  flag,  which  from  time  immemorial  has  been  used  by  parties  at  war 
with  each  other  to  cover  and  to  promote  acts  of  necessity,  of  comity, 
and  often  of  mercy  to  one  side  or  the  other,  and  in  this  case  especially 
an  act  of  disinterested  courtesy  and  accommodation  to  the  representa- 
tive of  Her  Britannic  Majesty  at  the  Government  of  Washington. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

T.  TURNER, 

Commodore  and  /Senior  Officer  Present. 

P.  S. — This  letter  has  been  detained  for  some  opportune  occasion  to 
send  it  in. 


[Indorsement.] 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  February  27,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Brigadier-General  Ripley  for  a report  of  the 
facts. 


THOMAS  JORDAN,  C.  8. 


Savannah,  February  22, 1863. 

John  Miller,  John  W.  JEvans,  W.  J.  Owens,  Augusta , Ga. : 

Gentlemen  : Organizations  of  companies  or  battalions  for  the  defense 
either  of  Charleston  or  Savannah  will  remain  in  Augusta,  drilling  and 
perfecting  themselves  in  the  use  of  arms,  prepared  and  ready  to  move  to 
either  of  the  first-named  cities  on  short  notice. 

As  soon  as  the  enemy  has  selected  his  point  of  attack  and  begins  to 
make  his  preparations  therefor  these  organizations  will  be  informed 
thereof  by  telegraph,  and  will  be  expected  to  depart  to  the  place  or  city 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


789 


ordered  to  by  tbe  next  train  leaving  after  the  reception  of  orders,  bring* 
ing  with  them  cooked  rations  for  at  least  five  days. 

Before  leaving  Augusta,  as  thus  ordered,  the  officer  m command  will 
telegraph  the  officer  in  command  at  either  Charleston  or  Savannah,  as 
the  place  of  destination  may  be,  the  time  of  their  departure  for  said 
city,  in  order  that  due  preparation  may  be  made  for  their  reception  and 
proper  assignment  of  duty  on  arrival.  ~ 

The  troops  thus  received  from  Augusta  to  assist  m the  defense  ot 
either  Charleston  or  Savannah  will  be  discharged  as  soon  as  the  press- 
iug  emergency  which  has  induced  them  so  patriotically  to  respond  to 
iny  proclamation  shall  cease  to  exist.  . 

It  is  understood,  however,  that  no  claim  of  pay  for  services  thus  ren-^ 
dered  shall  be  made  against  the  Government  without  the  approval  or 
the  War  Department.  Rations  and  transportation  from  and  back  to 
Augusta  will  be  allowed  by  the  Government. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ BEAUREGARD)  - 

General , Commanding. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  23, 1863. 

Gov.  M.  L.  Bonham,  Columbia , 8.  C.: 

I have  received  yet  no  instructions  from  War  Department  in  answer 
to  my  application,  but  will  receive  those  two  regiments  on  same  terms 
as  were  the  eight  just  discharged.  I leave  to-morrow  tor  Charleston, 
where  I will  give  all  necessary  orders.  & T BEAUREGAED. 


GoldsborouGH,  N.  C.,  February  24, 1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding , Charleston , 8.  C.: 

General:  I am  in  charge  of  the  troops  in  this  State,  and  am  anxious 
to  co-operate  in  the  defense  of  my  native  State.  Please  call  upon  me 
for  whatever  of  assistance  we  can  render.  Commodore  Lynch  has  re- 
auested  me  to  write  to  you  and  tender  his  own  services  and  those  ot  his 
officers  and  men  to  work  guns  or  perform  whatever  duty  you  may  re- 
quire. He  was  much  pleased  to  hear  that  you  intended  to  fire  by  bat- 
tery at  the  iron-clads,  and  thinks  that  they  can  be  damaged  m no  other 
way.  He  suggests  the  shortening  of  the  priming  wires,  to  prevent  their 
spiking  the  guns,  as  at  Port  Royal.  May  not  the  Yankee  fleet  return  to 
Wilmington,  having  become  intimidated  by  the  prospect  at  Charleston  1 
We  are  not  so  strong  as  we  would  wish  to  be.  Be  assured  of  my  earnest 
desire  to  aid  my  own  people  in  every  possible  way. 

V«ry  respectfully,  D H mLL> 

Major- General. 


February  24,  1863—12  o’clock. 

General  Beauregard  : . 

Under  the  hurried  and  defective  organization  and  in  absence  ot  in- 
formation from  Richmond  and  in  view  ©f  want  of  preparations  ior 


790 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


transportation,  supplies,  &c.,  the  troops  will  not  rendezvous  to-morrow 
and  next  day,  but  will  complete  organization. 

Wait  further  notice. 

M.  L.  BONHAM. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  27, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

So  long  as  enemy’s  fleet  is  still  at  Port  Royal  you  can  run  no  risk  in 
supporting  Genesis  Point.  Will  endeavor  to  re-enforce  you  from  here 
at  proper  time  if  practicable. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Ela., 

Charleston , S.  0.,  February  27,  1863. 

General  Thomas  Jordan: 

In  reference  to  the  communication  of  Commodore  Turner,  command- 
ing blockading  squadron  of  the  enemy  off  this  port,  I have  the  honor 
to  report: 

At  9.45  a.  m.  on  the  21st  instant  I received  from  the  commanding 
officer  of  Fort  Sumter  the  following  telegram:  “A  Yankee  steamer 
close  in  with  a white  flag ; looks  as  if  she  wished  to  communicate.’’  By 
my  direction  the  following  answer  was  returned:  “Keep  her  at  a 
proper  distance.” 

Having  occasion  to  go  to  Fort  Sumter  I proceeded  thither  and 
learned  that  while  she  was  coming  rapidly  in  several  shots  had  been 
fired  from  a battery  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  which  had  the  effect  of  bring- 
ing her  to  an  anchor.  I sent  Captain  Nance,  assistant  adjutant-gen- 
eral, with  Captain  King,  First  Regiment  Artillery,  to  meet  the  boat 
from  the  enemy’s  steamer.  Captain  Nance  reported  on  his  return  that 
the  boat  was  to  deliver  a letter  to  the  commander  of  Her  Majesty’s  ship 
Petrel,  then  in  this  harbor,  and  letters  to  certain  prisoners  captured  in 
the  Stono.  These  Captain  Nance  received.  The  officer  of  the  enemy 
who  communicated  with  him  wanted  to  know  why  his  flag  had  been 
fired  on ; to  which  Captain  Nance  replied  that  it  was  to  bring  him  to. 
Captain  Nance  further  told  him  that  if  any  answer  was  to  be  returned 
a white  flag  would  be  hoisted  on  Fort  Sumter,  when  a ship  could  be  sent 
to  the  mouth  of  Maffit’s  Channel,  where  she  would  be  met  by  a boat. 
This  ended  the  conference.  Upon  questioning  the  officer  commanding 
the  battery  from  which  the  shots  were  fired,  he  informed  me  that  he 
saw  the  flag  borne  by  the  Flambeau  perfectly  well,  and  also  saw  her 
boat  out  taking  soundings,  and  that  he  fired  the  shots  as  a notification 
that  the  vessel  was  to  come  to  and  cease  that  proceeding,  and  that,  as 
it  was  not  done  until  the  fourth  shot  had  been  fired,  had  the  boat  not 
stopped  the  sounding  he  intended  to  open  his  whole  battery  directly 
upon  the  vessel  with  accurate  aim.  His  information  *as  to  the  taking 
of  soundings  was  corroborated  by  reports  from  other  points,  and  as  the 
enemy  have  shown  no  disposition  to  communicate  by  flag  of  truce  until 
it  is  notorious  that  it  is  their  intention  to  attack  if  they  feel  strong 
enough — and  the  proceedings  of  the  boat  of  the  Flambeau  looked  very 
much  indeed  as  though  the  enemy  was  taking  ad  vantage  of  the  occasion 
to  reconnoiter — I approved  the  proceedings  of  the  officer  who  fired  the 
shots,  and  have  reiterated  the  orders  to  allow  no  reconnaissance  under 
any  pretext  whatever.  I have  further  respectfully  to  suggest  that  as 


791 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

officers  of  neutral  nations  never  have  been  mediums  of  communica- 
tion for  the  authorities,  military  or  civil,  of  this  Confederacy,  the  prac- 
tice of  allowing  the  enemy  to  communicate  with  this  port  by  flags  ot 
truce  on  any  pretext  whatever  at  the  present  juncture  should  be  put  a 

stop  to.  , _ . x 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


Charleston,  February  27, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : I am  desirous  of  making  some  experiments  with  torpedoes? 
for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  directions  of  the  forces  consequent 
on  explosions  when  accomplished  against  a vesseFs  side  and  7 feet  below 
the  surface  of  the  water. 

I am  induced  to  believe  that  the  entire  force  will  be  expended  through 
the  side  of  the  vessel,  for  the  reason  that  this  is  the  only  compressible 
substance  in  contact  with  the  torpedo,  the  water  surrounding  it  being 
perfectly  non-com pressible  and  not  yielding  except  by  actual  displace- 
ment, which  requires  a certain  lapse  of  time  to  overcome  inertia  ot  rest, 
a period  most  probably  greater  than  will  be  required  for  the  burning  of 
a charge  sufficiently  great  to  burst  in  the  side  of  the  vessel.  I have 
nearly  completed  all  the  arrangements  necessary  for  making  the  experi- 
ment, and  now  only  need  a hulk  to  operate  upon. 

Should  this  hypothesis  be  substantiated  by  actual  experiment,  then 
torpedoes,  fired  by  percussion  and  borne  at  the  extremities  of  spars 
suspended  below  small  boats,  may  be  advantageously  used  against  the 
enemy’s  vessels,  including  iron-clads. 

I have  prepared  several  torpedoes  to  make  the  test,  and  their  design 
being  novel  and  perhaps  interesting,  I would  be  glad  to  submit  one  of 
them  to  the  examination  of  the  commanding  general  at  any  time  that 
may  be  named. 

Arrangements  have  been  made  to  attach  one  of  these  torpedoes  to  the 
iron-clad  Ghicora. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

SerVant’  FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District  South  Carolina, 
Pocotaligo , 8.  0.,  February  27,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  memoranda  of  operations  con- 
templated in  Third  Military  District,  with  detailed  instructions  to  com- 
manding officers,  between  the  Coosawhatchie  and  Savannah  Rivers. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J W.  S.  WALKER, 

• Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Additional  instructions  will  be  sent.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jeffords’  in- 
structions for  the  movement  of  retreat,  indicated  in  memoranda,  were 
sent  to  him  last  July. 


792 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  (Chap.  XXVI. 


[In closure  No.  1.] 

Memoranda  for  operations  in  Third  Military  District. 

The  varied  contingencies  of  attack  on  the  long  and  accessible  line  of 
my  defense  could  not  admit  of  entire  detail.  It  must  be  left  iu  some 
points  to  the  directions  of  the  immediate  commanders. 

I inclose  my  orders  to  them  as  indicating  the  probable  movements  of 
the  enemy  and  the  corresponding  line  of  defense. 

It  may  be  stated,  in  general  terms,  that  it  is  throughout  a defense  of 
causeways,  over  rice  fields  or  swamps,  with  flanks  of  difficult  approach, 
which  must  be  watched  by  riflemen. 

The  great  difficulty  will  be  to  ascertain  the  main  point  of  the  attack 
and  concentrate  in  time  to  resist  it.  Re-enforcements  should  be  sent  to 
Green  Pond,  Pocotaligo,  Coosawhatchie,  Grahamville,  and  Hardeeville, 
as  the  strength  and  point  of  the  attack  may  indicate.  Should  any  por- 
tion of  the  line  be  cut  by  the  enemy  in  force  so  large  that  their  dislodg- 
ment  would  be  too  hazardous  to  be  attempted  by  the  troops  at  my  com- 
mand and  the  limited  increase  that  could  be  expected  by  the  railroad, 
or  should  they  occupy  any  part  of  the  road  in  General  Hagood’s  district, 
I would  consider  that  the  line  of  the  railroad  be  evacuated  by  the  force 
in  my  district,  in  which  case  the  entire  command,  save  that  portion 
west  of  New  River  and  the  Great  Swamp,  will  retire  in  the  direction  of 
Walterborough.  The  portion  of  my  command  west  of  New  River  will 
retire  toward  the  trestle  work  over  Savannah  River  and  look  to  Savan- 
nah for  support.  Should  the  enemy,  after  forcing  in  overwhelming  num- 
bers any  portion  of  my  line,  advance  into  the  country,  with  the  apparent 
intention  of  striking  the  South  Carolina  Railroad,  I will  concentrate  my 
force  behind  the  Edisto  Fiver  and  resist  their  progress. 

Should  the  movement,  after  driving  back  General  Hagood’s  force,  in- 
dicate an  effort  to  approach  Charleston  in  that  direction,  my  command 
will  be  moved  to  his  support  over  the  Edisto  by  bridge  at  Red  Bank  or 
by  Gioliam’s  Ferry,  as  circumstances  might  indicate.  I would  expect 
General  Hagood  to  send  guides  to  conduct  me  to  the  line  of  defense  he 
was  occupying. 

In  the  event  of  the  enemy’s  having  forced  the  last  line  of  defense 
behind  the  Ashley  River,  I would  proceed  to  Charleston  by  Summerville 
and  across  the  upper  branches  of  the  Cooper  River  by  road  leading  to 
mouth  of  Cooper  River  on  east  side. 

The  execution  of  all  these  movements  supposes  the  absence  of  any 
special  orders  from  the  general  commanding.  1 have  ordered  the  chief 
commissary  of  my  division  to  carry  three  days’  supply  of  provisions  to 
Walterborough.  Should  I remain  in  that  vicinity  my  supplies  would 
have  to  be  sent  to  George’s  Station  or  Ridgeville  and  drawn  by  wagons 
to  Walterborough,  or  some  convenient  point  behind  the  Edisto. 

The  telegraph  operators,  who  will  travel  with  me  with  their  apparatus, 
will  be  able  to  inform  the  commanding  general  of  my  wants.  A depot 
should  be  established  at  George’s  Station,  or  some  accessible  point  on 
the  railroad,  with  several  days’  rations,  for  the  supply  of  my  troops, 
behind  or  in  front  of  the  Edisto. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier  General , Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla.,  Charleston , S.  C.,  Feb.  28, 1863. 

This  memorandum  is  furnished  in  obedience  to  orders  of  general  com- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


793 


manding,  after  a conference  held  at  Pocotaligo,  on  the  24th  instant,  with 
Generals  Walker  and  Hagood,  when  verbal  instructions  were  given  them 
relative  to  their  future  movements,  looking  to  a concert  of  action,  as  far 
as  practicable,  in  the  event  of  an  attack  by  the  enemy,  now  concentrating 
a large  force  at  Port  Royal. 

6 G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


[Incloaure  No.  2.] 

Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District  S.  C., 

No.  24.  ) Pocotaligo , February  7,  1863. 

I.  Maj.  A.  0.  Izard  is  assigned  to  the  special  command  of  troops  at 
and  between  New  River  Bridge  and  Savannah  River. 

II.  Should  the  enemy  make,  an  attack  in  force  on  Red  Bluff  without 
a demonstration  of  a land  attack  at  any  other  point  west  of  the  Oketie 
the  following  dispositions  will  be  made  : Lieutenant-Colonel  Stokes  will 
move  with  three  companies  of  his  battalion  to  the  vicinity  of  Camp  De 
Saussure,  on  Screven’s  Ferry  road. 

Captain  Earle  will  move  his  battery,  with  the  infantry  support,  to  the 
same  point.  Should  other  points  be  threatened  with  a land  attack  the 
commanding  officer  at  New  River  will  make  such  disposition  of  his  force 
as  the  strength  of  the  respective  demonstrations  require.  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Gantt  will  move  the  remaining  company  at  Hardeeville  to  New 
River  Bridge.  In  case  of  an  attack  on  Red  Bluff  General  Mercer  will 
be  immediately  informed  of  it.  In  case  of  the  advance  of  the  enemy 
from  Red  Bluff  the  cavalry  should  dismount  and  skirmish  with  them, 
falling  back  toward  Cheves’ Battery,  at  junction  of  the  Screven’s  Ferry 
road  and  Tunbridge  Landing  road.  Should  the  line  of  the  enemy’s 
march  indicate  an  attack  by  the  Purysburg  road  a portion  of  the  force 
should  be  detailed  to  meet  them  at  the  battery  on  Purysburg  road,  1£ 
miles  from  Haines’.  Should  he  attack  us  in  that  position,  the  force  left 
at  Cheves’  Battery  should  follow  him  up  and  attack  him  in  flank  under 
cover  of  the  swamps.  Should  he  make  the  attack  on  Cheves’  Battery, 
a flank  movement  by  Cheves’  house  should  be  guarded  against. 

These  movements  will  of  course  be  affected  by  the  relative  strength 
of  the  enemy,  but  it  may  be  laid  down  as  a rule  that  in  the  State  of 
South  Carolina,  upon  ground  selected  by  ourselves,  the  enemy  should 
be  repulsed  if  not  exceeding  the  proportion  of  five  to  one.  Where  they 
have  to  cross  a causeway  and  cannot  make  a flank  they  should  be  beaten 
if  ten  to  one.  Should  the  enemy  advance  to  the  Purysburg;  road  it 
would  be  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  railroad.  The  way  of  re- 
treat, therefore,  should  be  toward  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  Savannah 
River. 

Should  they  attack  the  Cheves  Battery,  the  line  of  retreat  should  be 
down  the  Screven’s  Ferry  road  and  by  the  by-road  to  work  on  the 
Purysburg  road  or  by  the  trestle  bridge  over  Savannah  River. 

Bv  order  of  Brigadier  General  Walker: 

J E.  H.  BARNW^ELL, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosur©  No.  3.] 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Pocotaligo , 8.  (7.,  February  11,  1863. 

Col.  C.  J.  Colcock: 

Colonel:  Should  the  enemy  come  in  overwhelming  force,  you  might 


794 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  0 A.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI.  ij 


make  a successful  stand  at  your  first  position  after  leaving  Coosaw- 
hatchie.  Should  he  come  in  overwhel  ming  force,  he  would  send  a strong  i 
detachment  arouud  your  right  flank  beyond  the  small  causeway  and  i 
thus  force  a retreat  to  the  works  at  Coosawhatchie. 

The  woods  upon  the  left  of  the  position  near  the  fiver  should  be  cut  ij 
down,  so  that  the  guns  from  Coosawhatchie  could  command  the  approach 
of  the  enemy  on  your  left  flank. 

Should  the  enemy  approach  in  great  force,  your  only  hope  would  be 
to  hold  the  works  at  Coosawhatchie,  which  you  might  be  able  to  do  ! 
until  re-enforced.  A desperate  and  determined  defense  should  be  made  I 
at  that  position.  If,  however,  you  should  be  forced  to  retire,  the  best 
line  of  retreat  would  be  by  the  road  to  Pocotaligo,  in  order  to  form  a 
junction  with  me.  Should  that  road,  however,  be  taken  by  the  enemy, 
your  line  of  retreat  would  be  by  Possum  Course  [Corner?],  above  the 
point  where  the  Coosawhatchie  and  Tulifiny  branch.  This  crossing  is 
only  practicable  for  cavalry  and  infantry,  and  the  cavalry  should  take 
the  footmen  behind  them.  Your  wagons  and  artillery  would  have  to 
cross  higher  up,  at  a point  marked  on  the  map  as  Hickory  Hill  Post- 
Office.  It  is  proper  for  me  to  state  that  should  I be  forced  fromPoco- 
taligo  I shall  retire  to  the  Salkehatchie  Bridge,  from  thence  to  Waiter- 
borough.  Should  you  be  obliged  to  abandon  Coosawhatchie,  you  will 
endeavor  to  form  a junction  with  me.  You  will  send  two  of  your 
guides  to  Possum  Corner  and  two  to  the  crossing  above,  in  order  that 
the  route  may  be  thoroughly  understood.  It  may  be  considered  a 
maxim  on  our  long  line  of  defense,  with  a force  so  inadequate  for  the 
purpose,  that  the  commanding  points  only  can  be  defended.  In  your 
special  command  that  commanding  point  is  the  bridge  and  railroad  over 
the  Coosawhatchie  River.  If  that  can  be  defended  you  should  be  re- 
enforced from  Pocotaligo  and  from  Charleston.  It  the  railroad  is  worth 
holding,  the  re-enforcements  should  be  strong  enough  to  drive  the  enemy 
from  that  portion  of  the  road  west  of  the  Coosawhatchie  which  they 
may  have' seized.  If  not,  we  must  look  toward  Walterborough  and  the 
Edisto  River  as  the  second  line  of  defense  and  base  of  operations.  We 
would  then  have  to  depend  upon  George’s  Station  and  Branchville  as 
points  of  supply.  We  should  hope  for  victory,  but  be  prepared  for 
defeat,  which  would  only  be  temporary,  and  might  be  made  glorious. 


Yours,  very  sincerely, 


W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding . 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District, 

No.  50.  | Pocotaligo , February  23,  1863. 

In  case  the  enemy  land  and  advance  from  Port  Royal  Ferry  the  pickets 
at  Cowpens,  at  Mack  ay’s  Point,  and  on  Kean’s  Keck  road,  near  the  bridge 
over  Chisolm’s  Island,  will  remain  concealed  from  observation.  All  the 
rest  will  retire  in  the  direction  of  the  main  body  at  Leverett’s,  watch- 
ing the  movements  of  the  enemy.  A picket  at  Leverett’s  will  climb  the 
tree  at  that  post  and  report  to  headquarters. 

Should  the  enemy  land  at  Mackay’s  Point  and  Port  Royal  Ferry,  all 
the  pickets  will  retire.  Should  he  laud  at  Mackay’s  Point  only,  all  the 
pickets  will  retire  save  those  at  Port  Royal  Ferry  and  Chisolm’s  Bridge. 
Upon  the  arrival  of  the  pickets  at  Garden’s  Corner,  a squad  wdl  be  sent 
down  the  Combahee  Ferry  road.  They  will  conceal  themselves  at  the 
side  of  the  road  and  watch.  They  can  send  report  of  the  enemy’s  ad- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  795 

vance  up  the  road  by  any  one  of  those  by-roads  leading  into  Combahee 
River  road. 

A large  squad  will  also  be  sent  up  the  Sheldon  Church  road.  The  main 
body  will  proceed  by  the  Stony  Creek  road  over  the  Hospa  Bridge. 
Should  the  greater  portion  of  the  Abolition  forces  proceed  over  the 
Hospa  Bridge,  a courier  will  be  dispatched  by  the  road  from  Camp  Pem- 
berton at  the  spring  through  the  parsonage  to  inform  the  pickets  re- 
turning by  the  Sheldon  Church  road.  Should  any  portion  of  the  enemy 
advance  by  Sheldon  Church  road,  the  larger  number  of  the  squad  will 
take  the  Union  road  and  make  a close  observation  of  the  enemy  from 
the  obstructions  on  that  road. 

The  pickets  will,  whenever  the  cover  permits,  change  shots  with  the 
enemy,  but  particularly  at  the  Hospa  Bridge,  at  obstructions  on  Shel- 
don Church  road,  at  Dr.  Heury  Fuller’s,  at  Mrs.  Eustis’  Causeway,  at 
obstructions  on  Union  road.  In  all  contingencies  the  chief  of  the  squad, 
who  must  always  be  designated  in  observations,  will  send  to  headquar- 
ters from  time  to  time  couriers  with  information  of  the  advance  and 
streugth  of  the  enemy. 

These  orders  will  be  read  every  day  for  one  week  in  each  cavalry  com- 
pany. A copy  will  be  supplied  by  every  company  commander  to  all  his 
officers  and  non-commissioned  officers,  to  whose  attention  the  extreme 
importance  of  familiarizing  themselves  with  the  main  roads  and  by- 
roads of  the  country  to  operate  in  is  commended. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Walker,  commanding: 

JAMES  LOWNDES, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Military  District  of  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Run , February  28,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General:  By  direction  of  the  general  commanding  I beg  leave  re- 
spectfully to  inclose  memorandum  of  operations  contemplated  in  Secoud 
Military  District.  I would  also  in  this  connection  respectfully  ask  for 
re-enforcements  as  soon  as  it  may  be  in  the  power  of  the  general  com- 
manding to  furnish  them  for  this  purpose.  My  force  is  very  small  for 
the  extended  defensive  lines  it  will  be  necessary  to  take. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  February  28,  1863. 

This  memorandum  is  furnished  in  obedience  to  orders  of  general  com- 
mandiug,  after  a conference  held  at  Pocotaligo,  on  the  24th  instant,  with 
Generals  Walker  and  Hagood,  when  verbal  instructions  were  given  them 
relative  to  their  future  movements,  looking  to  a concert  of  action,  as  far 
as  practicable,  in  the  event  of  an  attack  by  the  enemy,  now  concentrating 
in  large  force  at  Port  Boyal. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGAKD, 

General , Commanding. 


796  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

[Inclosure.] 

Memorandum,  of  operations  contemplated  in  Second  Military  District. 

1st.  The  first  defensive  line  taken  will  be  south  of  the  Eantowles  and 
Willstown  road,  the  intrench ments  at  King’s  Creek  being  the  right,  , 
those  at  Yonge’s  Island  the  center,  and  the  Church  Flats  Batteries 
the  left. 

An  attack  by  a single  column  upon  this  position  will  be  resisted  ob- 
stinately. A general  attack  along  the  whole  line  in  strong  force  will 
compel  its  abandonment  after  holding  it  merely  long  enough  to  ascer- 
tain the  strength  and  designs  of  the  enemy.  The  line  is  too  long  and 
too  near  the  enemy’s  base  of  operations.  It  is  also  liable  to  be  turned 
by  an  advance  from  Edisto  Island  across  the  Dawho,  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Pinebury. 

2d.  The  second  line  taken  will  be  behind  the  Caw  Caw  Swamp.  This 
swamp,  commencing  at  Eantowles,  runs  westward  for  5 miles,  when  it 
divides  into  two  main  branches,  one  continuing  westward  to  the  Edisto 
Eiver,  a farther  distance  of  5 miles,  the  other  running  a little  west  of 
north  toward  Gioham’s  Ferry,  higher  up  on  same  river. 

The  left  of  this  line  will  be  the  batteries  at  Eantowles;  the  center 
where  the  new  road  crosses  the  swamp  a half  mile  east  of  its  bifurca- 
tion, and  the  right  will  follow  its  north  branch.  The  west  branch  of 
the  swamp  will  beheld  by  an  advanced  force  of  mounted  men.  The 
object  of  taking  this  line  is  to  delay  the  enemy  and  gain  time  for  re-en- 
forcements to  join  me  from  the  Third  District  by  way  of  Gioham’s  Ferry. 

It  is  objectionable  from  its  length  and  from  the  fact  that  the  north 
branch  of  the  swamp  is  practicable  almost  anywhere  to  an  enterprising 
enemy. 

The  enemy  will  attack  its  left  at  Eantowles  (seeking  the  most  direct 
road  to  the  city),  in  which  case  the  cavalry  on  the  right  will  operate 
offensively  on  their  flank  and  rear,  and  the  point  of  attack  will  be  obsti- 
nately defended  with  the  best  means  at  my  disposal.  In  the  event  of 
the  line  being  carried  at  Eantowles  the  troops  massed  there  for  its  de- 
fense will  retire  within  the  lines  of  the  city  by  the  most  direct  route, 
and  the  troops  on  the  right  will  retire  toward  Bacon’s  Bridge,  on  the 
Ashley,  or  the  enemy  will  attack  the  right  of  the  line,  where  it  is  much 
weaker,  and  seek  a more  circuitous  but  safer  route  to  the  city.  In  this 
case  this  line  can  only  be  held  long  enougli  to  make  the  enemy  concen- 
trate and  prepare  for  carrying  it.  It  is  hoped  that  time  sufficient  for 
the  junction  of  the  troops  from  the  Third  District  can  be  thus  obtained. 
When  the  line  is  thus  carried  the  troops  at  Eantowles  will  retire  by  the 
shortest  route  (behind  the  city  lines)  across  the  Ashley  and  proceed  up 
the  eastern  side  of  that  river  to  unite  with  their  command  at  Bacon’s 
Bridge.  The  troops  on  the  light  will  fall  back  direct  to  Bacon’s  and 
Slann’s  Bridges,  on  the  Ashley. 

3d.  The  third  line  taken  will  be  behind  the  Ashley,  to  protect  the 
South  Carolina  and  Northeastern  Eailroads.  The  troops  from  the 
Second  and  Third  Districts  united  will  hold  the  fordable  portion  of  the 
river,  i*.  e .,  from  Schultz  Lake,  a mile  above  Slanu’s  Bridge,  down  to  old 
Fort  Dorchester.  The  crossings  below,  where  pontoon  bridges  may  be 
thrown  across,  will  also  be  looked  after  by  them,  but  these  should  be 
held  by  troops  from  the  garrison  of  the  city.  A battle  will  be  fought 
in  defense  of  this  line,  without  orders  to  the  contrary.  The  line  of  re- 
treat from  this  line  will  be  down  the  peninsula  to  Charleston,  or  if  this 
line  of  retreat  should  become  impracticable  from  the  enemy’s  effecting 
a passage  of  the  river  near  the  city,  then  by  way  of  Summerville  and 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  797 

the  Twenty-two  Mile  House  around  the  head  waters  of  Cooper  River, 
and  down  the  east  bank  of  said  river  to  a point  near  the  city,  whence 
the  troops  can  be  thrown  into  the  garrison. 

A depot  of  provisions  for  ten  days  for  5,000  men  and  3,000  horses  has 
been  ordered  to  be  established  at  White  Church,  behind  the  second  line 
of  defense.  A depot  of  at  least  twice  the  amount  should  be  established 
at  Summerville,  behind  the  third  line. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C .,  February  28,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates: 

Colonel  : I am  instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  direct  that 
you  repair  forthwith  to  and  assume  command  of  the  Fourth  Military 
District  of  South  Carolina,  of  this  department,  hereafter  to  be  known 
as  a sub-district  to  the  First  Military  District. 

The  general  commanding  further  directs  me  to  say  that  in  case  of  an 
engagement  here  you  will  be  recalled  here. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  M.  OTB Y, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  February  28,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

My  telegrams  of  18th  and  20th  instant  are  still  unanswered,  asking 
authority  to  receive  State  volunteers  and  others  in  service  for  defense 
of  Charleston  and  Savannah.  Time  for  so  doing  all-important.  More 
troops  are  absolutely  required  in  this  department  or  railroad  to  Savan- 
nah must  be  abandoned.  I also  make  another  appeal  for  two  competent 
brigadier-generals  to  command  troops  under  General  Mercer ; otherwise 
1 must  not  be  held  responsible  for  any  disaster  which  may  occur  there. 
Please  answer. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGARD. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  February  28,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 

Accept  any  armed  troops  from  the  States  and  as  many  others  as  we 
can  arm.  Let  me  know  what  number  of  arms  you  will  require,  that  I 
may  inform  to  what  extent  we  can  supply  them.  The  troops  and  men 
to  be  accepted  should  not  be  raised  in  derogation  of  the  conscript  law. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  50.  ) Richmond , February  28,  1863. 

******* 

IX.  Major-General  Huger  will  proceed  to  the  Department  of  South 


798 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Carolina  and  Georgia  and  make  a thorough  inspection  of  the  artillery 
and  ordnance  stores  at  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  Savanuah,  Ga.  He  will 
report  the  number  and  caliber  of  guns  and  their  positions  at  each  of  the 
above-named  cities. 

- * # ##### 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Abstract from  Bet  urn  of  Troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia,  and  Florida, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  February  23,  1863. 


Present  for  duty. 

a 

fl 

C 

82 

Commanding  officer. 

Troop#. 

Total  effective 
infantry. 

Total  effective 

cavalry. 

Total  effective 

artillery. 

Aggregate  prese 

Aggregate  pr< 
and  absent. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley 

First  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

6,  376 

605 

2,456 

10,  708 

13, 273 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Hagood 

Second  Military  District 
of  South  Carolina. 

1,  254 

720 

187 

2,  377 

4, 129 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker 

Third  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

1,416 

1,  43  7 

491 

3,  767 

4, 435 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier 

Fourth  Military  District 
of  South  Carolina. 

336 

142 

561 

735 

jjri"-  GSrGD  H W Mercer 

District  of  Georgia 

4,499 

359 

1,740 

2, 673 
110 

10,313 

12, 188 

Brig.  Gen.  Howeil  Cobb 

District  of  Middle  Florida.. 

239 

807 

1,026 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan 

District  of  East  Florida. . . 

222 

441 

140 

916 

1,  249 

Grand  total 

14, 126 

5,  518 

6, 199 

29,  449 

37,  035 

Note.— Heavy  artillery  included  with  light  artillery  in  the  First  District  of  South  Carolina  and  the 
District  of  Georgia. 


RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 


First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina.. 
Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 
Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 
Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 

District  of  Georgia 

District  of  Middle  Florida 

District  of  East  Florida 


9,437 
2, 161 
3,  344 
478 
8,912 
708 
803 


Total  effective 


25,843 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  March  1,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldsborougli , N.  C, : 

My  Dear  General  : Your  letter  of  the  24th  ultimo  has  just  reached 
me,  and  I hasten  to  say  that  I wish  you  to  hold  in  readiness  every  man 
you  may  feel  authorized  to  send  out  of  your  department  subject  to  my 
requisition.  A.uy  troops  sent  should  be  provided  with  100  rounds  of 
ammuuitiou,  if  practicable,  and,  say,  with  five  days’  subsistence.  Please 
. thank  Commodore  Lynch  in  my  name,  and  inform  him  that  I accept  his 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  799 

tender  of  services  with  gratification,  and  should  be  pleased  to  see  him 
here  as  soon  as  possible,  with  such  officers  and  men  as  he  may  have  at 
his  disposition  for  service  in  South  Carolina.  The  movements  of  the 
enemy  at  Port  Eoyal  have  become  suspicious,  and  indicate  an  early 
movement  in  some  direction.  Looking  to  the  moral  and  political  conse- 
quences of  the  fall  of  Charleston,  it  would  appear  this  is  their  most  prob- 
able point  of  attack.  They  may  take  counsel  with  their  fears,  however, 
and  seek  some  more  vulnerable  position,  with  the  hope  that  in  the  course 
of  events  they  may  yet  be  able  to  humiliate  Charleston.  On  the  other 
hand,  awkward  relations  with  France  may  counsel  an  immediate  ven- 
ture upon  this  city,  as  events  may  tend  to  make  the  attack  impracticable 
in  another  month. 

With  many  thanks  for  your  offer  of  your  troops,  I am,  very  truly, 
your  friend, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina.  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  March  1,  1863. 

President  of  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad : 

Sir  : For  a successful  defense  of  the  line  of  the  Charleston  and  Sa- 
vannah Railroad,  with  the  limited  number  of  troops  at  disposal,  rapid 
concentration  at  any  threatened  point  is  essential,  and  to  effect  this  I am 
instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  represent  to  you  the  impor- 
tance of  placing  at  the  disposition  of  General  Walker  at  Pocotaligo 
Station  a train  of  cars  capable  of  carrying  a thousand  men. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  1,  1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

Troops  furnished  by  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  mainly  armed  and 
are  men  not  liable  to  conscription;  but  should  like  at  least  3,000  arms 
at  my  disposition  soon  as  practicable.  Some  of  the  North  Carolina 
troops  came  without  arms.  Enemy  at  Port  Royal  appeared  to  be  on 
movement  of  some  sort  yesterday. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  1,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

You  are  authorized  to  accept  armed  State  troops  and  as  many  others 
as  we  can  arm.  Let  me  know  what  number  arms  you  will  require. 
Troops  accepted  must  not  be  subject  to  conscription. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia;  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  March  1,  1863. 


D.  N.  Ingraham, 

Flag-Officer , Comdg.  C.  S.  Naval  Forces,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

Sir  : The  movements  of  the  enemy  in  Port  Royal  Harbor  yesterday 


800 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

looked  suspicious,  and  have  the  appearance,  of  an  early  movement  of 
some  sort.  Thus  forewarned,  it  will  appear  assuredly  the  part  of  pru- 
dence -to  he  on  the  watch.  I must  therefore  request  that  the  Confed- 
erate States  steamer  Stono  should  take  her  position  as  a guard  boat  in 
advance  of  the  forts  as  far  as  practicable  to-night,  and  thereafter  every 
night  for  the  present. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  March  2,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  George  W.  Rains,  Commanding , Augusta  : 

Colonel  : Your  communication  of  the  25th  ultimo  has  been  received 
and  considered  by  the  commanding  general,  who  directs  me  to  reply  that 
a cavalry  raid  by  the  enemy  on  Augusta  is  not  apprehended.  He  would, 
however,  suggest  and  urge  that  a part  of  the  forces  referred  to  should 
garrison  the  battery  at  Shell  Bluff,  and  hopes  that  proper  measures  may 
be  taken  by  you  to  effect  this  object. 

The  general  commanding  does  not  feel  authorized  under  existing  or- 
ders to  appoint  a provost-marshal  as  requested,  but  an  officer  could  be 
detailed  for  that  purpose  if  deemed  necessary. 

Respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  2, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , W.  C.  : 

Enemy  are  evidently  making  preparations  to  attack  Savannah} 
whether  real  or  not  time  will  tell.  Their  iron  clads  and  many  trans- 
ports are*  in  that  vicinity,  with  troops  on  Cockspur. 

F G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  2,  1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

Three  iron-clads,  fifteen  gunboats,  two  mortar-boats,  and  large  num- 
ber barges  are  off  Beaulieu  Battery,  Vernon  River;  twelve  steamers  in 
Mud  River  near  Savannah;  possibly  a feint  to  cover  some  real  point  of 
attack  in  that  quarter.  Please  read  my  letter  to  General  Cooper,  No- 
vember 1,  1862,  relative  defenses  Savannah.  Troops  in  department 
should  be  increased  at  least  one  brigade  immediately.  Transportation 
defective,  uncertain ; unsafe  wait  last  moment. 

’ G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  2, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

It  must  be  understood  by  officers  commanding  outworks  that  silencing 
guns  of  batteries  by  iron  clads  is  no  reason  for  abandoning  the  work  so 
Iona:  as  transports  do  not  pass  them  with  too  heavy  a force. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Chav.  XXYI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


801 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Ten  inch  columbiad  must  now  be  removed  from  Genesis  Point  to 
Rosedew.  Do  not  remove  guns  from  Hutchinson  Battery.  Prepare 
position  for  one  columbiad  at  Carston’s  Bluff;  also  at  Fort  Boggs. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Order  General  Walker  to  command  all  troops  and  line  of  outworks 
from  Carston’s  Bluff  to  Thunderbolt,  both  inclusive.  General  Talia- 
ferro to  command  from  Walker’s  right  to  Rosedew  inclusive.  General 
Clingman’s  brigade  leaves  here  to-morrow.  Hold  him  in  reserve  to 
support  any  point  attacked.  G T BEAUEEGAED. 

» 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  2,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  Mercer  telegraphed  for  at  least  2,000  arms  for  State  volun- 
teers. Can  he  not  have  them  at  once?  Enemy  evidently  threatening 

SaVaUimh-  G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  March  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker, 

Commanding , Pocotaligo , S.  C. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  yesterday  has  been  received.  The  views 
contained  in  it  are  approved  by  me.  Should  the  enemy  succeed  in  tak- 
ing the  trestle  work  over  the  Savannah  River  and  you  can  still  hold 
the  railroad  line  to  this  place,  you  must  of  course  do  so,  for  future  oper- 
ations. All  your  movements  must  loo.k  to  the  final  defense  of  Charles- 
ton, where  I.  shall  concentrate  all  my  troops  when  required  at  that 
poiut. 

Should  the  enemy  succeed  in  taking  Coosawhatckie  or  Pocotaligo, 
anv  strong  position  giving  us  still  command  of  the  railroad  to  this  place 
must  be  held  until  further  orders  for  future  operations  against  the 
enemy  should  he  endeavor  to  march  toward  Branchville,  which  will 
have  to  be  protected  by  a part  of  your  cavalry  and  one  or  two  sections 
of  artillery  moving  in  that  direction. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1 ’ G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  March  2,  1863. 


General  S.  Cooper: 

General  Mercer  reports  three  iron  clads  below  Fort  McAllister,  one  in 


51  E K— VOL  XIV 


802 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.XXVL 


Ossabaw  Sound,  with  fifteen  other  vessels.  He  thinks  an  attack  will 
be  made  in  the  morning  on  Forts  McAllister  and  Beaulieu. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 
Charleston , March  2,  1863. 

* * # * # 

V.  Brigadier-General  Clingman  will  proceed  in  light  marching  order 
to  Savannah,  Ga.,  with  his  brigade,  and  report  for  duty  to  Brigadier- 
General  Mercer.  The  brigade  will  be  provided  with  at  least  GO  rounds 
of  ammunition  and  three  days’  subsistence.  The  quartermaster’s  de- 
partment will  provide  the  necessary  transportation,  and  measures  must 
be  taken  to  secure  celerity  of  movement  by  railroad. 

# * * * * # * 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard: 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  54. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  3, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

I send  you  my  chief  engineer,  Major  Harris,  an  old  West  Point  gradu- 
ate; very  reliable  officer;  consult  liim  freely;  act  without  precipitation. 
Navy  must  guard  Savannah  River  Bridge  far  as  practicable.  Keep 
Rosedew  Battery  masked,  but  ready  for  use  at  close  range.  Lwill  be 
with  you  at  proper  time. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Inspector-General’s  Office, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  March  3,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  following  report  of  inspection 
of  Fort  Sumter,  made  on  the  28th  of  January,  1863,  in  conformity  with 
instructions  from  department  headquarters. 

Now  more  than  ever  the  eyes  of  the  Confederacy  are  centered  on  that 
bulwark  of  our  eastern  defenses,  Fort  Sumter.  It  is  the  first  historical 
monument  of  this  war,  and  as  it  opened  our  struggle  for  independence 
so  it  will  likely  close  it  with  equal  glory  to  our  national  honor. 

Fort  Sumter  is  worthy  of  its  high  reputation.  No  one  visits  it  offi- 
cially or  otherwise  without  pronouncing  it  a model  of  order  and  good 
management,  the  best  school  of  discipline  and  military  bearing,  and 
held  by  the  first  and  most  efficient  garrison  of  the  South. 

The  gallant  colonel  who  commands  it,  the  able  and  gentlemanly  offi- 
cers who  assist  him  in  his  duties,  the  true  soldiers,  whose  zeal,  endur- 
ance, and  regularity  of  service  have  become  proverbial,  all  alike  know 
full  well  what  is  expected  of  them  by  the  country,  and  all  are  equally 
willing  on  the  day  of  trial  to  undertake  any  task  which  brave  and  loyal 
men  may  possibly  achieve. 

The  garrison,  composed  of  seven  companies  of  the  First  Regiment  of 


803 


Cnxr.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

South  Carolina  Artillery,  is  under  the  immediate  command  of  the  fol- 
lowing  Held  officers:  1st,  Col.  Alfred  Bhett;  2d,  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  A. 
Yates:  3d,  Maj.  Ormsby  Blanding. 

Aggregate  of  garrison  present  and  absent,  568;  present  tor  duty,  48/ ; 
sick,  present  and  absent,  41. 

ABSENT  WITH  LEAVE. 

1st.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates,  on  detached  service,  as  per  Special 
Orders,  No.  87,  brigade  headquarters. 

2d.  Thomas  M.  Barker,  assistant  quartermaster,  on  sick  leave,  as  per 
Special  Orders,  No.  43,  department  headquarters. 

3d.  Second  Lieut.  Iredell  Jones,  Company  B,  on  recruiting  service. 

4th.  First  Lieut.  J.  S.  Bee. 

5th.  Second  Lieut.  E.  J.  Simkins,  on  recruiting  service,  as  per  cir- 
cular from  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  January  19,  1863. 

IN  ARREST. 

Non-commissioned  officer  from  Company  D 1 

Privates  from  Company  B 6 

Private  from  Company  C 1 

Private  from  Company  D J 

Private  from  Company  F j 

Privates  from  Company  I * 

14 

The  troops  present  quite  a remarkable  appearance  on  inspection.  I 
doubt  whether  any  corps  in  the  old  United  States  Army  ever  looked 
as  well.  The  uniforms,  arms,  and  accouterments  were  in  a perfect 
condition  as  regards  cleanliness;  but  the  knapsacks,  although  not  neg- 
lected, are  made  of  such  poor  material  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
give  them  a regular  form  and  to  wear  them  properly.  Some  muskets 
are  out  of  order  and  many  uniforms  want  repairing.  The  men  have 
no  haversacks,  and  not  a single  company  in  the  whole  garrison  have  the 
required  number  of  canteens,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  table  hereinafter 
mentioned.  * I attach  no  importance  to  the  want  of  haversacks,  as  no 
rations  need  be  carried  by  the  men.  It  is  not  the  case  with  canteens, 
which  become  indispensable  during  action  to  prevent  the  men  from  leav- 
ing their  posts  to  get  water. 

The  quarters  are  neatly  kept,  but  not  well  ventilated,  owing  to  recent 
changes  made  in  the  fort.  Crowded  as  are  the  men  in  their  quarters  it 
would  be  difficult  in  summer  to  preserve  their  health  should  no  steps 
be  taken  in  due  time  to  prevent  the  accidents  which  would  result  from 
the  actual  state  of  things. 

The  kitchen  and  mess-rooms  are  clean  and  well  taken  care  of.  The 
cooking  apparently  well  attended  to.  Wheat  bread  is  given  once  a 
week  to  every  company,  and  corn  bread  on  the  other  days.  The  allow- 
ance of  bread  is  rather  short,  but  it  is  good,  well  baked,  and  I believe 
perfectly  wholesome. 

The  hospital  at  Fort  Sumter  is  under  the  direction  of  Surg.  M.  S. 
Moore  and  of  Asst.  Surg.  S.  Muller.  Their  department  is  ably  con- 
ducted, but  owing  to  the  want  of  ventilation,  which  circumstances  have 
rendered  necessary  in  the  hospital  as  well  as  in  the  men’s  quarters,  I 


Omitted, 


804  COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  6A.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chat.  XXVI. 

would  suggest  that  more  care  be  given  to  the  cleanliness  of  both  the 
room  and  bedding. 

The  adjutant’s  office  and  the  manner  of  conducting  it  are  very  credit- 
able to  Lieut.  S.  Cordes  Boyleston,  the  adjutant  of  Fort  Sumter.  He 
evidently  understands  his  duties,  and  in  my  opinion  performs  them 
with  great  zeal  and  ability. 

The  company  books  as  a general  thing  denote  good  management  on 
the  part  of  the  company  commanders.  The  company  funds  are  now 
reduced  to  mere  nominal  items  on  account  of  the  shortness  of  rations 
and  of  the  impossibility  of  making  any  savings  from  them. 

I was  very  much  pleased  with  the  order,  the  system,  and  business- 
like manner  with  which  the  commissary  department  is  attended  to. 
Capt.  S.  P.  Ravenel  deserves  credit  for  the  good  administration  dis- 
played in  the  discharge  of  his  duties. 

The  fort  has  now  six  months’  provisions,  among  which  I would  men- 
tion 27,550  pounds  of  bacon,  32,900  pounds  of  pork,  446  barrels  of  flour, 
and  a large  supply  of  rice  and  meal.  Beef  is  issued  daily  to  the  gar- 
rison. The  attention  of  Captain  Ravenel  was  called  to  the  necessity 
of  regulating  his  issues  according  to  a report  to  be  furnished  by  the 
adjutant  of  the  post.  Funds  on  hand  up  to  the  28th  February,  1863, 
$3,454.12. 

Capt.  Thomas  M.  Barker,  assistant  quartermaster,  was  absent  when 
I mustered  and  inspected  the  garrison.  I thought  it  best  not  to  exam- 
ine his  books  and  accounts  during  his  absence.  I merely  went  through 
the  quartermaster’s  store-room,  which  I found  under  the  immediate 
charge  of  the  quartermaster’s  sergeant,  and  which  from  all  appearances 
indicates  good  management  in  that  very  important  department. 

Should  the  general  commanding  desire  it,  I will,  on  Captain  Barker’s 
return,  make  a separate  inspection  of  his  department  and  send  in  a 
special  report  of  the  same  to  headquarters. 

The  state  of  the  weather  on  the  day  of  inspection  and  the  additional 
task  of  mustering  the  garrison,  which  I willingly  performed  incompli- 
ance with  General  Ripley’s  desire,  prevented  me  from  having  the  troops 
drilled  before  me,  either  as  infantry  or  artillery,  but  I had  seen  them  drill 
on  several  previous  occasions,  and  I merely  repeat  what  all  others  say 
when  I assert  that  no  corps  in  our  Army,  except  perhaps  the  Fort  Moultrie 
regiment,  would  compare  with  any  advantage  to  the  Fort  Sumter  garri- 
son. The  regularity  and  mechanical  precision  of  their  manual  of  arms 
is  remarkable;  their  five  hundred  muskets,  their  thousand  hands,  move 
as  if  one  musket  only  and  one  pair  of  hands  were  put  in  motion.  In 
that  respect  and  in  many  others  regarding  important  details  of  the 
service  the  seven  companies  of  the  First  South  Carolina  Artillery  now 
at  Fort  Sumter  have  no  rivals. 

Respectfully  submitted  by 

1#  ALF.  ROMAN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Inspector  General. 


Hdqrs.  James  Island  and  Saint  Andrew’s, 

McLeod's,  March  3,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District: 

General:  In  accordance  with  your  written  instructions  of  February 
}5?  1863,  immediately  upou  assuming  the  command  assigned  me  of 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


805 


James  Island  and  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish,  I made  a thorough  personal, 
inspection  of  the  entire  division,  and  have  taken  measures  to  remedy 
the  deficiencies  and  supply  the  wants  of  the  command.  Myhatow, 
are  not  altogether  in  fighting  condition  in  consequence  of  the  want  of 
necessary  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores,  for  which  requisitions  have 

^Tha/vif  thought  it  proper,  if  not  necessary,  to  submit  a detailed  re- 
port upon  the  condition  and  state  of  the  defenses  intrusted  to  my 
charge,  though  many  of  the  matters  reported  upon  have  doubtless  been 
already  brought  to  the  -attention  of  the  commanding  general  and  your- 
self. Statements  A and  B exhibit  respectively  the  armament  and  esti- 
mates of  force  necessary  to  hold  the  two  main  divisions  of  the  command. 
The  estimates  of  force  I have  placed  at  the  minimum  number.  State- 
ment C*  will  show  the  effective  force  of  the  command. 

James  Island.— Before  remarking  upon  the  main  positions  m the 
body  of  this  island  or  on  the  Stono  front  I shall  briefly  describe  the 

condition  of  the  batteries  on  the  harbor  front. 

Fort  Johnson— This  work  mounts  five  guns— two  10-inch  colum- 
biads,  one  rifled  32-pounder,  two  smooth-bore  32-pounders,  and  one  10- 
inch  mortar.  The  guns  are  all  en  barbette  sunken  batteries,  with  tra- 
verses, bomb-proofs,  and  magazine  in  good  order.  The  fire  of  one  of  the 
heavy  guns  is  limited  by  a building  used  for  quartermaster  stores,  which 
I have  requested  the  engineers  to  remove.  I have  also  requested  that 
the  embrasures  of  the  abandoned  Lamar  casemates  should  be  securely 
closed, to  afford  bomb-proof  quarters  and  hospitals  for  the  garrison  ,n 
action.  I have  suggested  the  removal  of  the  smooth  bore  guns  from 
this  battery,  as  of  little  service  against  probable  attack  of  iron-clads, 
and  would  recommend  that  an  additional  rifled  32-pounder  be  sent  to 

^BatterT’glover.— This  work  is  intended  for  five  guns,  some  of 
which  are  now  in  position,  viz : One  rifled  32-pounder  and  three  smooth- 
bore 32-pounders  on  barbette  carriages;  the  fifth  gun,  an  Sunch  shell 
<mn  (navy),  is  awaiting  its  carriage.  This  gun,  not  being  intended  foi 
solid  shot,  would  be  more  serviceable  if  placed  in  the  front  battery^at 
Secessionville  in  lieu  of  the  rifled  24-pounder  now  in  that  battery,  and 
its  position  filled  by  a gun  of  long  range  and  one  capable  of  projecting 

heavy  solid  shot  or  bolts.  , , Q . , 

Battery  Means.— This  work  mounts  at  present  only  two  8-inch 
navy  shell  guns  en  barbette,  and  is  now  intended  .only  to  defend  the 
mouth  of  Wappoo  Creek.  From  its  great  distance  from  the  channel  of 
the  Asblev,  li  miles,  it  can  effect  but  little  in  that  direction,  and  should 
be  confined  to  the  protection  of  the  Wappoo  Crossing.  I would  respect- 
fully suggest  in  this  connection  an  iron  rail  or  plated  battery  for  these 
suns  at  Chisolm’s  Mill,  to  guard  the  channel,  which  is  immediately  at 
the  wharf,  which,  with  Battery  Means,  to  protect  mouth  of  Wappoo, 
would  make  the  new  bridge  more  impracticable  to  the  iron  clads  ot  the 
enemy  should  they  force  an  entrance  into  the  inner  harbor. 

The  James  Island  Lines  cover  a front  of  over  3 miles  and  are 
divided  into  equal  sections  by  James  Island  Creek.  They,  together  with 
the  strong  flanking  works,  Secessionville  on  the  left  and  Fort  Pember- 
ton on  the  right,  form  the  Stono  front  of  the  defenses.  The  eastern 
division  consists  of  a line  of  redoubts  and  redans  strongly  built .and . m 
good  condition,  armed  at  present  with  twenty  guns  of  light  caliber- 
There  are  six  redoubts,  five  redans,  and  one  lunette.  They  should  ea  , 
have  magazines  erected  in  them ; the  timber  for  such,  as  I understand, 


* Not  found. 


806 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


was  procured  last  summer.  Some  of  the  redoubts  still  want  ramps  and 
graded  platforms  for  extra  guns  they  may  mount  in  emergencies.  I 
have  directed  that  a well  should  be  dug  and  kept  clean  by  sentinels  in 
each  work.  The  leveling  of  the  old  cremaillere  lines  is  only  half  fin- 
ished. If  the  usual  infantry  force  is  stationed  on  the  island  the  work 
can  be  executed  by  details  from  the  regiments,  tools  for  the  purpose 
being  furnished  by  the  engineer  department.  Tiie  spaces  between  the 
redoubts  are  to  be  filled  with  smaller  flanking  works  and  rifle  pits  for 
infantry.  The  strengthening  of  the  Secession ville  batteries  will  obviate 
the  necessity  of  heavily  arming  the  two  left  flanking  redoubts,  and  in 
a communication  to  the  chief  of  ordnance  I have  suggested  certain 
changes  in  the  positions  of  their  armament.  The  roads  and  bridges 
communicating  with  Secessionville  are  in  good ’condition. 

Secession  ville. — The  works  consist  of  Fort  Lamar,  mounting  thir- 
teen guns  and  one  10-inch  mortar,  and  a newly  completed  two-gun  bat- 
tery for  siege  guns  on  the  north  point  of  the  peninsula,  fronting  Light- 
House  Inlet  and  Creek.  Fort  Lamar  is  nearly  completed,  and  is  an 
exceedingly  strong  position.  I have  suggested  to  the  chief  of  ordnance 
certain  changes  in  the  position  of  its  armament  for  approval  of  the 
general  commanding.  The  work  wanted  to  complete  and  to  make  it 
impregnable  if  defended  by  a proper  garrison  is  comparatively  slight, 
and  I understand  will  soon  be  executed.  The  placing  of  torpedoes  in 
Schooner  Creek  and  Light-House  Inlet  Creek  I deem  important,  and  I 
learn  has  been  ordered.  The  advance  line  of  the  eastern  division  is 
formed  by  the  Bridge  Neck  works,  for  protection  of  the  bridge  to  Seces- 
sionville, Reed  Battery,  and  the  Cross-Roads  Line.  The  first,  not  being 
from  their  position  exposed  to  artillery  fire,  have  been  constructed  with 
light  profile  against  infantry  fire;  they  have  ramps  for  three  field  guns, 
and  in  good  condition,  though  unsodded. 

The  Reed  Battery  mounts  two  siege  guns,  24-pounders,  and  is 
a hastily  constructed  work,  somewhat  low  in  its  site  and  relief.  Orders 
from  the  engineer  department  have  been  issued  to  extend  the  work 
on  the  right  by  two  field  works  for  two  guns  each,  with  connecting  in- 
fantry epaulement.  As  I consider  this  "/ork  all-important  in  protecting 
the  bridge  communication  with  Secessionville,  I would  recommend  its 
speedy  completion. 

The  Cross-Roads  Line  is  some  1,200  yards  in  length,  and  consists  of 
a hedge-row,  trimmed,  and  pierced  for  field  pieces,  adapted  to  infantry 
and  field  batteries  on  either  flank.  This  line,  originally  located  by  my- 
self is  only  intended  to  delay  and  attack  in  force  and  give  time  for 
preparation  on  the  inner  lines.  It  serves  also  as  a fortified  position  of 
some  strength  for  advanced  forces  to  occupy  when  the  enemy  have 
landed  upon  the  island.  Three  bridges  communicate  with  western 
division  of  the  island  : First,  at  Dill’s  Bluff,  in  good  condition ; second, 
at  Holmes’,  just  completed,  with  the  exception  of  a hand-railing,  and 
the  third  over  Newton’s  Cut.  This  latter  wants  repair,  and  I have 
called  the  attention  of  the  engineer  department  to  its  condition.  The 
means  of  communication  between  the  two  divisions  of  the  island  I con- 
sider ample  and  proper. 

The  Western  Lines  of  James  Island  consist  of  a continuous  re- 
dan line,  with  curtains  for  infantry,  extending  from  Holmes’  place  on 
the  left  to  Libby’s,  on  Wappoo  Creek,  on  the  right.  In  extent  these 
lines  are  about  the  same  as  those  on  eastern  side,  sav,  2,600  yards. 
They  have  no  advanced  line,  and  are  connected  with  Fort  Pemberton, 
their  point  Wappui,  by  a redan  and  two  flanking  redoubts.  These  de- 
fenses mount guns,  all  in  fair  condition.  I would  recommend  that 


80? 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — -CONFEDERATE. 

the  parapets  and  infantry  epaulements  be  thickened  in  some  places. 
The  epaulements  are  only  about  4 feet  thick,  and  the  whole  line  has 
been  considerably  washed,  and  wants  thickening  and  resetting.  I would 
also  suggest  the  erection  of  an  observatory  in  the  rear  of  the  Holmes 
redoubt,  for  the  purpose  of  communicating  by  signal  with  eastern  lines 
and  observing  Dill’s  Landing  and  the  Stono  in  case  the  enemy  should 
again  land  on  the  island.  The  redoubt  nearest  Fort  Pemberton  is  badly 
washed  and  needs  repair. 

Fort  Pemberton  is  a strongly  built  and  compact  work,  with  every- 
thing in  good  repair;  its  armament  is  now  fifteen  guns,  and  may  be  in- 
creased if  necessary  to  twenty-five  or  more.  I would  suggest  that  an 
additional  shell  gun  be  placed  in  position  on  the  land  face  toward  IsTew- 
ton’s  Out.  I think  a traverse  or  two  might  be  advantageously  placed 
on  the  left,  flanking  exterior  battery,  the  guns  of  this  battery  having 
very  little  protection  from  the  fire  of  boats  in  the  river  below  the  fort. 

The  communication  at  present  with  the  main  land  in  Saint  Andrew’s 
Parish  being  directly  under  the  fire  of  boats  lying  off  the  bay,  mouth 
of  Wappoo,  I directed  Lieutenant  Johnson,  of  the  engineer  corps,  to 
locate  and  report  upon  a crossing,  under  the  guns  of  Fort  Pemberton, 
over  the  Stono,  mouths  of  Elliott’s  Cut  and  Wappoo,  so  as  to  be  con- 
cealed from  view  of  gunboats  in  the  river  below  the  fort,  in  order  that 
the  crossing  might  be  used  to  withdraw  troops,  and  more  particularly 
to  furnish  a direct  and  short  communication  between  James  Island  and 
the  works  in  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish,  so  as  to  throw  troops  from  one 
point  to  the  other  without  the  least  delay.  The  report  has  been  sub- 
mitted to  the  chief  engineer  and  approved  by  him.  Lieutenant  John- 
son has  directions  to  execute  the  work  as  soon  as  possible.  There  is 
enough  of  work  to  be  done  upon  the  defenses  of  James  Island  to  em- 
ploy at  least  600  hands  for  six  or  eight  weeks.  The  present  force  is  some 
130  hands.  To  conclude  with  James  Island  and  its  defenses,  I will  in- 
dulge the  hope  that  the  advanced  line  of  defense  may  be  speedily  re-es- 
tablished upon  Cole’s  Island  and  the  Stono  once  again  freed  from  Yankee 
gunboats.  This  would  of  necessity  reduce  the  garrison  required  for  its 
defense  to  at  least  one-third  the  number  at  present  called  for. 

I will  forward  at  an  early  day  a report  upon  the  approaches  and  de- 
fenses of  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish,  and  would  respectfully  request  that 
the  report  upon  James  Island  and  statements  of  forces  necessary  for 
its  defense  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  as 

soon  as  possible.  . 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  GIST, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


808  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 


[Inclosure  A.] 

Armament  of  positions  and  estimate  of  force  necessary  for  defense  of  James  Island. 


Position. 

Preserr 

m( 

§ 

& 

t arma- 
int. 

U 

<3 

o 

Armament. 

Artillery. 

Infantry. 

£ 

<D 

CO 

9 

F* 

1 

Fort  Johnson . 

5 

1 

6 

90 

Battery  Glover 

5 

5 

75 

Battery  Means _ _ 

2 

8-10 

120 

Bines  (Fa  stern  Division)  

18 

24-38 

450 

2, 200 

1,  200 

Bines  (Western  Division) 

17 

30 

450 

2,  300 

1,300 

Secessionville. 

13 

2 

17 

250 

600 

Bridge  Neck  ) ( 

3 

45 

200 



Reed  Battery  > * \ 

2 

6 

90 

200 

Cross-Roads  Line  ) t 

Fort  Pemberton 

15 

20 

20-25 

300 

300 

1,600 

Total.  

75 

3 

120 

1,  735 

5, 100 

2,  500 

*This,  being  an  advanced  line,  is  not  included  in  the  total. 


SUMMARY. 


Artillery  force,  heavy  and  light,  including  eight  light  batteries 1, 700 

Infantry  force . 5, 100 

Infantry  reserve,  movable 2, 500 


Total - 9,300 


[Inclosure  B.] 

Armament  of  positions  and  estimate  of  force  necessary  for  defense  of  Saint  Andrew's  Parish. 


Armament. 

.2g 

S'* 

Position. 

Present. 

Intended. 

Artillery. 

Infantry. 

Infantry  f< 
tervals  ar 
serve. 

Remarks. 

Ttnig’s  

2 

2 

30 

Interior  detached  work. 

John’s  Island  Ferry  

6 

6 

80 

Advanced  works  to  be  aban- 

O  ’Dear’s 

4 

60 

doned  and  forces  withdrawn 
if  necessary. 

Bulow’s 

4 

60 

600 

Wilkes’  two  regiments 

12 

180 

600 

Main  line  of  defense  from  Stono 

Point  of  TPitiar  

4 

60 

1,200 
2,  500 
1,  200 
50 

to  advanced  and  detached 
works. 

Maywood’s  bam 

5 

75 

Ga.illaxd’s 

5 

75 

Banks  

7 

100 

Ashley  River. 

New  bridge. 

Cross-Roads  redoubt  

14 

210 

240- 

Church  Creek.. 

6 

90 

600 

T6te-fle-pont - 

8 

120 

300 

Total 

8 

77 

1, 140 

7,  390 

*2, 500 

* Reserve  movable  from  James  Island. 


SUMMARY. 


Artillery  force,  heavy  and  light,  six  light  batteries 900 

Infantry  force 6, 100 

Cavalry  force - - 1, 090 


Total 


8, 000 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — “CONFEDERATE. 


809 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

]Sjf0.  52*  I Richmond , Va .,  March  3,  1863. 

* ’ * * # * * * * 
XXIII  Brio-.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Con- 
federate States,  will  report  to  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  commanding, 
&c.,  at  Charleston,  S.  C.,  for  assignment  to  duty. 

* # # * * * * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : ^ WITHERS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  March  4,  1863. 

Commodore  T.  Turner,  ^ „ 7 ^ 

Commanding  U.  8.  Naval  Forces , (fee.,  off  Charleston  : 

Sir  : In  further  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  21st,  received  on  the  27th 
ultimo,  I have  now  to  say,  after  due  investigation  of  the  subject-matter, 
that  the  facts  of  the  case  appear  to  be  as  follows : 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st  February,  1863,  the  TJ.  S.  S.  Flambeau 
appeared  under  a flag  of  truce,  distinctly  visible,  making  her  way  m 
the  direction  of  the  harbor,  as  if  wishing  to  communicate.  Being  near 
enough  for  the  purpose  of  communication,  the  commander  of  a battery 
on  Sullivan’s  Island  fired  a shot  as  a notification  to  the  vessel  to  come  to, 
which  not  being  complied  with  he  fired  three  other  shots,  not  at  the 
vessel,  but  to  stop  her  course,  and  to  make  her  desist  from  the  soundings 
which  were  being  made  at  the  time  by  a boat  detached  from  the  1 lam- 
beau,  a proceeding  deemed  altogether  irregular  and  unwarranted. 

This  report  of  the  battery  commander  is  further  corroborated  by 
the  statements  of  persons  at  other  points  of  view. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ BEATJEEGAEI)) 

General , Commanding. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  troops  in  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  March  4,  1863. 


Commanding  officer. 


Brig.  Gen.  It.  S.  Ripley . - - 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Ha'good 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker. 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier.. 


Troops. 


Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer 

Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan — 


Grand  total. 


First  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

Second  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

Third  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

Fourth  Military  District 
of  South  Carolina. 

District  of  Georgia 

District  of  Middle  Florida. 


Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Total  effective 
infantry. 

Total  effective 
cavalry. 

Total  effective 
artillery. 

6,376 

605 

2,456 

10, 708 

13,  273 

1,  327 

740 

182 

2,  518 

3,019 

3, 363 

1,436 

484 

6,  004 

7,  863 

336 

142 

561 

735 

5,587 

1,  774 

2,  728 

11,  537 

13,  349 

359 

239 

110 

807 

1,026 

222 

441 

140 

916 

1,249 

. 17,234 

5,  571 

6,242 

33,  051 

40,  514 

Note.— Heavy  artillery  included  with  light  artillery  in  the  First  District  oi  South 
District  of  Georgia.. 


Carolina  and  the 


810 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 

First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 

Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 

Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 

Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 

District  of  Georgia 

District  of  Middle  Florida 

District  of  East  Florida 


. 9,437 

. 2, 249 
. 5,283 
478 
. 10,089 
708 
803 


Total  effective 


29, 047 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg , Fa.,  March  5,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston,  S.  C.: 

A large  force  is  reported  to  be  landing  at  New  Berne.  As  no  forces 
are  moving  from  the  North  the  force  must  be  from  your  front.  If  this 
information  agrees  with  yours  may  I ask  that  you  make  arrangements 
to  return  the  troops  sent  from  Wilmington  to  you  recently? 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  5, 1863. 

General  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding , Petersburg , Fa.  : 

Number  of  transports  at  Hilton  Head  still  the  same.  Can  learn  no 
diminution  of  the  enemy’s  force  in  my  front.  Am  still  expecting  an 
attack  here  or  at  Savannah  ; have  even  applied  for  additional  troops. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  March  5, 1863. 

Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales, 

Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance : 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  your  order  I proceeded  to  Pocotaligo  and 
saw  General  Walker,  whose  answers  to  the  questions  you  gave  me  you 
will  please  find  inclosed. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  JAQUELIN  SMITH, 

Captain  Artillery  and  Assistant  Chief  Artillery  and  Ordnance. 

[Incloeure.] 

Memoranda  of  disposition  of  guns  in  Third  Military  District. 

Pocotaligo,  March  4, 1863. 

The  guns  intended  for  Ashepoo  River,  one  12-pounder  rifled  and  one 
24-pounder  howitzer,  are  not  in  position,  for  the  reason  that  after  the 
battery  was  built  an  additional  battery  was  ordered  to  be  built  by  Cap- 
tain Echols  to  receive  the  rifled  gun,  and  a requisition  made  on  the 
engineer  department  at  Charleston  for  labor  to  do  the  same,  which  has 
not  been  received,  and  because  there  was  no  infantry  or  artillery  com- 


CHAP.  XXVt]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


811 


panj7  that  could  be  assigned  to  take  charge  of  them  until  very  recently. 
These  guns  can  be  put  In  position  at  once  in  original  battery  and  an 
infantry  company  be  assigned  to  take  charge  of  them.  The.  work  at 
Combabee  Ferry  could  not  receive  the  guns,  because  it  was  not  suffi- 
ciently advanced.  This  work  will  be  ready  for  the  guns  in  four  days. 
There  are  no  guns  for  this  position  unless  the  24-pounder  Austrian  gun 
sent  to  Coosawhatchie  was  intended  for  it  and  one  of  the  12-pounders 
at  Dawson’s  Bluff,  at  Pocotaligo.  The  two  guns  sent  for  this  position 
are  in  works  at  Old  Pocotaligo,  to  which  position  they  were  assigned 
until  the  battery  indicated  for  them  could  be  built.  This  is  now  in 
progress. 

At  Dawson’s  Bluff  there  are  three  guns  in  position — two  12-pounders, 
one  rifled,  and  one  smooth ; also  one  24-pounder  iron  howitzer.  At 
Coosawhatchie  redoubt  there  is  one  24-pounder  Austrian  gun,  placed 
there  because  there  was  no  other  position  ready  for  it.  The  projectiles 
for  the  12-pounder  rifle  gun  at  Dawson’s  Bluff,  ordered  to  be  sent  to 
General  Mercer,  were  sent  four  days  ago,  and  were  ordered  to  be  sent 
immediately  (by  a telegraph  to  the  commander  of  the  battery),  but  were 
delayed  four  days  for  want  of  transportation. 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

[Indorsement  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance, 

Charleston , March  7,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded. 

The  chief  of  artillery  cannot  account  for  the  12-pounder  rifle  siege 
gun  not  having  been  received  for  the  works  on  Combahee  River  but 
on  the  supposition  that  the  orders  on  the  subject  from  commanding 
general  have  not  been  fully  carried  out.  Special  Orders,  Ko.  247, 
series  of  1862,  provided  that  gUDS  [should  be]  furnished  from  White 
Point  Battery,  city  of  Charleston.  To  avoid  loss  of  time  and  much  in- 
convenience I respectfully  recommend  that  the  24-pounder  bronze  Aus- 
trian howitzer  now  in  work  at  Coosawhatchie  be  left  there  for  the  jires- 
ent,  and  so  with  the  two  12-pounder  siege  guns  at  Dawson’s  Bluff.  These 
are  important  positions  at  this  moment.  An  18-pounder  gun  now  having 
its  trail  repaired  at  the  arsenal  can  be  sent  by  me  to  the  Combahee  and 
a 24-pounder  howitzer  now  at  my  central  depot.  The  character  of  the 
Ashepoo  and  Combahee  Rivers  preclude  the  possibility  of  the  small 
armaments  assigned  to  them  effectually  closing  them  to  the  enemy  if 
bent  upon  forcing  his  passage  up  unless  the  submarine  batteries  which 
are  to  be  commanded  by  said  guns  are  established  as  projected. 

A.  J.  GONZALES, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance v 

[Indorsement  No.  2.] 

Charleston,  March  9, 1863. 

Approved.  One  12-pounder  rifled  gun  must  be  drawn  besides  from 
Georgetown  batteries  for  the  work  on  Combahee. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  6, 1863. 

S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

All  quiet  at  Fort  McAllister  ; four  ironclads  still  in  sight  yesterday; 


812  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

another  attack  anticipated.  We  had  only  four  effective  guns  and  one 
10-inch  mortar  against  six  (11  and  15  inch)  gdns  and  several  13-inch 
mortars  of  the  enemy.  Only  2 men  slightly  wounded  on  our  side. 

Fort  now  in  good  condition:  result  brilliant  to  our  arms. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  March  6,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah : 

General  : The  letter  of  N.  B.  Clinch,  adjutant  Fourth  Georgia  Cav- 
alry, to  Colonel  Clinch,  dated  February  26, 1863,  and  forwarded  through 
your  headquarters,  has  been  considered  by  the  commanding  general,  who 
sanctions  the  proposed  expedition  for  the  capture  of  the  Federal  gun- 
boats in  the  sound  south  of  the  Altamaha.  Y ou  are  therefore  authorized 
to  direct  the  necessary  preparations  for  the  adventure,  and  to  do  what- 
soever you  may  regard  as  essential  or  calculated  to  insure  success. 
Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JOED  AN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters,  McLeod’s , March  6, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  S.  Eipley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District : 

General:  I am  of  opinion  that  the  enemy  will  not  attack  Savannah 
unless  successful  in  their  attempt  to  reduce  the  outposts  and  river  bat- 
teries. If  this  be  so,  would  we  not  have  time  to  concentrate  ? At  same 
time  I think  the  Yankee  generals  will  be  loth  to  remain  quiet  when  so 
much  is  evidently  expected  from  them.  They  must  attempt  something, 
and  my  judgment  is  that  the  attack  will  be  upon  some  accessible  and 
least- guarded  point  of  the  railroad.  That  they  can  with  their  force 
accomplish  this  is  beyond  a doubt.  When  they  find  (if  they  do  not  know 
it  already)  that  the  city  of  Charleston  is  almost  without  troops  they 
would  destroy  road  and  bridges,  and  before  the  troops  could  be  sent 
by  way  of  Augusta  or  march  to  us  from  Savannah  we  would  be  in  their 
power,  always  supposing  they  come  in  overwhelming  force,  which  they 
would  of  course  do.  They  have  certain  means  of  information,  exactly 
what  kind  we  do  not  know,  and  if  they  are  aware  of  our  present  situa- 
tion, how  easily  could  they  send  two-thirds  of  their  forces  by  way  of 
John’s  Island  and  the  Stouo  and  force  our  lines  in  Saint  Andrew’s  and 
James  Island  ? An  enterprising  enemy  could  do  this. 

Having  some  knowledge  of  railroad  transportation,  I undertake  to 
say* that  it  will  consume  at  least  six  days  to  concentrate  our  forces  at 
Charleston ; hence  you  perceive  my  anxiety  consequent  upon  having 
so  small  a force  of  infantry.  My  suggestion  was  and  is  to  concentrate 
troops  and  transportation  at  some  proper  point  on  the  railroad  or  in 
Charleston,  this  latter  being  the  most  important  point,  and  be  in  readi- 
ness to  move  5,000  men  to  any  point  in  a few  hours.  The  transporta- 
tion can  be  had  and  held  without  interfering  with  mail  trains. 

I merely  give  you  my  ideas  hastily,  and  you  are  at  liberty  to  commu- 
nicate them  to  the  general  commanding  if  you  think  proper. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  GIST, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXTI  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


813 


[Indorsement  No.  1.] 


Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston , March  6,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded. 

I concur  with  General  Gist  that  it  is  well  to  keep  a sufficient  force 
of  infantry  to  repel  any  immediate  attack  on  James  Island  constantly 
in  position,  not  to  be  moved  thence  until  the  enemy  have  become  seri- 
ously engaged  elsewhere,  as  soon  as  the  state  of  the  command  will 
permit. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General. 

[Indorsement  No.  2.] 


The  general  commanding  will  be  happy  to  have  the  opinions  of  his 
subordinate  officers  at  the  proper  time. 

G.  T.  B, 

General , Commanding. 


Memoranda  for  operations  in  case  the  enemy  land  at  Fort  Royal  Ferry . 

PocotaliGtO,  S.  0.,  March  6,  1863. 

Colonel  Hall,  Forty-sixth  North  Carolina  Regiment,  will  command 
the  right,  with  the  two  North  Carolina  regiments;  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens, 
Twenty -fourth  South  Carolina  Regiment,  the  left.  Colonel  Hall  will 
place  one-half  a regiment  in  rear  of  Fort  Pocotaligo  as  support  to  bat- 
teries; one-half  in  rifle  pits  next  to  causeway.  One-half  of  North  Car- 
olina regiment  will  be  placed  near  Battery  No.  2 and  one-half  near 
Battery  No.  3.  The  supports  will  be  close  under  cover  until  ordered  out. 
Four  companies  of  Colonel  Stevens’  regiment  will  be  placed  behind  bank 
of  reserve  in  the  woods  near  Screven’s  road  to  support  batteries  when 
required.  A section  of  Captain  Preston’s  battery  will  be  held  in  reserve 
near  the  same  point.  Three  pieces  of  Captain  Elliott’s  battery,  Captain 
Trenholm’s  company,  Captain  Colcock’s  company,  and  the  remainder 
of  the  cavalry,  under  Colonel  Rutledge,  will  be  held  in  reserve  behind 
or  near  Elliott’s  Mill.  The  brigadier- general  commanding  proposes  to 
take  position  on  Elliott’s  Mill. " One  piece  of  Campbell’s  artillery  will 
be  placed  in  position  at  Elliott’s  lunette,  in  garden,  commanding  cause- 
way, and  one  on  Port  Royal  road  causeway.  Captain  Lamkin’s  bat- 
tery will  be  sent  to  Mr.  Daniel  Heyward’s  road.  If  enemy’s  force  ad- 
vance by  both  Sheldon  Church  and  Stony  Creek  roads,  a section  will 
be  sent  to  Pemberton’s  battery  on  Stony  Creek  road  and  one  to  works 
at  Mrs.  Eustis,  on  Sheldon  Church  road,  supported  by  Captain  Lowry’s 
company,  and  Captain  Edwards,  with  two  companies  of  the  squadron, 
horses  of  cavalry  to  be  well  concealed  in  rear. 

If  the  enemy  advance  on  one  road  only,  the  whole  force  will  concen- 
trate on  work  commanding  that  road.  A platoon  of  cavalry7  will  be 
placed  in  woods  west  of  Capt.  S.  Elliott,  jr.,  to  observe  if  the  enemy  make 
any  movement  in  that  direction.  A squad  of  Captain  Trenholm’s  com- 
panyT,  with  guides,  will  be  detailed  to  observe  enemy  and  report.  A 
section  of  Captain  Preston’s  battery  will  take  position  at  Union  road 
battery,  supported  byr  two  companies  of  the  squadron,  under  Captain 
Skinner.  A platoon  of  cavalry  will  be  sent  to  watch  causeway  leading 
from  Hutson’s  over  old  rice  fields  east  of  Screven’s.  A section  of  Cap- 
tain Elliott’s  battery  will  take  position  at  Battery  No.  1;  one  piece  at 
tfle  causeway  battery;  a section  of  Preston’s  at  Battery  No,  2, 


814 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GrA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


It  is  enjoined  upon  the  artillery  to  fire  with  great  deliberation,  mainly 
upon  the  enemy’s  infantry,  till  they  advance  upon  the  battery,  when  they 
will  be  plied  with  canister  as  rapidly  as  possible.  The  infantry  will 
not  fire  till  the  enemy  have  advanced  within  250  yards  of  their  position. 
Officers  will  be  careful  to  impress  this  order  upon  the  men,  as  the  enemy 
frequently  take  position  and  fire  at  long  range  to  draw  our  fire  or  scare 
us  by  a noisy  demonstration.  Should  the  enemy  march  by  either  two 
or  three  different  routes,  they  must  be  met  at  works  commanding  all  the 
routes  by  forces  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  the  demonstration.  In 
the  event  of  works  on  Union  road  being  taken,  the  line  of  retreat  would 
be  to  junction  of  Union  and  Salkehatchie  roads.  Should  the  main  fight 
have  taken  place  at  that  point,  a second  stand  would  be  made  by  the 
whole  command  concentrated  at  the  junction  or  at  Salkehatchie  Swamp 
and  bridge,  as  circumstances  would  require.  In  the  event  of  works  on 
Combahee  Eiver  road  being  attacked  by  the  main  body  of  the  enemy 
and  forced,  the  whole  command  would  be  concentrated  at  swamp  west 
of  Salkehatchie  Bridge.  If  only  a detachment  should  have  taken  the 
works,  they  will  retire  to  junction  of  Sellers’  road  and  the  Salkehatchie 
road  and  be  re-enforced  for  a second  stand.  Should  the  point,  however, 
have  been  taken  for  want  of  re-enforcement,  the  works  at  Pocotaligo 
will  still  be  held  and  a re-enforcement  sent  to  the  above  point.  Should 
the  enemy  land  at  Mackay’s  Point,  and  while  making  a demonstration 
at  Pocotaligo  march  through  the  woods  on  the  railroad  west  of  Poco- 
taligo, a force  will  be  sent  to  meet  them  through  Capt.  William  Hey- 
ward’s negro  quarters.  They  might  also  be  taken  in  rear  of  Capt. 
Thomas  Elliott’s  Causeway.  In  the  event  of  the  enemy  breaking  the 
line  of  defense  on  both  the  right  and  left  and  taking  possession  of  the 
Salkehatchie  road  before  the  right  at  Pocotaligo  could  retire,  the  left  of 
the  line  would  retire  by  the  Salkehatchie  Bridge  and  endeavor  to  hold  it 
by  breaking  down  the  bridge  and  planting  artillery  on  the  east  bank. 
The  right  would  retire  through  Blountville  by  Izard’s  Bridge  and  con- 
centrate either  at  Salkehatchie  Bridge  or  Walterborough,  according  to 
our  capacity  for  holding  the  line  of  the  Combahee  River.  If  forced  to 
retire  irom  the  Combahee  River,  a portion  of  the  command,  consisting 
mainly  of  cavalry,  with  a light  battery,  will  retire  to  Walterborough, 
the  remainder  to  the  bridge  over  the  Ashepoo,  with  a view  of  holding 
the  line  of  the  Ashepoo  River.  If  forced  from  that  line,  we  would  en- 
deavor to  hold  the  railroad  crossing  of  the  Edisto  and  also  try  to 
cover  the  line  of  railroad  from  Branchville  to  Ridgeville,  for  which  we 
would  expect  re-enforcements  from  General  Beauregard.  In  the  event 
of  retiring  from  any  position  the  troops  that  have  been  least  exposed 
to  fire  will  compose  the  rear  guard. 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Ela., 

No.  58.  ) Charleston , March  6,  1863. 

I.  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States,  having  reported  for  duty  in  this  department,  is  assigned  to  the 
District  of  Georgia,  and  will  report,  with  his  staff,  to  Brigadier- General 
Mercer,  commanding. 

* # # # # # * 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

' JKO.  M.  OTEY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


815 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  March  8,  1863. 
Capt.  W.  H.  Echols,  Engineer  Officer: 

The  general  commanding  desires  me  to  inform  you  that  the  torpedoes 
for  the  Combahee  and  Ashepoo  Fivers  ought  to  be  placed  as  soon  as 
practicable.  He  desires  to  be  informed  also  if  the  new  battery  at 
Haig’s,  on  the  Stono,  has  been  armed.  Verbal  instructions  were  given 
on  the  subject  to  Major  Harris  and  General  Bipley.  You  will  please 
inquire  of  the  latter  what  has  been  done  in  the  matter  should  you  not 
have  in  your  possession  the  desired  information. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  CHISOLM, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  8, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Eeturn  General  Clingman’s  brigade  to  report  to  General  Eipley  as 
before  going  to  Savannah. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  <7.,  March  9,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  E.  Gist, 

Comdg.  Confederate  States  Forces  James  Island : 

General  : Your  communication  of  the  15th  ultimo  has  been  sub- 
mitted to  the  commanding  general  since  his  return  from  Savannah,  and 
I am  instructed  to  communicate  his  remarks  upon  the  same,  as  follows: 

The  general  commanding  leaves  to  the  generals  commanding  each  district  the  con- 
trol and  disposition  of  the  troops  stationed  within  their  jurisdiction,  holding  them 
responsible  for  the  same.  Should  the  disposition  be  faulty,  the  general  commanding 
then  exerts  his  power  of  correcting  the  error. 

When  General  Ripley  arrived  here  General  Gist  was  ordered  to  report  to  him  for 
duty.  On  General  Gist's  return  from  North  Carolina  he  was  again  (verbally)  ordered 
to  report  to  General  Ripley  for  the  same  duty  or  otherwise,  as  the  latter  might  direct. 

The  sub-divisions  contained  in  Orders,  No.  6,  meet  with  the  approval  of  the  general 
commanding. 


I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 


CLIFTOY  H.  SMITH, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


State  of  South  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Columbia , March  9,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Commanding , &c. : 

Dear  Sir:  General  Garlington  is  sick  in  bed.  Bot  seeing  him  until 
late  last  night  and  other  circumstances  have  prevented  my  writing  you 
sooner. 

When  I ordered  the  troops  formerly  composing  the  First,  Fourth,  and 
Tenth  Beserves,  now  under  a new  organization,  to  repair  to  the  coast  it 
was  to  supply  to  some  extent  what  was  wanted  of  the  Beserves,  viz,  to 
bold  the  grqqnd  till  the  arrival  Qf  disciplined  troops,  4s  the  time  ap> 


816 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.?  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


proached  for  them  to  rendezvous  the  prospect  of  an  immediate  attack 
grew  fainter  ; the  troops  would  be  very  raw ; no  answer  was  received 
from  the  President  or  yourself  accepting  them ; the  disciplined  troops 
were  reaching  our  coast  from  North  Carolina,  and  the  season  for  seed- 
ing the  land  was  rapidly  approaching;  I therefore  suspended  the  call,  of 
which  I apprised  you. 

The  following  telegrams  and  extract  of  the  letter  from  Mr.  Miles  were 
received  by  General  Garlington  and  that  from  Mr.  Orr  to  myself  arrived 
during  my  absence  at  home: 

[From  Hon.  James  L.  Orr.— Extract,  dated  February  25,  1863.] 

On  reading  your  proclamation  I called  to  see  the  Secretary  of  War  to  ascertain  from 
him  what  troops  he  had  sent  to  South  Carolina  and  what  other  troops  he  proposed  to 
send.  I commenced  the  conversation  by  telling  him  of  your  proclamation,  and  ex- 
pressing my  regret  that  you  had  found  it  necessary,  in  your  judgment,  to  call  out  the 
militia,  and  inquired  if  he  could  not  send  troops  enough  to  avoid  the  necessity.  He 
said  substantially,  that  he  thought  it  unnecessary  that  the  militia  should  have  been 
called  out;  that  they  were  not  efficient;  that  one  trained  regiment  that  had  been  I 
under  lire  was  worth  four  or  five  of  raw  militia ; that  they  consumed  as  much  of  the  | 
commissary  stores  as  an  equal  number  of  efficient  troops,  and  that  it  was  necessary 
to  husband  our  commissary  stores  with  the  greatest  caution ; that  when  he  was  tele- 
graphed on  the  subject  he  did  not  encourage  the  call,  but  did  not  feel  at  liberty  to 
say  it  must  not  be  done  ; that  he  had  already  sent  one  brigade ; that  he  had  another 
in  North  Carolina  ready  at  a moment’s  notice  to  send  wherever  the  enemy  might 
make  the  attack ; that  while  appearances  indicated  an  attack  on  Savannah  or  Charles- 
ton, it  might  be  a feint,  and  that  the  troops  should  be  kept  ready  to  move  at  a 
moment’s  notice  to  the  point  where  the  attack  was  actually  made ; that  Ransom’s 
division  would  all  be  sent  if  needed.  He  stated,  further,  that  the  army  of  the  enemy 
was  greatly  reduced  on  the  Rappahannock;  that  the  retiring  troops  were  concen- 
trating at  Newport  News  and  Fort  Monroe,  whether  to  advance  by  way  of  Suffolk  or 
Richmond  or  whether  they  were  merely  collecting  to  be  sent  by  transports  to  Charles- 
ton or  some  other  southern  point  was  not  certainly  known ; that,  with  a view  of  being 
ready  for  any  contingency,  General  Lee  had  already  sent  nearly  all  of  Longstreet’s 
army  corps  (Hood’s  and  Pickett’s  divisions)  to  a point  between  this  city  and  Peters- 
burg, on  the  line  of  railroad,  so  that  they  could  be  in  readiness  to  march  toward  Suf- 
folk if  the  enemy  came  in  that  direction,  and  if  they  were  sent  by  transports  that  the 
troops  could  take  the  cars  for  Charleston.  He  is  earnest  in  his  purpose  to  have 
Charleston  defended  at  all  hazards,  and  without  some  accident,  now  wholly  unex- 
pected, you  may  rest  assured  that  he  will  send  whatever  number  of  troops  may  be 
considered  necessary  for  the  successful  defense  of  the  city. 

[Telegrams  from  Hou.  Mr.  Miles  to  General  Garlington,  February  26.  | 

Calling  out  militia  was  not  done  at  instance  of  authorities  here.  Entirely  in  the 
control  of  the  Governor.  I fully  concur  in  your  views,  but  what  can  we  do  here?  - 
Troops  will  continue  to  be  sent  as  occasion  demands. 

[Telegram  from  Hon.  Mr.  Miles  to  General  Garlington,  February  28.] 

Secretary  of  War  thinks  you  had  better  only  organize  militia,  but  not  send  to  the 
coast  unless  in  the  event  of  some  disaster.  Every  effort  will  be  made  to  send  re-en- 
forcements from  time  to  time  as  events  demand  and  as  the  movements  of  the  enemy 
elsewhere  will  permit.  Major  Jordan  writes  me  that  he  is  sanguine  of  our  success  in 
the  event  of  an  attack. 

[From  Mr.  Miles. — Extract,  dated  March  1,  1863.] 

My  replies  to  your  telegrams  were  perhaps  sufficiently  full  to  render  it  hardly  nec-  . 
essary  to  write  you  on  their  subject-matter.  The  object  of  the  War  Department 
originally,  in  desiring  to  retain  the  regiments  of  reserves,  was  to  give  time  for  the 
sending  on  oP re-enforcements.  The  impression  seemed  to  prevail  in  Charleston  that 
an  attack  was  so  imminent  that  it  might  be  looked  for  daily,  nay  almost  hourly. 
The  transportation  of  troops  from  North  Carolina  was  very  slow,  not  amounting  to 
1,000  men  a day,  hence  we  are  not  a little  surprised— not  to  say  mortified— that  the 
Legislature  (if  they  believed  the  attack  so  imminent  as  the  military  authorities  in 
Charleston  did)  should  refuse  to  retain  in  service  the  regiments  of  Reserves  even  for 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


817 


a week  or  two.  Since  then,  however,  troops  have  been  sent  from  North  Carolina  in  n am- 
bers exceeding  the  numbers  of  the  Reserves.  The  Secretary  of  War  does  not  think  the 
calling  out  of  the  militia  desirable.  In  the  first  place  they  would,  as  you  suggest,  neces- 
sarily "be  imperfectly  organized.  Secondly,  they  would  trench  very  much  upon  our 
limited  subsistence.  Thirdly,  they  would  be  of  very  little  real  service.  Hence  the 
advice  of  the  Secretary  is  to  organize  them  at  home,  but  not  to  send  them  to  the 
coast  until  some  very  pressing  exigency  may  arise.  In  this  view  I entirely  concur. 
What  you  say  about  the  agricultural  interest  is  very  forcible,  and  must  commend 
itself  to  the  judgment  of  every  reflecting  person.  There  is  every  desire  here  to  ren- 
der General  Beauregard  all  possible  assistance.  Troops  will  continue  to  be  sent  as 
rapidly  as  events  demand  and  the  movements  of  the  enemy  elsewhere  will  admit. 

Under  these  circumstances,  with  the  additional  facts  that  the  people 
of  the  Fourth  and  Tenth  Reserves,  now  reorganizing  (the  Charleston 
troops  scarcely  yet),  are  in  a country  cultivated  mostly  by  white  labor, 
and  that  to  take  them  away  for  three  months  will  prevent  the  planting 
and  raising  of  grain  crops,  so  essential  for  themselves  and  also  for  sub- 
sisting the  troops  and  portions  of  the  Confederacy  where  no  crops  can 
be  raised,  it  seems  to  me  impolitic  to  call  out  the  regiments. 

I will  add  that  a great  many  of  our  boys  under  eighteen  and  men 
over  forty  are  already  in  the  field  as  volunteers.  Moreover  I have  en- 
couraged the  raising  of  volunteer  companies,  to  continue  their  organi- 
zation for  the  fight,  unless  their  militia  regiments  shall  be  ordered  to 
the  field,  when  they  will  join  them.  These  volunteers,  of  which  it  is 
not  improbable  you  may  get  several  companies,  will  be  better  thau  the 
mixed  militia.  It  will  unquestionably  be  better  in  all  respects  that  the 
militia  should  not  be  called  out  now,  and  in  this  I hope  your  judgment 


will  concur. 

Very  truly  and  respectfully,  yours, 


M.  L.  BONHAM. 


Inspector-General’s  Office, 
Charleston , S.  0.,  March  10,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  communication  of  the  4th  instant,  request- 
ing me  to  make  frequent  visits  (at  least  once  a week)  to  the  torpedo 
ram  to  urge  its  completion,  I visited  yesterday  the  ship-yard  where 
said  ram  is  being  constructed,  and  I beg  leave  to  report  as  follows  : 

Sixty-one  skip -carpenters  and  laborers  are  now  employed  on  the  ma- 
rine ram,  under  the  general  supervision  of  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee.  They  work 
from  7 a.  m.  to  1 p.  m.  and  from  2 p.  m.  to  6 p.  m.  Captain  Lee  and 
F.  M.  Jones,  his  assistant,  think  that  the  wood  work  of  the  boat  will  be 
completed  in  two  weeks.  The  timber  and  planking  for  the  shield  is 
already  prepared  and  is  now  being  put  together.  The  boiler  and  part 
of  the  engine  are  in  place  and  the  shafting  was  being  fitted  to  the 
stern.  The  necessary  repairs  to  the  machinery  (which  is  second-hand 
machinery,  purchased  in  Savannah)  are  being  executed  at  the  arsenal. 
Captain  Lee  has  no  immediate  control  over  that  portion  of  the  work, 
and  he  doubts  whether  it  will  be  ready  as  soon  as  the  rest.  Both  Cap- 
tain Lee  and  Jones,  being  otherwise  engaged,  do  not  remain  all  day  with 
the  workmen.  Captain  Lee,  however,  visits  the  ship  yard  regularly  once 
a day. 

So  much  time  has  been  consumed  in  the  building  of  that  ram,  and  on 
the  other  hand  the  difficulty  of  procuring  iron  to  shield  it  is  so  great, 

52  E R — VOL  XIV 


818 


COASTS  Of  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MlD.  AND  EAST  FLA.  (Chap.  XXVi. 

that  no  zeal,  I imagine,  is  shown  in  the  progress  of  the  work.  If  the 
carpenters  were  ready  to-day  no  iron  could  be  had  to  complete  the  ram. 
The  Navy  Department  has  promised  everything,  but  has  given  com- 
paratively nothing.  The  idea  of  working  simultaneously  on  four  or 
five  gunboats  in  Charleston  instead  of  concentrating  all  the  labor  on 
one  at  the  time  is  indeed  so  very  singular  that  I am  altogether  at  a loss 
to  account  for  it.  From  all  appearance  the  Palmetto  State  and  the 
Chicora  will  be  the  only  two  rams  used  in  the  defense  of  this  harbor, 
whether  the  Federals  attack  us  now  or  whether  they  delay  it  for  months. 
Respectfully  submitted. 

ALF.  ROMAN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Inspector- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  March  11,  18G3. 

Hon.  S.  R.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy , Richmond , Va. : 

Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  5th  instant  has  been  received.*  I had  already 
given  orders  for  the  organization  of  boarding  parties  to  storm  the  ene- 
my’s irou-clad  monitors  should  they  succeed  in  entering  the  harbor, 
when  Captain  Ingraham  showed  me  your  letter  of  the  fith  February. 
I then  ordered  the  boarding  parties  (organized  and  to  be  organized) 
turned  over  to  him  for  service,  as  indicated  in  your  letter.  General 
Ripley,  commanding  this  military  district,  informed  me  on  the  9th  in- 
stant as  follows : 

I have  detailed  from  Keitt’s  and  Colquitt’s  regiments  a number  sufficient  to  man  all 
the  boats  which  can  be  procured.  It  is  intended  the  men  shall  be  instructed  under 
the  officers  of  the  Navy  as  soon  as  possible. 


Should  the  Navy  Department  desire  that  this  boarding  expedition  be 
again  placed  under  the  control  of  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  who  has  the 
immediate  charge  of  the  harbor  defenses  of  Charleston,  he  will  gladly 
avail  himself  of  this  important  auxiliary  to  the  other  means  already  at 
his  disposal. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  61.  f Charleston , March  11,  1863. 

I.  For  the  present  Brig.  Gen.  Trapier  will  report  to  commander  of 
First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina  to  command  a sub-district 
embracing  Sullivan’s  Island. 

******* 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

J JNO.  M.  OTEY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


819 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  March  12,  1863. 

M.  L.  Bonham, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina , Columbia  : 

Dear  Sir  : Your  communication  of  the  9th  instant  has  been  received. 
To  say  that  I have  not  been  disappointed  by  the  decision  announced 
would  not  be  frank  with  you.  I was  fully  alive  to  the  sacrifices  and 
hardships  which  a call  on  your  militia  must  entail  and  not  unconscious 
of  the  prejudicial  effects  that  would  flow  from  the  withdrawal  of  some 
1,500  men  from  their  avocations  (planting')  at  this  season  of  the  year, 
but  at  the  same  time  I have  regarded  the  alternative  consequences 
that  might  be  involved  without  the  presence  here  of  every  arms-bearing 
man  your  State  can  raise. 

I know  it  has  been  promised  that  all  assistance  shall  be  rendered  us 
here  in  the  hour  of  attack  that  may  be  found  practicable.  I know, 
too,  that  two  partially  unarmed  brigades  have  been  sent  me  from  North 
Carolina,  and  another  brigade  is  held  in  readiness  to  be  sent  from  the 
same  quarter,  the  three  brigades  constituting,  I believe,  Bansom’s  en- 
tire division,  which  figures  so  prominently  in  Colonel  Miles’  accounts 
of  the  assistance  that  is  to  be  rendered  in  due  season.  If  an  attack  is 
to  be  made  at  all  be  assured  one  brigade  added  to  the  troops  already 
in  the  department  will  not  make  a sufficient  force  upon  which  should 
be  devolved  the  maintenance  of  such  v£st  public  interests  as  are  at 
stake  in  this  military  department. 

On  assuming  command  I called  on  my  predecessor  to  state  the  mini- 
mum force  that  he  regarded  essential  for  the  defense  of  Charleston  and 
Savannah  and  the  several  approaches  thereto.  That  minimum  force  he 
estimated  as  follows : 

First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 


Infantry 15,600 

Heavy  artillery 2, 850 

Cavalry 1,000 


Total  all  arms 19, 450 

And  nine  batteries  of  light  artillery. 

Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 

Infantry 5,000 

, Heavy  artillery 200 

Cavalry 800 


All  arms 6,  000 

And  two  batteries  light  artillery. 


Third  District  South  Carolina. 


All  arms 5, 000 

That  is,  a force  of  30,450  men  of  all  arms.  Instead  of  those,  I have 
now,  all  told,  but  17,447  men  for  the  duty. 

For  the  District  of  Georgia  General  Pemberton  estimated  as  the 
minimum  force  essential : 


Infantry 10,000 

Heavy  artillery 1, 200 

Cavairy 2, 000 


Total  all  arms 13, 200 


And  eight  batteries  of  light  artillery. 


820  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

T have  but  10,204.  In  other  words,  my  command  is  much  smaller  and 
weaker  than  the  force  commanded  by  General  Lee  a year  ago  in  this 
State,  when  the  hostile  force  at  Port  Royal  was  of  not  more  than  half 
the  strength  of  the  enemy  now  concentrated  in  that  vicinity. 

With  what  resources  1 have  I shall  make  the  best  battle  I can,  con- 
scious that  I have  done  all  that  I could  to  enlarge  those  resources  in 
all  practicable  ways. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  March  13,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General:  In  obedience  to  instructions  from  department  headquar- 
ters I made  an  experiment  with  my  boat  torpedo  on  yesterday.  One 
of  ihe  abandoned  gunboats  was  placed  at  my  disposal  some  days  since, 
which,  after  loading  with  rubbish  from  the  burnt  district,  got  a draught 
of  6J  feet  at  her  bow.  I was  anxious  to  obtain  a draught  of  7^  feet,  but 
was  unable  to  procure  a vessel  of  that  class.  The  torpedo-bearing  boat 
for  attacking  this  hulk  was  ft  light-built  cauoe  about  20  feet  long,  with 
a spar  suspended  6 feet  from  her  keel  and  projecting  beyond  her  bow 
22  feet,  at  the  extremity  of  which  I placed  the  torpedo,  with  a charge  of 
nearly  30  pounds  of  powder.  It  was  my  purpose  to  make  the  experi- 
ment at  1.30  o’clock  p.  m.,  that  being  the  hour  of  high  water,  but  the 
delays  consequent  upon  the  want  of  dispatch  on  the  part  of  the  steamer 
engaged  to  tow  the  hulk  in  place  prevented  the  completion  of  all  neces- 
sary preparations  until  2.30  p.  m.  At  that  hour  a strong  northwest 
wind,  amounting  nearly  to  a gale,  was  blowing,  which,  with  the  ebb  tide, 
rendered  it  impossible  for  me  to  moor  the  hulk  in  such  position  as  to 
attach  the  lines  for  striking  her  side.  Every  previous  preparation 
having  been,  however,  made,  I deemed  it  proper  to  make  a trial  even  at 
the  risk  of  failure,  and  gave  orders  to  strike  the  vessel  in  the  stern. 
After  great  difficulty,  owing  to  the  roughness  of  the  sea,  I secured  a 
line  to  the  bow  of  the  torpedo-boat,  and  after  reeving  it  through  a 
block  secured  to  the  hulk  returned  it  through  a block  in  the  stern  of 
the  torpedo-boat,  and  thence  to  a row-boat.  I then  ordered  the  row-boat  v 
to  pull  away.  The  torpedo-boat  moved  with  good  speed  to  the  hulk  and 
apparently  struck,  but  without  the  expected  discharge.  The  position 
of  the  torpedo-boat  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  torpedo  had  passed  un- 
der the  hulk.  Leaving  the  boat  in  this  position  I returned  to  the  city, 
and  after  giving  the  hands  a recess  of  an  hour  returned  to  the  hulk  to 
examine  into  the  true  condition  of  things.  I then  found  that  the  tor- 
pedo, in  place  of  striking  directly  in  the  stern,  had  passed  diagonally 
under  the  counter  of  the  hulk.  On  withdrawing  it  I discovered  that 
the  torpedo  had  not  come  in  contact,  and  that  the  lead  plugs  contain- 
ing the  sensitive  tubes  and  charges  of  chlorate  potassa  were  entirely 
uninjured.  Night  fast  coming  on  I secured  the  torpedo-boat  to  tlie  side 
of  the  hulk  so  as  to  be  safe  from  accident,  determining  to  make  a new 
trial  the  following  morning.  On  this  morning  at  8 a.  m.  I returned  to 
the  hulk,  accompained  by  Captain  Chisolm,  of  the  general  staff,  and  Mr. 
W.  S.  Uenerey,  machinist,  and  after  anchoring  the  hulk  across  the 
stream  put  on  the  lines  and  struck  her  about  amidships.  The  torpedo 
instantly  exploded,  with  little  or  no  displacement  of  water.  In  about 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


821 


twenty  seconds  the  hulk  sank.  On  moving  up  to  the  torpedo-boat  we 
discovered  her  entirely  uninjured,  with  a very  small  quantity  of  water 
in  ber,  more  than  half  of  which  was  there  before  the  explosion.  From 
all  appearances  the  spar  is  uninjured. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FBANCIS  I).  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , March  13,  18G3. 

Eespectfully  referred  to  Commodore  Ingraham,  with  the  recommenda- 
tion that  as  many  boats  as  practicable  of  the  boarding  flotilla  (say  at 
least  one  dozen)  should  be  fitted  up  at  once  with  Captain  Lee’s  spar 
torpedo,  not  only  to  defend  the  harbor  against  iron-clads  but  to  blow 
up  the  blockaders  at  night. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  13, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Commanding , near  Jacksonville , Fla. : 

It  is  impossible  to  spare  a man  at  this  time.  The  general  leaves  all 
things  to  your  discretion  and  judgment,  as  at  this  distance  cannot  in- 
struct intelligently.  Order  people  of  Jacksonville  out  of.  place  if  you 
think  proper.  Eeport  present  state  of  affairs. 

THOMAS  JOED  ANT, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  13, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  II.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga.  : 

Hold  one  brigade  ready  to  support  General  W.  S.  Walker  if  prac- 
ticable. Have  those  box  cars  been  furnished  him?  Reports  of  Fort 
McAllister  are  received. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  13,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , S.  C.  : 

Enemy’s  movements  must  be  closely  watched.  Act  not  with  precipi- 
tation, but  be  always  prepared  to  act  at  moment’s  notice.  General 
Mercer  will  support  you  if  practicable. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


822  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI, 


Abstract  from  Beturn  of  Troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia,  and  Florida, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  March  13,  1863. 


Troops. 


First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. . . 
Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 
Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 
Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 

District  of  Georgia - 

District  of  Middle  Florida 

District  of  East  Florida 

Grand  total 


Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  and 

absent. 

Total  effective 

infantry. 

Total  effective 

cavalry. 

Total  effective 

artillery. 

4, 246 

709 

2, 732 

8,  663 

10,  048 

1,437 

820 

187 

2,  675 

3.  106 

3,448 

1,  333 

499 

6,  060 

7,  709 

336 

142 

561 

735 

7,  685 

1,772 

2,  780 

13,  981 

16,  738 

359 

239 

110 

805 

1,026 

222 

441 

140 

916 

1,  249 

17,  397 

5,  650 

6,590 

33,  661 

40,  611 

Note.- — Heavy  artillery  included  with  light  artillery  in  the  First  District  of  South  Carolina  and  the 
District  of  Georgia. 


RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 


First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. . 
Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina. 
Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 
Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 

District  of  Georgia 

District  of  Middle  Florida 

District  of  East  Florida 


7,687 
2,444 
5, 280 
478 
12, 237 
708 
803 


Total  effective 


29, 637 


Organization  of  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia , 
and  Florida , commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , March  13, 1863. 

FIBST  MILITABY  DISTBICT  OF  SOUTH  CABOLINA. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley  commanding. 

JAMES  ISLAND  AND  SAINT  ANDREW’S. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist  commanding. 

8th  Georgia  Battalion,  Maj.  B.  F.  Hunt. 

25th  South  Carolina,  Col.  Charles  H.  Simonton. 

3d  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Company  K,  Capt.  T.  Cordes. 

Ferguson’s  (South  Carolina)  cavalry,  Company  G,  Capt.  B.  W.  McTureous. 

2d  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Lieut.  Col.  A.  D.  Frederick. 

Lucas’  (South  Carolina)  battalion  of  artillery,  Maj.  J.  J.  Lucas. 

Palmetto  (South  Carolina)  Battalion  of  Artillery,  Lieut.  Col.  E.  B.  White. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  L.  Clingman’s  brigade. 

8th  North  Carolina,  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw. 

* 31st  North  Carolina,  Col.  John  V.  Jordan. 

51st  North  Carolina,  Col.  Hector  McKethan. 

61st  North  Carolina,  Col.  James  D.  Radcliffe. 

German  Artillery,  Company  B,  Capt.  F.  Melcliera. 


Cbap.  xm)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC  —CONFEDERATE.  823 

FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA- Continued. 

sullivan’s  island  and  christ  church  parish. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  commanding. 

1st  South  Carolina  Infantry,  Col.  William  Butler. 

20th  South  Carolina  Infantry,  Col.  L.M.  Keitt.  Whildem 

Ferguson’s  (South  Carolina)  cavalry,  Company  h,  Capt.L.  . wn  me 

Rutledge  (South  Carolina)  Cavalry,  Company  D,  C^tT-Pmckney. 

1st  Regular  Artillery,  Companies  I and  K,  Capt.  J.  A.  Sitgrea  . 

Ferguson  Light  Battery,  Capt.  T.  B Ferguson 

German  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Company  A,  Capt.  I>.  Werner. 

Santee  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Capt.  Chris.  Gaillara. 

MORRIS  island. 

21st  South  Carolina,  Col.  Robert  F.  Graham. 

Gist  Guards,  Capt.  C.  E.  Chichester. 

Mathewes  Artillery,  Capt.  F.  N.  Bouneau. 

CITY  OF  CHARLESTON. 

46th  Georgia,  Col.  P.  H.  Colquitt. 

Charleston  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.P.  C.  Gaillard. 

21st  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry,  Maj.  Wdliam  P.  White. 

South  Carolina  Siege  Train,  Maj.  Charles  Alston,  jr. 

CASTLE  PINCKNEY  AND  FORT  RIPLEY. 

1st  Regiment  Artillery,  Company  H,  Capt.  H.  S.  Farley. 

FORT  SUMTER. 

1st  Artillery,  Companies  B,  C,D,  E,  F,  G,  Col.  Alfred  Rhett. 

GEORGETOWN  AND  VICINITY  SUB- DISTRICT  TO  FIRST  DISTRICT. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  A.  Yates  commanding. 

2d  South  Carolina  Artillery  (one  company),  Capt.  F.  F.  Warl  y. 

Light  Battery,  Capt.  J.  Ward. 

SECOND  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood  commanding. 

7th  Battalion  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (eight  companies),  Lieut.  Col.  P.  H.  Nelson. 
16th  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Col.  fa™eas^9ullough- 

26th  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Col.  A.  L.  Smitb.  p b 1L 

3d  South  Carolina  Cavalry  (one  company),  Capt.  A.  L.  CampbelL 
6th  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Col.  H.  K.  Aiken. 

South  Carolina  Battery,  Capt.  E.  L.  Parker.  ,. 

South  Carolina  Battery,  Capt.  George  H.  Walter. 

Stono  Scouts,  Capt,  J.  B.  L.  Walpole. 

THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA . 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker  commanding. 

Ferguson  Cavalry  (eight  oompanies),  Lieut.  Col.  R.  J.  Jettorcts. 


824 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA— Continued. 

Rutledge  Cavalry  (five  companies),  Col.  B.  H.  Rutledge. 

Company  Rangers,  Capt.  M.  J.  Kirk. 

Horse  Artillery,  Capt.  W.  L.  Trenbolm. 

Light  (South  Carolina)  Battery,  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr. 

Light  (South  Carolina)  Battery,  Capt.  J.  T.  Kanapaux. 

Palmetto  Battalion,  Company  A,  Capt.  W.  E.  Earle. 

Virginia  Battery,  Capt.  J.  N.  Lamkin. 

Brig.  Gen . John  R.  Cooke’s  "brigade . 

15th  North  Carolina,  Col.  H.  A.  Dowd. 

27th  North  Carolina,  Col.  John  A.  Gilmer,  jr. 

4Cth  North  Carolina,  Col.  E.  D.  Hall. 

48th  North  Carolina,  Col.  Robert  C.  Hill. 

Light  Battery,  Captain  Cooper. 

DISTRICT  OF  GEORGIA . 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer  commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  B.  Taliaferro’s  brigade. 

32d  Georgia,  Col.  George  P.  narrison,  jr. 

47th  Georgia,  Col.  George  W.  M.  Williams. 

4tli  Louisiana  Battalion  (six  companies),  Col.  J.  McEnery. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker’s  brigade. 

25th  Georgia,  Col.  C.  C.  Wilson. 

29th  Georgia,  Col.  William  J.  Young. 

30th  Georgia,  Col.  Tliomas  W.  Maugham. 

UNATTACHED. 

Savannah  River  Batteries  and  other  defenses. 

1st  Georgia  Volunteers,  Col.  C.  H.  Olmstead. 

54th  Georgia,  Col.  Charlton  H.  Way. 

63d  Georgia,  Col.  G.  A.  Gordon. 

1st  Battalion  Georgia  Sharpshooters  (four  companies),  Capt.  A.  Shaaff. 
Battalion  Savannah  Volunteer  Guard  (three  companies),  Maj.  John  Screven. 
Emmett  Rifles,  Capt.  George  W.  Anderson. 

4th  Georgia  Cavalry,  Col.  D.  L.  Clinch. 

5th  Georgia  Cavalry,  Col.  Robert  H.  Anderson. 

Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry  (three  companies),  Maj.  E.  C.  Anderson,  jr. 
Battalion  Georgia  Partisan  Rangers  (three  companies),  Maj.  John  M.  Millen. 
22d  Battalion  Georgia  Artillery  (five  companies),  Col.  E.  C.  Anderson. 
Chatham  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  Joseph  S.  Claghorn. 

Chestatee  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  Thomas  H.  Bomar. 

Columbus  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  Edward  Croft. 

Joe  Thompson  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Capt.  Cornelius  R.  Hanleiter. 

Martiu’s  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  Robert  Martin. 

Read’s  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  First  Lieut.  J.  A.  Maxwell. 

Terrell  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  E.  G.  Dawson. 

DISTRICT  OF  EAST  FLORIDA. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan  commanding. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  John  Bryan. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  J.C.  Chambers. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  S.  E.  Hope. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  J.  W.  Pearson. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  Edwin  West. 

Company  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  Capt.  W.  E.  Chambers. 

Company  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  Capt.  F.  J.  Clark. 

Company  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  Capt.  J.  J.  Dickison. 


825 


Chat.  XITL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

DISTRICT  OF  EAST  FLORIDA— Continued. 

Company  Second  Florida  Cavalry,  Capt.  S.  F.  Ron. 

Company  Cavalry,  Capt.  R.  Harrison. 

Company  Cavalry,  Capt.  W.  Stephens. 

Company  Partisans,  Capt.  S.  W.  Mays. 

Company  Partisans,  Capt.  J.  Q.  Stewart. 

Company  Partisans,  Capt.  John  Westcott. 

Company  of  Rangers,  Capt.  P.  B.  Bird. 

Milton  (Florida)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  J.  L.  Dunham. 

DISTRICT  OF  MIDDLE  FLORIDA. 

Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb  commanding. 

First  Georgia  Regulars,  Col.  William  J.  Magill. 

First  Florida  Battalion  Infantry  (live  companies). 

Second  Florida  Cavalry  (five  companies). 

Second  Florida  Battalion,  Partisan  Rangers  (one  company). 

Leon  (Florida)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  R.  H.  Gamble. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  14, 1863. 

Maxwell  and  Baker, 

Senators  from  Florida , Richmond , Va.  : 

Can  spare  no  troops  or  guns  for  Florida  so  long  as  enemy  threatens 
in  such  overwhelming  numbers  this  place  and  Savannah.  Will  do  all 
I can  soon  as  practicable  to  assist  General  Finegan.  AEEEGAKD 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  14,  1863. 

Col.  W.  Porcher  Miles, 

Member  of  Congress , Richmond,  Va. : 

My  Dear  Colonel:  I have  just  received  your  favor  of  the  8th  in- 
stant,* and  hasten  to  answer  it  as  fully  as  practicable  at  this  moment. 
I can  well  understand  the  perplexity  of  Mr.  Seddon’s  position,  but  mine, 
I regret  to  say,  is  no  less  so.  How  I can  successfully  defend  two  such 
important  cities  as  Charleston  and  Savannah  with  about  25,000  men,  as 
vou  say  (scattered  over  100  miles  of  country),  is  no  easy  problem.  It  it 
were  not  for  the  bad  moral  effect  of  abandoning  the  railroad  between 
here  and  Savannah  I would  not  hesitate  to  do  so  under  the  present  cir- 
cumstances: but  this  would  be  equivalent  to  a victory  for  the  enemy, 
and  hence  I have  to  hold  the  Savannah  Eailroad,  which  1 believe 
could  be  cut  by  him  at  more  than  one  point  if  he  knew  how  and  where 

to  make  his  attack.  ~ , 

Last  year,  when' he  had  about  15,000  men  at  Hilton  Head,  General 
Lee  had  over  40,000  men  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and 
Georgia ; but  now  that  the  enemy  has  about  40,000  (not  30,000,  as  you 
suppose),  I have  only  about  25,000  to  oppose  him  with.  Even  with  this 
disparity  of  numbers,  however,  I would  not  fear  to  encounter  him  in 
open  field  and  with  my  forces  well  in  hand;  but,  scattered  as  they  are 
and  must  be,  I have  reason  to  doubt  my  ability  to  resist  him  long  enough 

* Not  found. 


826 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chai*.  XXVI. 


te>  receive  assistance  from  North  Carolina  or  Virginia.  I have  now  done 
all  that  I could  to  procure  troops  from  the  Confederate  Government  and 
from  this  State.  If  I meet  with  a disaster  under  the  present  circum- 
stances the  responsibility  will  not  rest  on  my  shoulders. 

With  regard  to  the  heavy  guns  that  you  refer  to  for  this  harbor  I 
must  remark  that  last  summer,  when  General  Pemberton  thought  the 
floating  boom  would  still  be  a success,  he  estimated  that  at  least  twenty 
10-inch  columbiads,  besides  the  three  captured  ones,  would  be  abso- 
lutely required,  in  addition  to  the  armament  of  the  forts  and  batteries; 
but  now  that  the  boom  is  an  entire  failure,  is  it  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  the  same  twenty  guns  you  say  we  have  received  here  are  still  suf- 
ficient for  a successful  defense  of  this  important  harbor?  I leave  the 
answer  to  your  own  judgment.  I do  not  wish  to  aocuse  any  one  in 
particular,  but  why  is  it  that  after  a two  years’  war  we  have  but  one 
Tredegar  Works  in  the  Confederacy?  Is  it  not  because  we  have  con- 
stantly grasped  at  the  shadow  of  peace  in  sixty  or  ninety  days  ? This 
most  lamentable  mirage  is  the  main  cause  of  the  present  destitute  con- 
dition of  our  quartermaster’s  and  commissary’s  supplies;  especially  of 
the  latter  department,  the  genius  of  its  chief  consisting  only  in  reducing 
the  rations  of  our  poor  soldiers  to  make  his  supplies  last  longer,  thereby 
increasing  the  running  but  not  the  fighting  qualities  of  our  troops. 

But  to  return  to  our  heavy  guns.  Wilmiugton  has  already  captured 
two  10-inch  columbiads  on  their  way  here,  and  has  one  42  pounder 
banded  and  rifled  gun,  which  I sent  from  Fort  Moultrie.  I have  no 
objection  to  Whiting’s  receiving  more  heavy  guns  from  Richmond;  but 
those  in  power  must  decide  which  is  the  most  important  of  the  two 
places — Wilmington  or  Charleston ; for,  as  we  say  in  French,  uqui  trop 
embrasse  mat  etreint.lL. 

With  regard  to  the  question  of  permanent  courts  in  my  department, 
if  the  Secretary  of  War  would  only  order  to  report  to  me  a party  of  the 
stray  colonels  who  are  floating  about  loose  from  place  to  place  without 
commands,  especially  about  Richmond,  I could  turn  them  to  some  good 
account  by  putting  them  on  courts-martial,  thereby  relieving  my  regi- 
mental officers. 

I am  surprised  to  hear  that  the  examining  boards  for  getting  rid  of 
ignorant  and  incompetent  officers  have  not  reported  fully  enough.  The 
Secretary  of  War  may  rest  assured  he  cannot  go  wrong  in  approving 
the  reports  of  inefficiency  already  sent  in.  Ample  instructions  will  be 
given  hereafter  to  examining  boards  to  prevent  such  fatal  delays.  I 
regret  to  hear  that  the  difficulty  relative  to  Toombs  should  have  beeu 
such  a stumbling-block.  It  could  easily  have  been  removed  by  making 
Ripley  and  Mercer  major-generals.  Worse  officers,  I believe,  have  be- 
fore now  been  promoted  to  that  rank  and  still  higher.  Ransom  is  an 
excellent  officer.  He  is  one  of  those  colonels  I tried  so  long  and  so  hard 
to  have  ordered  to  report  to  me  in  Western  Tennessee  last  winter,  but 
I was  unsuccessful  as  a matter  of  course,  and  my  cavalry  remained  (with 
the  exception  of  several  well  officered  regiments)  not  much  better  than 
a mounted  mob  during  several  mouths.  Captain  Feilden  has  reported 
for  duty,  and  I think  will  make  an  efficient  officer.  Already  six  moni- 
tors, besides  the  New  Ironsides,  are  in  the  waters  of  my  department, 
concentrating  about  Port  Royal,  and  transports  with  troops  are  still 
arriving  from  the  North.  I believe  the  drama  will  not  much  longer  be 
delayed;  the  curtain  will  soon  rise.  Hoping  for  the  best,  I remain 
yours,  very  truly, 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  827 

Charleston,  March  14,  18G3. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley: 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  letter  of  this  date,  concerning 
the  negro  labor,  I would  respectfully  state  that  numerous  calls  have 
been  made,  in  the  form  of  requisitions,  from  this  department,  the  sub- 
stance of  which  is  that  2,500  negroes  were  necessary,  in  monthly  rebels, 
to  carry  on  the  works,  as  follows : 

The  month  of  November  a call  was  made  for 2, 500 

The  month  of  December  a call  was  made  for rjjx 

The  month  of  January  a call  was  made  for 

The  month  of  February  a call  was  made  for ^,0 

In  all,  for  four  months ^ 


The  number  received  in 

No. 

Received. 

101 

November  7 

62 

November  17 

100 

November  1 

62 

November  12 

278 

November  21  

83 

November  22 

210 

November  22 

802 

November  16 

583 

Uet  ember  1 

49 

December  6 

104 

December  20 

58 

December  20 

93 

January  4 

114 

January  25 

12 

December  23 

65 

December  18 

41 

December  1 

16 

December  18 

2,833 

Discharged. 


November  24. 
January  17... 
November  24. 
January  15 
J anuary  17  . . 
January  16... 
January  15... 
January  16... 
February  2 . . 
January  16. . . 

March  12 

January  22... 

Not 

Not 

March  13 

March  i3 

February  1 . . . 
March  11 


Sick  and 
runaway. 


15 
14 
20 
12 
60 
22 
46 

292 

196 

12 

50 

16 
50 

5 

6 

10 

10 

7 


For  duty. 


86 

48 

80 

50 

218 

61 

164 

510 

387 

37 

54 

42 

43 
109 


Time. 


2 
H 
2 

1 

2i 

n 
2* 
55  j 3 
31  I 2 
9 ! 21 


days. 

days. 

days. 

day  8. 

days. 

days. 

days. 

months. 

months. 

months. 

months. 

month. 

months. 

months. 

months. 

months. 

months. 

months. 


843 


1,990 


Average  monthly  labor  for  the  four  months,  755  for  duty,  labor  of 

the  sick  excluded.  _ , , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  H.  ECHOLS 


General  Orders,  \ March  14,  1863. 

No.  10.  f 

Brio*.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  having  been  assigned  to  duty  in  this  military 
district  he  will  assume  command  of  sub  division  No.  2,  as  announced  in 
General  Orders,  No.  6,  of  12th  February,  1863,  and  is  charged  with  a 
strict  compliance  of  the  provisions  of  that  order. 

Bv  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley : 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Special  Orders,  t Headquarters  Third  Mil.  Dist 

■$0  qg,  f Pocolahgo , March  15,  1863. 

II.  Lieutenant- Colonel  Capers  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  all 
troops  between  the  Combahee  and  Ashepoo  Rivers.  In  this  command 
is  included  the  heavy  batteries  at  Combahee  Ferry  and  on  the  Ashepoo. 


By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Walker,  commanding: 

J JAMES  LOWNDES, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant ■ General. 


828  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  15, 1863.  ; 

H.  C.  Guerin, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Major:  I am  instructed  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  there 
should  be  made  provision  for  the  contingency  of  one  or  more  iron- 
clads forcing  their  way  into  this  harbor  and  destroying  the  Ashley  iron 
bridge,  and  also  interrupting  communication  with  troops  in  Christ 
Church  Parish  and  Sullivan’s  and  Morris  Islands.  Subsistence  should 
be  placed  in  depots  at  proper  points  in  view  of  that  possibility,  and  the 
general  commanding  wishes  you  to  place  yourself  in  direct  communica-  i 
tion  with  the  district  commanders,  to  the  end  that  all  practicable  meas-  | 
ures  of  precaution  may  be  arranged  and  taken  in  the  premises. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance, 

Charleston,  March  15,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  state,  in  answer  to  your  note  of  the 
13th,  received  yesterday  evening,  that  there  is  no  record  in  the  ordnance 
or  artillery  offices  relative  to  the  applications  of  General  Pemberton 
for  heavy  guns  for  this  department. 

What  application  he  may  have  made  in  writing  directly  to  Richmond 
I know  not.  I am  positive  about  one  thing,  to  wit,  that  he  went  to 
Richmond  to  apply  personally  for  such  heavy  guns  and  obtained  the 
promise  of  ten  10-inch  columbiads,  and  several  8-inch  which  were  to 
have  been  cast  in  Rome,  Ga. ; the  latter  not  being  procurable  some  10- 
iuch  were  promised  in  their  stead.  I inclose  copies  of  such  communica- 
tions as  are  on  my  books  in  relation  to  this  matter.* 

I once  telegraphed  the  Secretary  of  War  during  General  Pemberton’s 
administration  for  10-inch  mortars,  and  after  your  taking  command  a 
letter  from  Colonel  Rhett,  inquiring  how  many  guns  were  wanted  by 
you  for  the  defense  of  the  department  (heavy  guns),  having  been  re- 
ferred to  me  by  you,  I applied  for  fifty-one  10  inch  columbiads  for  the 
defense  of  the  inner  harbor,  as  a necessity,  after  the  failure  of  the  ob- 
struction at  the  gorge,  which  application  was  approved  and  forwarded 
by  you,  and  of  which  a copy  was,  I believe,  kept  at  the  adjutant-gen- 
eral’s office. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  J.  GONZALES, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance. 


Special  Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  First  Military  District, 

> Department  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  112.  ) • Charleston,  March  15,  1863. 

*##*##* 

II.  Maj.  Charles  Alston,  jr.,  commanding  siege  train,  will  proceed  as 
soon  as  practicable  in  person  to  the  headquarters  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


829 


Gist,  commanding  James  Island  and  Saint  Andrew’s,  and  receive  from 
that  officer  instructions  in  relation  to  the  position  of  his  guns  within 
that  command  in  case  of  necessity.  \ 

III.  Should  circumstances  require,  Brigadier-General  Gist  is  author- 
ized to  call  directly  upon  Major  Alston  for  either  the  whole  or  a por- 
tion of  his  force,  who  will  move  immediately  upon  the  requisition. 

Brigadier  General  Gist  will  report  the  fact  of  the  call  and  the  neces- 
sity thereof  at  once  to  these  headquarters. 

# # # # ^ # * * 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley : 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Proceedings  of  a Board  of  General  Officers  which  convened  at  Charleston , 

8.  C.,  on  the  I Oth  of  March,  18G3,  in  obedience  to  the  following  orders: 

Special  Orders,  ) IIdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  G2.  ) Charleston , March  12,  1863. 

# # * * * # # 

VI.  A hoard  of  general  officers  is  appointed  to  assemble  in  Charles- 
ton as  soon  as  practicable,  for  the  purpose  of  examining  into  and  re- 
porting upon  the  following  points  in  connection  with  the  defense  ot 
Charleston,  viz: 

1st.  Amount  and  description  of  heavy  ordnance  deficient  or  necessary 
for  the  efficient  defense  of  the  harbor. 

2d.  The  number  and  character  of  heavy  ordnance  called  for  and  sup- 
plied since  1st  Juue,  1862. 

3d.  What  additional  ordnance,  if  any,  and  description  may  be  neces- 
sary to  complete  the  armament  of  works  constructed,  under  construc- 
tion, or  ordered  to  defend  the  approaches  to  Charleston,  and  including 
Sullivan’s  and  Morris  Islands,  as  well  as  Saint  Andrew’s  and  Christ 
Church  Parishes. 

4th.  What  works,  if  any,  are  essential  for  the  defense  of  Charleston, 
in  addition  to  those  already  constructed,  under  construction,  or  ordered. 

5th.  What  addditional  force  of  artillery  and  infantry  respectively  is  re- 
quired for  the  proper  defense  of  Charleston  and  the  approaches  thereto, 
including  a movable  reserve  column,  the  effective  strength  of  each  arm 
at  present  available  being  reported. 

Gth.  What  number  of  negroes  have  been  called  for  during  the  last  four 
months ; the  number  received  for  the  same  time,  and  the  average  num- 
ber employed  each  month. 

VII.  The  board  is  authorized  to  call  on  any  staff  officer  in  the  depart- 
ment to  appear  before  it  and  supply  such  information,  including  official 
reports  and  papers,  as  may  be  deemed  proper  for  the  discharge  of  the 
special  duties  herein  assigned. 

DETAIL  FOR  THE  BOARD. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 'commanding  First  Military -District. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier,  Provisional  Army  of  tbe  Confederate  States.. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley  will  select  some  staff  officer  as  a recorder. 
******* 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


830 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


The  board  met  pursuant  to  the  above  order. 

Present:  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  president ; Brig.  Gen.  James  H. 
Trapier,  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Gist,  and  proceeded  to  the  consideration  of 
the  points  to  which  attention  lias  been  called. 

The  board  have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  thereon,  as 
follows : 

First  and  second  points. — The  board  find*  from  the  papers  sub- 
mitted by  the  chief  of  artillery  and  ordnance,  which  are  appended, 
marked  W,#  and  from  the  knowledge  of  some  of  the  members,  that  vari- 
ous requisitions  were  made  for  the  supply  of  heavy  ordnance,  chiefly  for 
the  defense  of  the  outer  harbor,  and  especially  for  armament  of  Battery 
Bee,  after  the  1st  of  June,  1862,  by  direction  of  Major-General  Pember- 
ton, then  in  command  of  the  department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 
Much  dependence  was  placed  upon  a chain  and  boom  obstruction  then 
being  constructed  by  the  order  of  that  officer,  which  it  was  hoped  and 
believed  would  successfully  detain  an  attacking  fleet  under  the  fire  of  the 
heavy  forts  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbor.  About  the  1st  of  October  it 
was  demonstrated  that  the  chain  and  boom,  upon  which  much  labor  had 
been  expended,  would  prove  a failure,  and  a communication  from  the 
chief  of  artillery  to  the  Ordnance  Department  at  Richmond,  approved 
and  indorsed  by  the  commanding  general,  was  forwarded,  calling  for 
fifty-one  guns — 10  inch  columbiads.  A copy  of  the  indorsement  ap- 
pended, marked  B.*  The  number  of  guns  which  it  was  understood  were 
to  have  been  furnished  under  requisitions  from  Major-General  Pember- 
ton was  ten  10-inch  columbiads  which,  added  to  the  requisitions  last 
mentioned  for  the  inner  harbor,  would  include  sixty-one  10-inch  colum- 
biads, with  their  ammunition,  exclusive  of  a number  of  10-inch  sea- 
coast  mortars. 

In  view  of  the  novel  and  formidable  character  of  the  attack  proposed 
by  the  enemy  the  board  are  of  opinion  that  the  guns  called  for  by  these 
requisitions  are  and  have  been  necessary  for  the  efficient  defense  of 
the  harbor. 

From  the  records  of  the  ordnance  officer  of  the  First  Military  District 
it  appears  that  since  the  1st  of  June,  1862,  there  have  been  received 
seventeen  10-inch  columbiads,  two  42-pounder  banded  and  rifled  guns, 
two  7-inch  banded  Brooke  guns,  two  12-pounder  banded  and  rifled 
gun,  and  eight  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars.  Considering  that  the  42- 
pounder  banded  and  rifled  and  the  7-inch  guns  are  equivalent  to  a 
10-inch  columbiad  when  they  may  be  in  certain  positions,  it  appears 
that  of  the  principal  requisitions  sent  in  there  remains  a deficiency  of 
thirty-eight  10-inch  columbiads  still  unfurnished.  In  addition  to  the 
guns  received  one  3-inch  Whitworth  and  two  18-pounder  Blakely  guns 
have  been  received  from  importation.  These  and  the  12-pounder  rifled 
and  banded  are,  however  useful,  not  to  be  depended  on  for  positive  de- 
fense against  such  an  attack  as  is  contemplated. 

A strong  additional  security  to  this  harbor  would  be  a few  guns  of 
such  caliber  as  it  is  believed  the  enemy  will  bring  to  the  attack.  Au- 
thority had  been  obtained  some  three  mouths  since  to  have  one  or  more 
15-iucli  guns  cast  at  the  Charleston  Arsenal  works.  It  is  believed  that 
most  of  the  iron  has  been  procured  and  that  most  of  the  appliances 
have  been  furnished,  but  from  some  untoward  disagreement  between 
the  superintending  mechanics  and  the  ordnance  officers  the  progress 
of  the  work  has  been  delayed,  if  not  indefinitely  postponed.  It  will  be 
be  well,  in  the  opinion  of  the  board,  that  the  work  should  be  pressed 


Not  found. 


dflAp.  xxvi  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  831 

forward  as  rapidly  as  may  be,  and  that  at  least  three  guns  of  that  cal- 
iber be  furnished  as  soon  as  possible. 

Third  point.— Such  defenses  of  the  water  approaches  to  Charleston 
as  have  been  ordered  and  constructed  could,  in  the  opinion  of  the  board, 
be  sufficiently  armed  by  the  guns  required  for  could  they  be  obtained; 
and  as  those  completed  are  not  yet  fully  furnished,  and  are  in  position 
to  command  every  water  approach,  the  board  would  not  deem  it  advis- 
able to  call  for  more  artillery  of  very  heavy  caliber  until  the  requisi- 
tions made  can  be  filled. 

Certain  points  it  would  appear,  however,  would  be  benefited  by  ad- 
ditions, but  these  could  be  drawn  from  those  guns  already  required  for. 
Battery  Bee  is  deficient  by  four  10-inch  columbiads,  Fort  Moultrie 
might  well  have  two  or  more;  Castle  Pinckney  should  also  be  strength- 
ened by  the  addition  of  two  10-inch  guns  or  one  10-inch  and  one  Brooke 
gun. 

The  land  approach  by  Sullivan’s  Island  requires,  say,  two  long-range 
guns  of  a caliber  which  would  allow  them  to  be  movable  for  its  advanced 
post  at  Battery  Marshall. 

The  works  at  Light-House  Inlet  would  be  much  strengthened  by  two 
long-range  guns,  which  might  play  upon  an  enemy  buoying  the  chan- 
nel and  command  the  beach  of  Folly  Island. 

The  sea  front  of  Battery  Wagner  would  be  much  increased  in  strength 
by  two  rifled  42-pounders  or  10-inch  columbiads,  which  might  be  drawn 
from  other  points  were  the  deficiency  in  requisitions  supplied. 

For  Battery  Marshall  and  the  new  works  at  Light-House  Inlet  it 
would  be  well  to  have  four  rifled  and  banded  24-pounders  or  30- 
pounder  Parrott  guns. 

For  the  defense  of  the  lines  in  Christ  Church  and  Saint  Andrew’s 
Parishes,  in  addition  to  the  guns  already  in  position,  it  is  the  opinion  of 
the  board  that  dependence  should  be  placed  on  a well-organized  siege 
train.  This,  at  present  consisting  of  eight  8-inch  siege  howitzers  and 
four  rifled  12-pounders,  should  be  increased  as  much  as  possible  with 
guns  of  similar  caliber.  How  far  it  would  be  necessary  to  increase  it 
would  of  course  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  attack,  but  the  board  are 
of  the  opinion  that  it  would  not  be  too  much  to  double  the  number  of 
the  howitzers  and  to  add  eight  rifled  guns,  say  four  12-pounder  rifles 
and  tour  30-pounder  Parrotts,  with  full  equipments. 

Fourth  point. — The  board  are  of  opinion  that  it  would  be  well  to 
cause  to  be  erected  new  and  strong  works  at  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort 
Johnson,  on  James  Island,  for  the  guns  now  in  position  at  that  point; 
that  detached  works,  five  in  number,  armed  each  with  one  10  inch 
columbiad,  be  constructed  at  intervals  of  about  100  to  150  yards  along 
the  James  Island  shore  between  the  Martello  Tower  and  Battery  Glover, 
and  that  Castle  Pinckney  should  be  strengthened  as  it  receives  addi- 
tional armament. 

That  the  enemy  be,  if  possible,  expelled  from  Stono  Eiver,  and  that 
strong  works,  armed  with  guns  drawn  from  Fort  Pemberton,  be  re- 
erected on  Cole’s  Island.  Should  this  be  impracticable  the  board  believe 
that  as  soon  as  labor,  either  of  troops  or  negroes  or  both,  can  be  procured 
a strong  work  should  be  erected  at  Grimball’s,  on  James  Island,  and  a 
short  line  of  defense  from  Secessionville  to  Grimball’s  be  taken  up  with 
an  outpost  at  Legare’s  Landing. 

The  board  are  unanimously  of  opinion  that  the  present  location 
of  Fort  Pemberton  is  a mistake,  and  that  it  gives  an  enemy,  if  he 
chooses,  an  opportunity  of  landing  and  commencing  his  regular  ap- 


832  COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  Mtf).  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ciiap.  XXVI. 

proacbes  toward  the  interior  defenses  of  James  Island  at  liis  leisure 
and  with  comparative  security. 

It  would  be  well  to  increase  the  works  at  White  Point  Battery  as 
fast  as  the  additional  guns  for  that  position  can  be  procured.  It  may 
be  deemed  questionable  whether,  if  the  deficiency  in  guns  can  be  pro- 
vided for  the  works  as  far  in  the  harbor  as  White  Point,  the  whole 
is  not  secure;  but  should  it  be  thought  necessary  to  defend  the  Ashley 
River,  giving  additional  security  to  the  communications  with  James 
Island,  the  position  at  Chisolm’s  Mill  offers  more  advantages  than  any 
other,  and  a work  at  that  point,  if  it  can  be  armed,  is  recommended. 

Fifth  point. — On  the  25th  of  October,  1862,  under  orders  from  the 
commanding  general,  reports  were  made  by  Brigadier-General  Ripley, 
commanding  First  Military  District,  arid  Brigadier-General  Gist,  com- 
manding James  Island  and  the  main,  making  estimates  of  the  increase 
of  ordnance  and  troops  for  the  defense  of  Charleston  against  such  a sea 
attack  as  is  now  threatened,  and  a land  attack  by  a force  not  exceeding 
30,000  men.  (Copies  of  these  papers  are  appended,  marked  C.)* 

The  present  danger  is  almost  precisely  what  was  then  anticipated, 
and  it  would  appear  that  similar  provisions  to  meet  it  are  desirable. 
At  that  time  it  was  thought,  to  meet  such  an  emergency  as  now  threat- 
ens, an  increase  of  the  force  in  this  district  by  21,561  men  of  all  arms 
would  be  required.  How  much  of  this  force  could  be  drawn  from  other 
points  within  the  limits  of  the  department  would  be  for  the  command- 
ing general  to  determine.  Then  the  force  under  Brigadier-General 
Gist’s  command,  as  will  appear  by  reference  to  the  return  (herewith 
appended,  marked  D),f  was  4.528  enlisted  present  for  duty.  In  the  re- 
mainder of  the  district  there  were  1,987,  making  an  effective  total 
present  of  6,515.  These,  with  the  additional  troops  estimated  for, 
made  a total  of  trooj)s  required  28,076  of  all  arms,  including  a movable 
column  of  11,250. 

The  numerous  approaches  to  the  city  of  Charleston  and  the  abso- 
lute necessit3r  of  holding  certain  points  requiring  strong  garrisons  will  j 
account  for  the  strength  of  the  estimate. 

While  the  board  consider  the  force  necessary  in  case  the  attack  is  I 
made  by  the  enemy  in  the  strength  estimated,  they  are  of  opinion  that 
it  would  also  suffice  if  it  were  made  in  stronger  force,  for  the  reason 
that  the  advantages  which  he  possesses  in  his  facilities  for  transpor- 
tation would  not  obtain  to  a great  extent  in  moving  a force  much  ex- 
ceeding 30,000  men.  Since  the  date  of  these  estimates  the  strength  of 
the  command  in  and  about  Charleston  has  been  increased,  and  is  now 
10,513  effective  total  of  different  arms,  as  follows : (Copy  of  return  ap- 
pended, marked  E.)t 


Heavy  artillery 2, 062 

Light  artillery 779 

Cavalry 1, 101 

Infantry 6, 551 


This  increase  has  obtained  partially  from  the  increase  of  certain  regi- 
ments by  recruits  and  conscripts,  but  principally  by  the  re-enforcement 
by  Brigadier-General  Clingman’s  command.  A portion  of  the  infantry, 
about  700,  is  acting  as  heavy  artillery,  but  this  does  not  affect  the 
numerical  strength  of  a required  increase,  and  the  number  short  of  the 
estimate  is  now  16,563.  The  force  within  the  department  has  been  in- 
creased within  the  knowledge  of  the  board  by  one  brigade  in  addition 
to  that  of  General  Cliugman,  increasing  the  means  of  the  commanding 


See  pp.  652-656.  tNot  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  833 

general  to  that  extent,  and  so  far  enabling  him  to  call  on  other  districts 
to  supply  the  deficiency  in  case  of  an  attack  here.  But  in  view  of  the 
still  existing  deficiency  and  the  probability  that  a considerable  length 
of  time  must  elapse  after  the  congency  arises  before  this  point  could  be 
re-enforced  to  the  extent  required,  the  board  consider  it  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  two  strong  brigades  should  be  added  to  the  permanent 
strength  of  the  department  without  delay.  This  would  give  force  to 
check  an  enemy  until  the  larger  re-enforcements  could  arrive,  and  would 
make  the  strength  of  the  whole  command  nearly  that  under  General 
R.  E.  Lee  when  the  vicinity  was  threatened  by  General  Sherman’s  army, 
from  12,000  to  20,000  strong,  and  the  fleet  of  Admiral  DuPont,  without 
monitors  or  iron-clad  floating  batteries. 

The  force  as  reported  under  Generals  Hunter  or  Burnside  at  Port 
Royal  now  is  from  35,000  to  40,000,  and  Admiral  DuPont’s  fleet  has  six 
monitors  and  one  iron  clad  battery  of  which  we  know. 

Sixth  point. — From  the  report  of  Captain  Echols,  engineer  for  the 
District  of  South  Carolina,  it  appears  that  11 ,000  negroes  have  been  called 
lor  during  the  last  four  months,  making  an  average  of  2,750  each  month 
for  one  month’s  labor.  (Copy  of  Captain  Echols’  report  appended, 
marked  F.)# 

The  number  of  negroes  received  during  that  time  was  2,833,  from 
which  843  are  to  be  deducted  as  sick  and  returned.  By  retaining  over 
the  stipulated  time  the  average  of  monthly  labor  for  the  four  months 
has  been  755. 

The  necessity  of  employing  negro  labor  is  apparent  from  the  fact  that 
with  the  works  projected,  for  which  some  28,000  men  (soldiers)  were 
deemed  necessary,  but  about  6,500  were  present,  and  the  greater  por- 
tion of  those  in  positions  which  it  was  impossible  to  neglect  even  tem- 
porarily. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General. 

J.  H.  TRAPIER, 

Brigadier- General.  Provisional  Army.  , 

S.  R.  GIST, 

Brigadier-  General , Provisional  Army  Confederate  States. 

[Indorsement.  1 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  March  27,  1863. 

This  report  is  approved.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  15-inch 
columbiad  ordered  to  be  made  here  should  have  been  delayed,  when  so 
much  needed  by  the  cause  referred  to  in  this  report.  A few  such  heavy 
guns  would  be  of  the  greatest  advantage  in  the  defeuse  of  Charleston. 

The  recommendation  for  the  increase  of  the  siege  batl  ery  meets  with 
my  cordial  approval,  but  it  can  only  be  done  gradually,  for  want  of 
guns,  men,  horses,  harness,  &c. 

A strong  field  work  and  shore  batteries  at  Fort  Johnson  are  of  great 
importance  for  the  safety  of  the  harbor  and  of  Fort  Sumter  itself.  The 
field  work  has  long  been  contemplated  by  me,  but  the  want  of  laborers 
has  always  delayed  its  construction. 

The  repossession  of  the  Stono  River  would  be  of  great  importance 


53  R R— VOL  XIV 


* See  p.  827. 


834 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

to  the  defense  of  James  Island,  which  could  then  be  securely  held  by 
about  one-fifth  of  the  force  at  present  required.  I can  but  express  my 
regret  that  when  Cole’s  Island  was  abandoned  the  work  at  Battery 
Island  was  not  strengthened  and  heavily  armed  and  obstructions 
placed  across  the  Stono  at  that  point,  which  is  quite  narrow;  whereas 
by  locating  Fort  Pemberton  where  it  is  now  all  the  Lower  Stono  and 
the  landings  on  both  of  its  banks  have  been  abandoned  to  the  enemy. 
A battery  should  also  have  been  constructed  at  Legar6’s,  to  command 
the  water  approach  and  landing  from  Folly  Biver. 

White  Point  Battery  and  Chisolm’s  Mill  are  both  important  posi- 
tions for  the  defense  of  the  city  and  Ashley  Biver. 

The  general  commanding  is  of  opinion  that,  with  due  regard  for  the 
safety  of  Savannah  and  other  important  points,  the  total  re-enforce- 
ments he  could  collect  in  about  one  week’s  time  for  the  defense  of 
Charleston  could  not  possibly  exceed  10,000  men  of  all  arms,  thus 
leaving  still  required,  according  to  the  estimate  of  the  board,  6,563,  or 
about  three  brigades,  which  would  be  located  at  present  as  follows,  if 
they  could  be  had,  to  wit:  One  brigade  between  the  Edisto  (Pon  Pon) 
and  Combahee  ; another  in  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish,  and  the  third  to  be 
used  as  a movable  column,  to  re-enforce  any  point  suddenly  threat- 
ened by  the  enemy. 

The  want  of  a sufficient  number  of  negroes  has  been  long  felt,  and 
has  materially  crippled  the  artificial  defenses  of  Charleston. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD, 

General , Commanding. 


List  of  heavy  ordnance  turned  over  to  the  First  Military  District  by  the  Chief  of  Ordnance . 


Date. 


1862. 

August  30 
September  — 
September  — 

September  4 
September  8 
September  11 
September  16 
September  2 2 
September  24 
September  24 
September  29 
October  7 
October  27 


No. 

Description. 

Date. 

No. 

1 

10-inch  columbiad  gun. 

1862. 

October  23 

1 

1 

10-inch  columbiad  gun. 

October  26 

3 

2 

42-pouuder  rifled  and  banded 

November  20 

1 

gun. 

November  27 

1 

2 

10-inch  sea-coast  mortars. 

November  29 

1 

1 

10-ioch  columbiad. 

December  5 

1 

1 

10-inch  sea-coast  mortar. 

December  15 

1 

1 

10-inch  columbiad. 

1863. 

1 

10-inch  sea-coast  mortar. 

February  13 

1 

1 

10-inch  columbiad. 

February  14 

1 

1 

10-inch  columbiad. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

10-inch  columbiad. 

10-inch  columbiad. 

10-inch  columbiad. 

Description. 


10-in  ch  sea-coast  mortar. 

10-iu  ch  sea-coast  mortars. 
10-incb  columbiad. 

1 0-inch  columbiad. 

10-inch  columbiad. 

10-mch  columbiad. 

10-inch  columbiad. 

7-inch  rifled  and  banded. 
10-inch  columbiad. 

7-inch  rifle  and  banded 
(Brooke  gun),  received 
about  the  middle  of 
March.* 


* Invoiced  February  21. 


Hdqrs.  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance, 

Charleston , March  17,  1863. 

Bespectfully  forwarded  to  Brigadier-General  Bipley  as  part  of  the  in- 
formation desired  by  him. 

A.  J.  GONZALES, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , March  18,  1863. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris,  Chief  Engineer  Department: 

Major  : I am  directed  by  the  general  commanding  to  instruct  you 


835 


:hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

that  upon  further  reflection  he  desires  the  torpedoes  intended  for  the 
Cooper  Diver  to  be  placed  in  the  Ashley  Diver,  in  the  best  positions  to 
protect  the  bridge  over  that  stream,  and  also  to  give  due  notice  to  all 
vessels,  boats,  crafts,  Ac.,  that  may  have  to  pass  in  that  locality. 
Despectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  TOUT  ANT  BEAUDEGADD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  March  18,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  D.  S.  Bipley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District , Charleston , 8.  C. : 

General  : In  view  of  the  possible  contingency  of  a night  reconnais- 
sance by  the  enemy  on  Morris  or  even  Sullivan’s  Island  it  is  the  wish  of 
the  general  commanding  that  you  should  so  dispose  your  cavalry,  for  a 
time  at  least,  that  you  may  be  able  to  place  more  cavalry  to  watch  the 
beach  at  night,  especially  of  the  former  island. 

Despectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JODDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  March  18,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  D.  S.  Bipley, 

Comdg.  First  Military  District , Charleston , 8.  C.  : 

General  . The  Citadel  Cadets,  under  Major  White,  having  been  or- 
dered to  report  to  me  in  case  of  an  attack  on  this  city,  can  they  not  be 
used  to  guard  and  defend  the  battery  at  tbe  new  bridge  ? They  might 
go  there  to  practice  every  day,  although  living  at  the  Citadel,  for  it  is 
not  desirable  to  put  them  in  camp  at  present. 

Captain  Thomas,  of  Columbia,  has  offered  me  a company,  raised  by 
himself,  for  the  defense  of  the  city,  which  might  be  employed  in  guard- 
ing the  works  on  the  other  side  of  the  new  bridge,  or  with  other  de- 
tached companies,  also  promised,  to  guard  the  lines  on  the  Neck.  All 
these  companies  will  be  ordered  to  report  to  you ; hence  it  would  be  well 
to  determine  first  where  they  are  to  be  sent.  Can  the  guns  on  Castle 
Pinckney  be  made  to  bear  on  Cooper  Diver  where  torpedoes  are  to  be 
placed  hereafter;  if  not,  what  guns  can  ? I have  ordered  these  torpedoes 
to  be  put  in  the  Ashley  Diver  first,  to  guard  the  railroad  bridge.  Could 
not  an  arrangement  be  made  for  communicating  on  foot  at  low  tide  from 
Cummings  Point  to  Fort  Johnson  ? I am  going  to  order  some  works  on 
iHatcli  Island  (not  the  one  we  looked  at),  to  take  Morris  Island  in  flank 
and  reverse  with  siege  rifled  guns. 

Cannot  graduated  sights  be  fixed  to  nearly  all  our  heavy  guns  ? They 
would  add  greatly  to  their  usefulness. 

Despectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUDEGADD, 

General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  March  19,  1863. 


D.  N.  Ingraham, 

Flag-Officer , Comdg.  C.  8.  Naval  Forces , Charleston , 8.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  occasion  to  communicate  by  flag  of  truce  with  the  enemy 


836 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


off  this  harbor,  and  I have  therefore  to  ask  your  assistance  with  the 
steamer  Stono  to  bear  the  flag. 

I should  also  be  pleased  if  you  could  permit  the  communication  I have 
to  send  to  be  carried  by  a naval  officer,  Lieutenant  Bier,  for  example, 
w ho  might  be  able  to  observe  the  position  and  somewhat  of  the  charac- 
ter of  the  flag  ship  of  the  squadron,  to  w7it,  the  Ironsides. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Savannah,  March  19,  1863. 

Dear  General:  I inclose  a private  note  from  General  Wayne  for 
your  consideration.  The  suggestions  you  may  deem  valuable. 

It  is  very  desirable  not  to  run  counter  to  any  of  the  crotchets  of  our 
disputatious  Governor,  w ho  perhaps  finds  that  a second  negro  impress- 
ment might  not  improve  his  chance  for  re-election  to  the  gubernatorial 
chair,  and  therefore  seeks  to  evade  the  question  by  delays  and  points 
of  etiquette  between  military  commanders  and  himself  and  between 
military  commanders  themselves.  I am  of  course  not  ambitious  of  get- 
ting to  loggerheads  with  His  Excellency,  and  am  more  than  willing  to 
avoid  any  direct  communication  with  him.  Our  laborers  are  fast  leav- 
ing us,  and  if  the  details  are  not  renewed  anything  like  a complete  sys- 
tem of  defenses  for  Savannah  must  go  by  the  board. 

The  Abolition  programme  for  the  day  is  not  being  carried  out,  I sup- 
pose. 


Yours,  truly, 


H.  W.  MERCER. 


[Inclosure.] 


Milledgeville,  March  16,  1863. 

My  Dear  Hugh  : As  men  not  military  do  not  understand  the  rela- 
tions and  connection  of  responsibilities  of  military  grades  and  rank, 
and  as  there  are  some  who  do  not  choose  to  see,  let  me  suggest  to  you 
some  arrangement  with  General  Beauregard  by  which  your  responsi- 
bility to  him  and  at  the  same  time  your  position  as  the  military  com- 
mander in  the  State  of  Georgia  may  be  understood  by  the  Governor, 
and  a conflict  of  authority  engendered  in  his  mind  prejudicial  to  the 
public  interests  be  prevented. 

In  the  militia  matter  you  may  have  noticed  that  he  sought  to  pass 
by  you  and  ignore  your  action  under  the  direct  call  upon  him  of  General 
Beauregard;  and  in  the  papers  you  sent  up  on  the  matter  of  negroes  im- 
pressed for  work  on  the  fortifications  around  Savannah  you  see  the  same 
disposition  manifested  in  his  reply,  “that  he  would  not  order  a new7  im- 
pressment unless  officially  notified  by  General  Beauregard  that  such  a 
course  was  necessary  for  the  safety  of  Savannah.’' 

I am  aware  that  you  do  not  stand  upon  points,  but  I can  see  in  the 
ignorance  of  the  Governor  in  military  affairs,  contentious  as  he  con- 
stitutionally is,  the  germs  of  difficulties  with  you  all  and  with  the  Con- 
federate Government. 

It  would  be  well  if  all  calls  upon  the  State  for  details  of  any  kind  of 
force  were  made  through  you;  or,  if  circumstances  require  a direct 
communication  with  the  Governor,  that  in  the  call  reference  should  bft 
made  to  you  as  the  one  to  be  answered  and  to  attend  to  it. 

Love  to  all  at  home. 

Yours,  truly, 


H.  C.  W. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


837 


Charleston,  March  19,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General:  In  obedience  to  orders  received  from  the  commanding 
general  I have  fitted  out  ten  boats  belonging  to  the  Navy  Department 
with  spars  and  bracing  gear  complete.  I have  also  finished  and  tested 
four  of  the  torpedoes  and  prepared  them  for  immediate  use.  These 
have  been  transferred  to  the  Navy.  I will  most  probably  have  three 
more  finished  by  to-morrow,  and  the  whole  number,  twelve,  should  be 
ready  by  the  early  part  of  next  week.  I have  succeeded  in  getting  a 
partial  supply  of  glass  tubes  and  other  necessary  material,  and  expect 
a further  supply  from  Savannah  on  to-morrow. 

On  last  night  Commodore  Ingraham  permitted  Lieutenant  [William 
T.]  Glassell  with  one  small  boat  and  a crew  of  seven  men  to  go  out. 
The  enterprise  failed  in  consequence  of  the  boat  getting  aground  in 
Drunken  Dick  Shoal.  Lieutenant  Glassell  was  in  consequence  com- 
pelled to  cut  away  the  gearing,  but  succeeded  in  bringing  in  with  him 
the  torpedo  with  all  its  attachments.  As  the  inventor  of  the  mode  of 
attack,  and  consequently  responsible  in  a greater  degree  than  any 
other  party  for  its  successful  operation,  I would  most  respectfully  pro- 
test against  so  unfair  a test  as  the  sending  of  a single  boat  unsupported 
against  the  fleet.  The  consequence  of  such  an  undertaking  must  almost 
certainly  be  the  destruction  of  the  boat  and  the  exposure  of  the  plan. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FBANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain , Engineers . 

[Indorsement.] 

The  principle  can  be  tested  with  one  small  boat  as  well  as  with  many 
together. 

G.  T.  B. 


Headquarters  District  of  East  Florida, 

Camp  near  Jacksonville , March  20,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy  still  occupy 
the  town  of  Jacksonville.  My  command  has  been  engaged  in  skirmish- 
ing with  them  constantly  since  their  occupation,  inflicting  on  them  a 
considerable  loss.  The  nature  of  the  ground  in  rear  of  the  town  and 
the  sweep  of  the  enemy’s  fire  from  their  gunboats  over  ify  together  with 
the  inadequate  result  of  compelling  a merely  temporary  abandonment 
of  the  place  by  the  enemy  and  then  withdrawing  for  a new  occupation 
by  them,  have  induced  me  to  withhold  my  troops  from  any  great  ex- 
posure. 

The  constant  presence  of  five  gunboats  at  Jacksonville,  two  of  which 
carry  a very  heavy  armament,  and  the  great  difficulty  of  getting  my  light 
field  batteries  in  a position  where  the  gunboats  would  be  within  reach 
of  their  effective  fire  before  being  exposed  to  a concentrated  fire  from 
all  the  enemy’s  heavy  guns,  have  prevented  me  from  making  an  attack 
on  the  town.  I should  not,  however,  have  hesitated  to  attack  and  carry 
the  place  had  there  been  any  probability  that  the  substantial  result  of 
holding  it  would  be  within  reach  of  the  means  at  my  command.  The 
heavy  guns  and  ihe  force  necessary  to  do  this  1 have  not  at  my  command, 
nor  have  I any  assurance  that  I can  obtain  them,  and  I have  considered 
it  my  duty,  unless  the  enemy  should  remove  a sufficient  number  of  his 


838  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

gunboats  to  enable  me  to  strike  an  effective  blow,  not  to  expose  my 
command  to  severe  loss  from  firing  which  we  have  not  now  an  oppor- 
tunity of  returning  with  effect.  The  town  is  now  strongly  fortified  in 
the  rear,  and  this  furnishes  an  additional  reason  for  not  venturing  an 
attack,  unless  we  had  the  heavy  guns  and  the  force  necessary  to  hold 
it.  One  of  the  difficulties  of  the  position  is  that  unless  I can  place  my 
guns  in  position  to  command  the  wharves  and  the  ground  below  the 
town  (which  is  very  difficult  to  accomplish  so  long  as  the  gunboats  re- 
main in  front  of  the  town),  after  approaching  under  the  fire  of  their 
gunboats  and  batteries,  I may  find  the  enemy  escaped  on  board  his 
transports  and  rapidly  passing  beyond  my  fire,  leaving  my  troops  still 
exposed  to  his  guns. 

The  enemy’s  force  in  Jacksonville  consists  of  two  regiments  of  black 
troops  with  white  officers,  commanded  respectively  by  Colonels  Mont- 
gomery and  Higginson,  largely  re-enforced,  as  we  are  advised  by  our 
pickets  to-day,  by  troops  supposed  to  be  white.  They  are  making  pris- 
oners of  all  male  citizens  found  in  Jacksonville,  on  the  Saint  John’s 
River,  who  refuse  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  holding  them  as  hos- 
tages for  their  negro  troops.  They  are  robbing  and  plundering  every  thing 
on  the  east  bank  of  the  Saint  John’s  River,  which  is  protected  from  us  by 
their  gunboats,  and  the  river  at  almost  all  points  above  here  is  very  wide 
and  impassable  without  large  boats.  The  women  and  children,  excepting 
five  or  six  families,  have  been  removed  from  town  under  a notification 
which  I ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  McCormick,  commanding  post,  to 
send  to  Colonel  Higginson,  commanding  negro  troops  at  Jacksonville 
(copies  of  which  and  the  reply  thereto  are  herewith  transmitted),  in  order 
that  I might  be  at  liberty  to  attack  the  town  should  a favorable  opportu- 
nity present  itself.  They  have  been  sent  to  Lake  City,  where  some  provis- 
ion will  be  made  for  them.  The  enemy  have  been  expecting  re-enforce- 
iinents  of  white  troops,  some  of  which  are  reported  by  our  pickets  to 
have  arrived  to-day.  Their  own  statements  and  circumstances  indicate 
that  their  probable  policy  is  to  occupy  Jacksonville  with  white  troops 
and  send  the  negroes,  with  largely  increased  numbers,  to  Palatka,  and 
then  attempt  to  move  amongst  the  plantations.  If  large  numbers  of 
negro  troops  are  to  be  sent  into  East  Florida,  as  seems  now  the  inten- 
tion of  the  enemy,  with  the  Saint  John’s  River  as  a base  of  operations 
held  by  their  gunboats,  and  within  easy  access  of  the  great  depots  of 
supplies  and  re-enforcements  at  Port  Royal  and  of  occasional  re-enforce- 
ments from  Fernandina  and  Saint  Augustine,  it  will  be  impossible  for 
the  small  number  of  troops  in  this  district  to  render  protection  to  every 
part  of  it.  I am  compelled  to  keep  one  company  at  Tampa,  one  at  Pa- 
latka, one  near  Fernandina,  one  on  the  coast  between  Bayport  and 
Crystal  River,  three  detachments  on  the  Suwannee  and  at  Cedar  Keys, 
as  corps  of  observation  and  to  prevent  negroes  from  escaping  to  the 
enemy. 

I would  again  call  the  attention  of  the  commanding  general  to  the 
want  of  arms  for  the  new  companies  now  being  organized.  I would 
also  ask  of  the  commanding  general  instructions  as  to  the  proper  dis- 
position of  negroes  captured  with  arms  and  serving  under  the  enemy. 
I would  also  report  to  the  commanding  general  that  General  Cobb  has 
sent  me  one  large  gun,  Captain  Gamble’s  battery  of  light  artillery,  and 
two  new  companies,  about  40  men  each,  and  that  Colonel  Clinch,  com 
manding  Fourth  Georgia  Cavalry,  is  here  with  three  small  pieces  of 
artillery  and  277  men. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  &c., 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


;hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


839 


[In  closure*.] 


Headquarters  O.  S.  Forces, 
Camp  near  Jacksonville , March  17,  1863. 


Colonel  Higginson, 

Commanding  at  Jacksonville : 

I hereby  notify  you  to  remove  the  women  and  children  from  Jack- 
sonville within  twenty -four  hours  from  this  time.  After  that  time  they 
will  remain  in  the  town  on  your  responsibility.  If  the  safe  return  of 
teams  is  guaranteed  1 will  to-day  send  to  the  brick-yard  church  or  to 
the  town  for  all  women  and  children  who  may  wish  to  come  within  our 


lines. 


I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully, 

A.  H.  McCORMICK, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  C.  S.  Forces,  Camp  near  Jacksonville. 


Headquarters, 
Jacksonville,  March  18,  1863, 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  H.  McCormick: 

Colonel  : There  has  been  no  restriction  upon  the  passage  of  women 
and  children  across  my  lines  nor  will  there  be,  and  I shall  continue  to 
render  assistance  with  my  wagons  to  such  as  may  wish  to  remove.  1 
will  at  once  issue  a general  order  communicating  your  willingness  to 
render  similar  aid  for  the  next  twenty-four  hours.  Any  teams  coming 
under  a flag  of  truce  as  far  as  the  brick  church  will  of  course  be  rigidly 
respected 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  respectfully,  mGGINg0K) 

Colonel  First  Regiment  S.  C.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Post. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  March  20,  1863. 

M.  L.  Bonham, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina , Columbia,  8.  t.  : 

Dear  Governor  : Your  letter  of  the  17th  instant  has  been  received. 
The  number  of  companies  required  at  Georgetown  (which  is  a part  of 
the  State  from  which  the  Abolitionists  ought  to  be  kept  out  if  practica- 
ble) may  go  up  to  ten,  or  one  regiment,  if  so  many  can  be  furnished. 
The  batteries  in  that  district  are  very  much  exposed,  being  only  sup- 
ported at  present  by  some  inferior  cavalry.  Captain  Thomas  only 
offered  the  services  of  his  company  for  the  defense  of  Charleston.  It 
would  of  course  be  very  acceptable  for  Georgetown,  as  well  as  any  other 
similar  companies  up  to  the  number  above  stated. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, t BEAURBGAED) 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  March  21,  1863. 

! Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Comdg.  Third  Military  District , Lake  City , Fla. : 

General  : The  report  of  your  engagement  with  the  Abolitionists  at 
Jacksonville  on  the  10th  instant  has  been  received.  I congratulate  you 


840  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXV L 

and  those  under  your  command  for  your  success  in  driving  back  the 
enemy  into  the  town.  I regret  exceedingly  not  being  able  at  this  time 
to  re-enforce  you  with  men  and  guns  from  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
owing  to  the  threatening  attitude  of  the  large  forces  now  concentrated 
at  Port  Koyal,  but  1 will  endeavor  to  afford  you  assistance  as  soon  as 
possible  with  safety  to  Charleston  or  Savannah.  Meanwhile  your  re- 
port will  be  forwarded  to  the  War  Department,  with  the  hope  that  it 
will  be  able  to  order  you  re- enforcements  from  the  most  available 
quarter.  ' 

Your  telegram  for  Enfield  rifles  and  siege  guns  has  been  received. 
The  latter  cannot  now  be  furnished,  but  the  chief  of  ordnance  has  been 
ordered  to  supply  you  with  the  former  if  practicable;  otherwise  with 
such  muskets  as  he  may  have  available. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


Abstract  from  Beturn  of  Troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia,  and 
Florida,  commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  March  21,  1863. 


1 

Present  for  duty. 

-s 

T3 

a 

c3 

Commanding  officer. 

District. 

Total  effective 
infantry. 

Total  effective 
cavalry. 

Total  effective 
artillery. 

Aggregate  prese: 

Aggregate  presei 

absent. 

Brig  Gen.  It.  S.  Ripley 

First  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

Second  Military  District 
of  South  Carolina. 

Third  Military  District 
of  Sooth  Carolina. 
District  of  Georgia 

6,727 

1,115 

2,  952 

12,345 

14,  495- 

Brio-  Gen.  J.  H<igood 

1, 764 

839 

282 

3, 170 

3, 599 

Bri«*  Gen.  W . S.  W 3-lker 

3,  655 

1,  686 

496 

6,  645 

8,177 

Brinr  Gen  H W 

5,361 

731 

1, 836 

2,740 

11,  609 

13,  497 

Briir  Gen  Howell  Cohb 

District  of  Middle  Florida  - 

382 

261 

1,555 

1,  993 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan 

District  of  East  Florida. 

222 

441 

140 

916 

1,249 

flrori  fl  tntfll 

18,460 

6,  299 

6,871 

36,  240 

43,  019 

Note. — Heavy  artillery  included  with  light  artillery  in  Hirst  District  of  South  Carolina  and  the- 
District  of  Georgia. 


RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 

First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina . . . 

Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 
Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina . 

District  of  Georgia 

District  of  Middle  Florida 

District  of  East  Florida 

Total  effective 31,630 


10, 794 
2, 885- 
5, 837 
9,  937 
1,374 
803: 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  East  Florida, 

No.  180.  f Camp  Finegan , March  22,  1863.  • 

Col.  D.L.  Clinch,  commanding  Confederate  States  forces  at  thiscampr 
will  move  the  troops  of  this  command  to  the  hill  on  this  side  of  the 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  841 

Three  Mile  Branch  in  the  following  order  on  to-morrow  morning  at  7 
a.  m.: 

1st.  Two  batteries  of  artillery. 

2d.  All  the  cavalry  that  can  be  spared  from  picket  duty. 

3d.  All  the  infantry  and  dismounted  cavalry. 

The  cavalry  will  be  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mc- 
Cormick. 

The  artillery  will  be  under  the  command  of  Major  Thomas. 

The  infantry  under  command  of  Major  Brevard. 

The  whole  force  will  be  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Clinch. 

Captain  Buckman,  in  addition  to  his  ordinary  duty  of  keeping  the 
command  supplied  with  ammunition,  will  be  charged  with  the  manage- 
ment of  the  32-pounder  rifle  gun  on  platform  car.  He  will  be  required 
to  see  that  the  gun  and  its  support  are  protected  with  cotton  and  in- 
trenchments  for  the  men.  The  line  of  battle  will  be  formed  on  the  hill 
on  this  side  of  the  Three  Mile  Branch. 

Every  effort  will  be  made  by  our  skirmishers  to  advance  to  the  ground 
selected,  and,  failing  in  this,  we  will  open  on  them  with  the  32-pounder 
rifle  gun. 

Colonel  Clinch  will  require  the  supply  of  ammunition  to  be  ample  tor 
a protracted  engagement.  The  men  will  be  required  to  carry  two  days’ 
rations  cooked.  The  camp  will  be  left  under  command  of  a suitable 
officer,  with  the  camp  guard  of  this  day.  The  men  will  be  required  to 
be  kept  under  arms  ready  to  move.  The  train  will  be  ordered  by 
Colonel  Clinch  to  move  the  infantry  and  dismounted  cavalry. 

The  chief  surgeon,  with  his  assistants,  will  be  required  to  be  on  the 
ground  with  ambulances  and  necessary  surgical  appliances. 

Bv  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan,  commanding: 

J W.  CALL, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  O.,  March  23,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District , Charleston , 8.  C.  : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  say  that 
it  is  liis  wish  that  you  have  a thorough  understanding  with  Flag-Offi- 
cer Ingraham  as  to  the  proposed  method  of  attack  by  small  boat  flotilla, 
in  order  to  avoid  tiring  into  them. 

He  also  wishes  you  to  obtain  such  information  as  will  enable  us  to 
procure  wood  and" coal  at  the  shortest  notice  possible  for  the  use  of  the 
Stono,  should  that  steamer  be  transferred  back  to  the  army. 

I am  also  instructed  to  direct  you  to  guard  well  the  new  bridge, 
especially  against  fire,  to  prevent  which,  either  by  accident  or  design,, 
the  greatest  x>recaution  must  be  taken. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J JNO.  F.  O’BRIEN, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  March  23,  1863. 

D.  B.  Harris,  Major  and  Chief  of  Engineers  : 

Major:  The  commanding  general  wishes  the  obstructions  of  Wap- 
poo  Cut  to  be  completed  as  soon  as  possible. 


842 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


He  desires  you  likewise  to  examine  tlie  battery  wall  at  White  Point, 
to  determine  whether  it  is  solid  and  strong  enough  to  resist  such  pro- 
jectiles as  the  enemy  may  be  provided  with  should  they  push  into  this 
harbor. 

Further  inform  these  headquarters  whether  or  not  the  bridge  over 
Eantowles  Creek  opposite  Bulow’s  is  in  a serviceable  condition.  If  it 
is  not,  the  commanding  general  desires  to  have  it  made  so  at  once. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , March  23,  1863. 

Hon.  H.  Cobb,  Quincy , Fla. : 

Negro  regiments  are  stated  to  be  employed  in  Florida  in  considerable 
force.  Render  any  aid  in  your  power  to  General  Finegan  in  subduing 
them. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  March  24,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding , Savannah , Ga. : 

Dear  General  : I have  not  had  time  until  now  to  answer  your  let- 
ter of  the  19tli  instant,  inclosing  one  from  Wayne  to  you.  I think  you 
are  both  right  in  your  views,  for  what  we  want  are  the  means  of  de- 
fending the  State  of  Georgia,  and  those  can  evidently  be  had  only  by 
a thorough  good  understanding  between  the  Confederate  and  State 
Governments  or  authorities  ; hence  I will  accept  any  reasonable  meas- 
ures to  attain  that  desirable  end.  If  we  cannot  get  the  negroes  we  will 
stop  the  works  and  appeal  to  the  people  for  assistance.  I begin  to 
think  that  the  enemy  is  not  at  all  prepared  to  take  the  offensive  by 
land  against  Charleston  or  Savannah.  What  they  intend  doing  is  not 
yet  very  plain,  probably  not  even  to  themselves;  but  assuredly  delay 
can  only  add  to  our  strength  and  to  their  weakness.  They  may  finally 
conclude  to  repair  to  Florida  and  support  their  negro  colony  in  that 
quarter.  I do  not  think  they  will  make  much  by  that  operation. 

I remain,  yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters,  McLeod’s  House, 

No.  8.  j March  24,  1863. 

I.  The  commanding  general  having  signified  his  approval,  the  bat- 
teries in  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish  will  be  known  and  styled  as  follows : 

1st.  Battery  near  Haig’s  place,  on  the  Stono,  to  be  known  as  Bat- 
tery Haig. 

2d.  Battery  near  Wilkes’  place,  as  Battery  Wilkes. 

3d.  Battery  near  John’s  Island  Ferry,  as  Battery  Palmer. 

4th.  Battery  near  Magwood’s  place,  as  Battery  Magwood. 

5th.  Battery  near  Gaillard’s  place,  as  Battery  Gaillard. 

6th.  Battery  near  Banks’  place,  as  Battery  Banks. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


843 


7th.  Bastioned  fort  near  Bee’s  Ferry,  as  Fort  Bull. 

Bv  command  of  Brigadier-General  Gist : 

MALLOBY  P.  KING, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


Names  of  forts  and  batteries .* 

Fort  southeast  and  near  extremity  of  new  bridge,  in  Saint  Andrew’s 
Parish,  as  Fort  Gladden. 

Fort  near  and  northwest  of  Fort  Gladden,  as  Fort  Barnes. 

Battery  on  city  side  of  new  bridge,  as  Battery  Gadberry. 

Half-Moon  Battery  No.  1,  as  Battery  Augustus  Smith. 

Half-Moon  Battery  No.  2 (north  of  No.  1),  as  Battery  James. 


Charleston,  March  25, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General:  The  work  on  torpedo  ram  has  nearly  come  to  a stand  for 
the  want  of  iron.  I have  exhausted  every  private  source  of  supply, 
and  unless  the  Government  comes  to  my  assistance  the  work  must 
stop.  The  whole  spousing  of  the  boat  is  ready  for  the  iron  plating. 
The  engine  is  in  place,  and  the  shield  is  finished  as  far  as  my  supply  of 
iron  for  bolts  will  permit.  I have  requested  Commodore  Ingraham  to 
assist  me,  but  he  is  unable  to  do  so.  I hope  the  practical  demonstra- 
tions of  the  efficiency  of  torpedoes  borne  by  vessels  may  remove  any 
objections  arising  out  of  the  novelty  of  the  device  and  the  departure 
from  long-established  custom.  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  if 
row-boats  may  carry  torpedoes  and  sink  large  vessels  with  them  with- 
out damage  from  their  own  weapons,  whether  larger  vessels  may  not 
use  them  more  effectually  and  with  greater  security.  The  naval  officers 
of  this  station,  after  witnessing  the  trial  in  the  harbor,  warmly  approved 
of  and  adopted  this  terrible  weapon  of  offense. 

In  proof  of  it,  the  iron-clads,  together  with  every  available  steamer 
and  small  boat  in  the  harbor,  are  now  being  prepared  for  their  use.  One 
thing  has  been  clearly  and  fully  demonstrated,  and  that  is  that  ves- 
sels may  be  constructed  impenetrable  by  shot  and  shell.  There  is  a 
limit  to*  the  power  of  missiles ; there  is  no  limit  to  the  means  of  resist- 
ing them.  If  six  inches  of  wrought  iron  or  even  steel  be  not  a sufficient 
prot&tion  nine  inches  may  be,  and  so  on  to  any  thickness.  Such  is  the 
resisting  strength  of  iron-clads  above  the  water-line  in  the  rare  and 
elastic  medium  of  air,  where  comparatively  little  resistance  is  offered 
to  the  expansive  force  of  gunpowder.  But  below  the  water-line,  in  a 
medium  incompressible,  where,  consequently,  the  power  of  gunpowder 
becomes  far  more  tremendous,  the  iron-clad  vessels  are  undefended,  for 
the  reason  that  ordinary  missiles  cannot  reach  them.  It  is  here,  then, 
with  a new  weapon,  that  they  must  be  attacked  with  hope  of  success  $ 
and  I believe  that  the  one  satisfactory  experiment  with  the  spar  torpedo 
has  opened  to  us  clearly  the  way  to  the  attainment  of  this  end.  I may 
appear  visionary,  but  after  the  most  thoughtful  consideration  of  the 
subject  am  free  to  confess  that  with  one  powerful  vessel,  strongly  iron- 
plated,  modeled  for  great  speed,  and  with  enormous  motive  power,  with 
propellers  so  arranged  as  to  enable  her  to  turn  quickly,  without  guns  of 


No  date,  but  filed  with  General  Orders,  No.  8,  preceding. 


844 


COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


any  kind,  without  turrets  or  shields,  with  an  iron-clad  deck  unbroken 
fore  to  aft,  with  nothing  about  it  but  a shot-proof  smoke- stack,  I firmly 
believe  that  such  a vessel,  armed  with  torpedoes,  would  defy  the  Navy 
of  the  United  States.  With  a speed  superior  to  any  vessel  afloat  car- 
rying an  armament,  she  could  always  reach  the  enemy,  while  the  in- 
stant of  contact  must  be  that  of  destruction.  I believe  that  a vessel  of 
this  kind  built  abroad,  where  material  and  labor  are  ample,  and  where 
consequently  the  work  may  be  rapidly  accomplished,  would  not  only 
keep  open  every  port  now  in  our  possession,  but  would  so  embarrass 
the  enemy  as  to  drive  them  from  those  ports  on  our  coast  where  they 
now  have  almost  undisturbed  possession. 

I may  perhaps  in  this  communication  have  pressed  the  matter  too' 
strongly,  but  so  firm  is  my  conviction  of  the  importance  of  the  enter- 
prise that  I am  assured  you  will  excuse  my  unseemly  ardor. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 
Captain  and  Engineer . 


f Indorsement  No.  1.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  U,  March  26,  1863. 

The  advantages  of  torpedo  rams  over  iron-clad  gunboats  has  re- 
peatedly been  called  by  me  to  the  attention  of  the  War  and  Navy  De- 
partments, and  I fully  coincide  in  the  views  expressed  by  Captain  Lee 
on  the  importance  of  having  a few  torpedo  rams  of  great  speed  built 
in  Europe,  armed,  however,  with  one  or  two  heavy  rifled  guns  for  defen- 
sive purposes  in  cases  of  necessity.  I can  but  express  my  regret  again 
that  the  one  being  constructed  here  cannot  be  finished  at  once  for  want 
of  iron-plates,  as  I consider  it  much  superior  for  offensi  ve  purposes  than 
the  two  iron-clad  gunboats  we  have  now  in  this  harbor  on  account  of 
their  very  slow  speed.  I therefore  respectfully  refer  this  letter  of  Cap- 
tain Lee  to  the  attention  of  the  War  Department  for  such  orders  as  it 
mav  think  advisable  in  the  case. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


[Indorsement  No.  2.] 


Mr.  S.:  Inclose  to  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
attention  to  it  and  its  return.  * 


April  2,  1863. 
with  a letter  inviting  his 

J.  A.  S.,  Secretary. 


Gainesville,  Alachua  County,  Florida, 

March  26,  1863. 

[Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff] : 

General  : I proceeded  on  the  25tli  from  Lake  City  to  the  headquar- 
ters of  General  Finegan,  whom  I found  in  the  field  a few  miles  from 
Jacksonville.  The  inclosed  map  will  show  you  roughly  the  surround- 
ings of  Jacksonville  and  position  of  General  Finegaids  camp. 

* Returned  by  Secretary  of  the  Navy  April  7. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  845 

The  night  previous  he  had  run  up  his  railroad  gun  (a  32-pounder  rifle) 
and  thrown  a few  shell  into  the  town.  About  1 p.  m.  the  enemy  ad- 
vanced, most  probably  to  break  down  a railroad  trestle,  and  thus  pre- 
vent the  railroad  gun  from  approaching  near  to  them.  Our  pickets 
were  driven  in  and  the  enemy  advanced  beyond  the  Three  Mile  Branch, 
but  retired  on  the  approach  of  General  Finegan’s  forces,  and  burnt  all 
the  houses  on  the  outer  part  of  the  town,  having  only  taken  one  rail 
from  the  railroad  trestle.  , „ . ^ 

I visited  the  advanced  line  of  skirmishers  under  Major  Brevard,  and 
General  Finegan  showed  me  an  open  pine  barren,  with  a gradual  slope, 
about  3 to  4 miles  from  Jacksonville,  where  he  expects' to  fight  if  the 
enemy  will  ever  come  there.  General  Finegan  has  given  up  all  idea  of 
attacking  Jacksonville,  and  I expect  that  many  of  his  officers  are  not 

anxious  for  a very  bloody  fight. 

Probably  an  attack  would  have  been  successful  if  made  a week  be- 
fore, when  Colonel  Clinch  arrived,  and  it  was  planned  but  given  up. 
We  returned  to  camp  about  5 o’clock,  and  Colonel  Clinch  started  for 
Georgia  at  dark.  This  morning  at  9 o’clock  the  enemy  were  again  re- 
ported advancing,  and  General  Finegan  started  down  with  his  command 
to  meet  them,  but  as  he  said  a fight  was  not  probable  I came  on  to  this 
place,  which  is  the  principal  depot  on  the  Florida  Bailroad. 

General  Finegan  estimated  the  enemy’s  force  at  about  2,700,  pro- 
tected by  two  batteries  in  position  and  the  fire  of  their  gunboats  and  a 
gun  on  a railroad  car.  They  have  no  visible  means  of  transportation 
for  an  advance,  and  General  Finegan  thinks  they  will  await  re-enforce- 
ments before  attempting  a serious  advance,  making  ravages  along  the 
Saint  John’s  Biver.  He  has  sent  one  cavalry  company  to  Palatka,  and 
thinks  of  sending  a section  of  artillery,  as  the  people  are  apprehensive 
of  an  advance  of  the  enemy  into  the  Peninsula  of  Florida  and  alarmed 
at  their  almost  defenseless"  condition.  General  Finegan  has  to  guard 
his  flanks  carefully  with  pickets  on  Front  Creek  above  and  McGirt’s 
Creek  below.  Large  boats  (8  feet)  can  ascend  these  creeks  a short  dis- 
tance. Three  Mile  Branch,  about  2 miles  from  Jacksonville,  is  held  by 
our  pickets;  it  is  in  range  of  the  enemy’s  shell.  I understood  his  force 
to  be  Brevard’s  four  companies  of  infantry,  six  new  small  companies  of 
infantry,  three  light  batteries,  and  two  companies  of  cavalry,  and  one 
more  cavalry  company  expected.  The  First  Georgia  Begulars  also  form 
part  of  his  force  for  the  present.  The  best  light  battery  is  also  bor- 
rowed from  General  Cobb.  A countryman,  who  had  been  imprisoned 
at  Jacksonville  and  released  on  the  night  of  the  24th,  made  these  state- 
ments, viz : Two  white  regiments,  the  Eighth  Maine  and  Sixth  Connec- 
ticut, arrived  in  Jacksonville  on  Monday.  There  had  been  there  pre- 
viously one  regiment  of  negroes,  about  800  strong,  called  First  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  all  the  officers  of  which  are  white.  They  assert 
their  intention  of  going  to  Lake  City,  end  want  to  land  from  Fernan- 
<lina,  Palatka,  and  Saint  Mark’s.  There  is  much  bad  feeling  among  the 
whites  against  the  negroes.  They  expect  cavalry  and  artillery  from 
Hilton  Head. 

There  are  four  gunboats  at  Jacksonville  and  two  guns  on  cars,  one 
brass  and  the  other  a long  iron  gun. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENBY  BBYAN, 

Major  and  Assistant  Inspector- General. 


846 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  27,  1863. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond,  Va.: 
General  Finegan  reports  from  camp  near  Jacksonville : 


More  reliable  information  places  enemy’s  negro  troops  here  at  1,500,  under  Mont- 
gomery, of  Kansas,  who,  under  cover  of  tbeir  gunboats,  are  robbing  people  and  have 
captured  citizens.  Two  white  regiments  (Eighth  Maine  and  Sixth  Connecticut)  have 
also  arrived.  Black  troops  are  going  to  Palatka. 

General  Finegan  calls  for  troops  and  siege  guns.  Have  sent  liim 
detachment  of  Clinch’s  regiment  and  ordered  him  to  call  on  Cobb.  I 
cannot  spare  now  men  or  guns  from  here  or  Savannah. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  27, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Gamp  near  Jacksonville , Fla.: 

Three  hundred  Enfields  sent,  with  30,000  rounds,  on  23d  instant.  No 
siege  guns  can  be  sent  now.  Keep  Clinch’s  detachment  and  call  on 
General  Cobb  for  assistance. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  27,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

Enemy  appear  in  movement  this  direction.  Twenty  vessels  in  North 
Edisto  25th  instant,  four  of  which  are  monitor  iron-clads.  Not  enough 
along  to  indicate  a landing  in  that  quarter. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hbqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , March  27,  1863. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris, 

Chief  Fngineer  Department , Charleston , S.  C.  : 

Major:  The  monitors  of  the  enemy  are  reported  in  the  North  Edisto. 
They  might  attempt  to  force  their  way  by  Church  Flats  and  Wappoo 
Cut.  I hope  the  latter  is  thoroughly  obstructed,  as  directed.  If  not, 
lose  no  time  in  doing  so.  Are  the  obstructions  about  Church  Flats, 
together  with  the  shallowness  of  the  stream,  sufficient  to  prevent  the 
monitors  passing  there  to  get  into  the  Stono  and  silence  our  batteries 
commanding  the  approaches  from  John’s  Island?  This  must  be  looked 
into  at  once,  and  such  steps  adopted  as  the  circumstances  may  require. 
The  enemy  will  probably  await  the  spring  tides  of  the  beginning  of 
April  to  make  his  attack  on  this  place.  Have  you  received  lately  any 
more  laborers?  The  want  of  them  has  very  much  retarded  our  prepa- 
rations for  defense.  How  is  the  new  battery  in  rear  of  Morris  island 
progressing?  This  may  also  become  a very  important  work,  as  well  as 
our  harbor  torpedoes.  Should  you  not  have  laborers  enough  to  execute 
the  above  works  writh  dispatch  call  upon  the  commanders  of  districts 
for  details  of  men. 

Respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Cha.p.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  84T 

Circular.!  Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , March  27,  1863. 

The  approach  of  the  enemy  northward  from  Port  Royal  may  indicate 
a speedy  attack  on  the  city  of  Charleston.  The  brigadier-general  com- 
manding this  district  desires  that  commanders  of  sub-divisions  will  keep 
their  troops  in  their  commands  in  fighting  condition.  All  batteries 
should  be  supplied  with  whatever  is  necessary  for  immediate  action, 
and  the  utmost  vigilance  exercised  by  all  guards  and  pickets  as  well 
as  commanding  officers.  Prompt  reports  of  any  unusual  occurrences 
must  be  reported  at  once  to  these  headquarters. 

This  circular  will  be  extended  to  proper  commanders. 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Bipley : 

J WM.  F.  NANCE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- GeneraL 


Headquarters  District  of  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Bun , March  28,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

Brigadier-General  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General:  Last  year  the  enemy  landed  on  Seabrook  Island  and 
marched  across  John’s  Island  to  Legareville,  not  attempting  any  move- 
ment on  the  main.  Should  they  attempt  the  same  march  again,  and  not 
have  present  in  North  Edisto  a force  sufficiently  large  to  threaten  the  main 
seriously  at  the  same  time,  a blow  might  be  struck  at  them  on  the  march 
between  the  Cocked  Hat  and  Aberpoolie  Bridge.  I have  recently  ex- 
amined the  country  carefully,  and  send  by  my  aide,  Captain  Tracy,  an 
accurate  map,  which,  with  his  explanations,  will  put  you  fully  in  posses- 
sion of  my  views.  I do  not  ikink  this  feasible  without  the  addition  of 
three  or  four  regiments  to  my  force. 

I communicate  this  because,  if  it  meets  the  views  of  the  commanding 
general,  the  re-enforcements  should  be  sent  to-morrow  to  Rantowles 
Station. 

Yery  respectfully, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , March  28,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General:  Upon  the  receipt  of  the  intelligence  of  landing  of  the 
i enemy  on  James  Island  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dargan  proceeded  to  the 
point  of  Folly  Island,  on  the  Stono.  He  found  three  transports  and  one 
j gunboat  in  the  Stono  and  saw  perhaps  100  of  the  enemy  on  Cole’s 
Island  j a few  parties  were  on  the  opposite  shore.  I have  no  doubt  that 
I they  are  making  a reconnaissance  in  some  force,  with  a view  of  deter- 
mining the  best  base  of  operations  against  Charleston  by  land  as  well 
\ as  sea.  Would  it  not  be  well,  as  the  torpedo  row-boats  do  not  answer 
i well  at  sea,  to  induce  the  naval  commander  to  send  them  through 
' Wappoo  into  the  Edisto  or  Stono  or  both,  and  attack  such  force  as 
they  have  in  still  water. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- GeneraL 


848  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav. XXVI. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  March  28,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker, 

Commanding  Third  Military  District , Pocotaligo : 

General  : By  paragraph  VI,  Special  Orders,  No.  52,  headquarters  of 
this  department,  a copy  of  which  was  sent  to  Major-General  Hunter, 
U.  S.  Army,  through  the  blockading  fleet  oft*  this  harbor,  communica- 
tion by  flags  of  truce  was  prohibited  by  way  of  the  Savannah  River. 
It  appears,  however,  that  flags  are  still  sent  that  way.  You  will  there- 
fore transmit  to  Major  General  Hunter,  commanding  United  States 
forces  in  this  department,  the  duplicate  of  the  orders  in  question,  and 
inform  him  that  Brigadier-General  Mercer  has  been  instructed  to  re- 
eeive  no  more  flags  within  the  waters  of  the  Savannah  River  except 
in  some  extreme  exceptional  case. 

Respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  28,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga.  : 

If  Yankee  letters  plainly  indicate  future  attack  on  Fort  McAllister 
then  suspend  removal  of  10-inch  guns:'  not  otherwise. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  March  28,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah  : 

General  : Major-General  Hunter  having  been  furnished  with  an 
official  copy  of  paragraph  VI,  Special  Orders,  No.  52,  from  these  head- 
quarters, his  recent  communications  with  you  are  in  disregard  of  that 
order.  It  is  therefore  the  direction  of  the  commanding  general  that 
hereafter  flags  sent  otherwise  than  as  prescribed  in  that  order,  copy 
herewith,  shall  not  be  received  by  you. 

He  moreover  desires  you  to  communicate  his  views  in  this  connection 
to  Flag-Officer  Tatnall,  to  the  end  that  except  in  some  extreme  case  no 
flag  oftruce  shall  be  received  from  the  enemy  within  the  waters  of  the 
Savannah  River. 

The  general  order  of  the  enemy  relating  to  the  subject  of  paroles  will 
be  submitted  to  the  War  Department  before  it  will  be  published  or 
acted  upon. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  28,  1863. 

Hon.  C.  G.  Memminger, 

, Secretary  of  the  Treasury , Richmond , Va. : 

Dear  Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  24th  instant  has  come  to  hand.  I have 
the  advantage  of  knowing  already  Mr.  W.  S.  Bennett,  of  this  city,  and 
will  take  the  earliest  opportunity  to  converse  with  him  relative  to  the 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


849 


manner  of  obstructing  the  entrance  into  this  harbor,  although  I fear 
from  my  past  experience  that  the  depth  of  water,  force  of  current,  bad 
anchorage,  want  of  time,  and  difficulty  of  procuring  sufficient  labor  and 
proper  material  are  insurmountable  obstacles  in  the  way  of  obstructing 
effectually  the  channel  between  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  where  I feel  con- 
fident no  iron-clad s or  monitors  of  the  present  day  could  remain  for  a 
few  hours  under  fire  without  being  disabled.  If  my  interior  line  of 
harbor  defenses  were  proportionately  as  well  armed  and  I had  three 
more  brigades  of  troops  (which  I consider  indispensable  at  this  moment), 
the  result  of  the  coming  attack  on  this  important  city  would  be  less 
doubtful  in  my  mind.  I hope,  however,  that  if  we  are  not  successful, 
while  the  country  may  deplore,  it  will  have  no  just  cause  to  blush  for, 
our  defeat. 

With  respect,  I remain  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  March  29,  1863. 

Hutson  Lee, 

Major  and  Chief  Quartermaster , Charleston , 8.  C. : 

Major  : The  commanding  general,  in  view  of  demonstrations  of  the 
enemy  in  this  vicinity  threatening  operations  against  this  position  by 
land  and  sea,  is  obliged  to  require  the  several  railroads  to  hold  at  your 
disposition  enough  cars  and  locomotives  for  the  rapid  transportation 
to  this  point  of  at  least  6,000  men  by  the  Northeastern  Railroad,  and, 
say,  10,000  by  the  Savannah  and  Charleston  Railroad.  You  will  there- 
fore make  the  necessary  arrangements  to  this  end. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  . 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  29,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond,  Va.  : 

Four  iron-clads  still  in  North  Edisto ; three  additional  transports 
reached  there  last  evening,  two  with  troops,  one  (schooner)  horses. 
Shelled  pickets  5 p.  m.  yesterday,  and  effected  landing  on  Seabrook 
Island,  with  what  object  not  yet  developed. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  29,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Your  proposed  attack  on  enemy’s  flank  on  John’s  Island  is  approved, 
provided  points  in  your  district  guarding  Savannah  Railroad  are  not 
endangered,  until  re-enforcements  from  Walker  and  Mercer  are  re- 
ceived here.  Do  all,  however,  you  can  with  safety  to  harass  and 
retard  his  march. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

54  R R — VOL  XIV 


850 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  30,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

General  Finegan  telegraphs  yesterday  from  Baldwin: 

Enemy,  black  and  white,  evacuated  Jacksonville  to-day;  have  doubtless  gone  to 
Hilton  Head.  They  burned  most  of  the  town  before  leaving. 

He  went  immediately  after  with  his  troops  and  saved  some  valuable 
buildings.  It  seems  the  object  of  the  expedition  was  to  make  me  divide 
my  forces. 

I call  specially  the  attention  of  the  Government  to  the  wanton  de- 
struction of  private  property  in  Jacksonville. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  30,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va . : 

French  consul  and  family  leave  to-day  in  steamer  Milan.  Spanish 
consul  left  beginning  this  month.  British  consul  several  months  ago. 

This  indicates  those  powers  wish  no  representatives  here  except  vice 
consuls.  Should  Hunter  take  this  city  would  it  not  be  advisable  to 
order  away  all  foreigners  not  in  military  service  ? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  East  Florida, 

No.  12.  1 Lake  City , Fla.,  March  30,  1863. 

The  brigadier-general  cQmmanding  has  much  pleasure  in  commend- 
ing in  the  highest  terms  the  conduct  and  services  of  the  officers  and 
men  of  the  command  near  Jacksonville  in  the  recent  operations  against 
the  enemy.  The  duties  imposed  on  them  were  severe,  constant,  and 
dangerous.  They  were  performed  by  both  officers  and  men  with  a 
cheerfulness  and  gallantry  which  would  be  creditable  to  any  troops  in 
the  service.  The  command  was  composed  of  the  companies  of  Capts. 
Winston  Stephens  and  [W.  E.]  Chambers,  of  the  Second  [Florida]  Cav- 
alry (Lieutenant-Colonel  [A.  H.]  McCormick  commanding),  assisted 
by  Maj.  R.  Harrison,  of  that  regiment;  the  companies  of  Captain 
[Edwin]  West,  of  First  Special  Battalion;  of  Captain  [S.  F.]  Rou’s 
company,  serving  as  infantry;  Captains  [John]  Westcott,  [S.  W.l 
Mays,  [P.  B.]  Bird,  J.  Q.  Stewart,  of  First  Partisan  Rangers,  and 
the  independent  infantry  companies  of  Captains  [Samuel  E.]  Hope, 
John  Bryan,  A.  [A.]  Stewart,  O.  F.  Peek,  C.  Beggs,  [A.  P.]  Moofcey, 
and  Lieutenant  Tucker’s  company,  from  camp  of  instruction,  com- 
manded by  Maj.  T.  W.  Brevard;  and  the  artillery  companies  of 
Captains  [R.  H.]  Gamble,  [Joseph  L.]  Dunham,  and  [Henry  F.]  Abell, 
with  five  companies  of  Fourth  Georgia  Cavalry,  Colonel  [D.  L.]  Clinch 
commanding,  three  of  which  served  as  infantry  under  the  command  of 
Major  [ J.  C.l  McDonald,  of  that  regiment.  Colonel  Clinch,  as  command- 
ing officer  of  forces,  during  his  stay  was  active  and  efficient  in  the  dis- 
charge of  his  duty,  and,  with  Major  McDonald  and  his  officers  and  men, 
was  eager  and  ready  to  meet  the  enemy  on  all  occasions.  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  McCormick,  commanding  cavalry,  and  Maj.  R.  Harrison,  Second 
Florida  Cavalry,  with  Captains  Chambers  and  Stephens  and  their 
officers  and  men,  performed  constant  and  severe  duty,  watching  and 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  851 

meeting  the  enemy  night  anjl  day.  Maj.  T.  W.  Brevard,  commanding 
infantry,  with  Captain  West's  company  of  First  Special  Battalion,  and 
Captains  Westcott,  Mays,  Bird,  and  J.  Q.  Stewart  and  their  companies 
of  First  Battalion  of  Partisan  Bangers;  and  independent  infantry  of 
Captains  Hope,  Bryan,  A.  [A.]  Stetffcrt,  O.  F.  Peek,  Beggs,  and  Mootey ; 
Captain  Bou's  company  of  dismounted  cavalry ; Lieutenant  Tucker's 
company  from  camp  of  instruction,  and  the  companies  of  Fourth  Georgia 
Cavalry,  performed  hard  and  important  outpost  and  picket  duty  night 
and  day,  lying  close  to  the  enemy,  and  on  several  occasions  driving 
them  back  when  they  were  out  in  force,  and  while  under  cover  of  the 
fire  from  their  gunboats  and  batteries.  Captain  Hope  with  his  company 
performed  good  service,  and  Captains  Mootey,  Peek,  and  Beggs,  and 
their  officers  and  men,  although  just  mustered  into  service,  did  their 
duty  bravely  and  well.  Lieutenant  Tucker,  commanding  company  from 
camp  of  instruction,  rendered  efficient  service  and  is  entitled  to  favora- 
ble mention;  as  also  are  Lieut.  Thomas  Broome  and  Cadet  Lewis  M. 
Gamble.  Major  [B.  B.]  Thomas,  chief  of  artillery,  commanded  the  bat- 
teries with  efficiency  and  performed  good  service.  The  Florida  Artil- 
lery, Capt.  B.  H.  Gamble  commanding,  with  Lieutenants  [F.  L.]  Ville- 
pigue  and  [C.  E.]  Dyke,  [Edward  W.]  Gamble,  and  [Joseph  N.]  Whit- 
ner;  the  Milton  Artillery,  Captain  [J.  L.]  Dunham  commanding,  with 
Lieutenants  [Simon  K.]  Bull,  [Drury]  Bambo,  and  the  other  officers  and 
men ; Abell's  battery,  Captain  [H.  F.]  Abell  commanding,  with  Lieu- 
tenant [Charles  F.]  Stevens  and  the  other  officers  and  men,  deserve  special 
commendation  for  their  admirable  discipline,  drill,  and  efficient  service. 
The  veteran  regiment — First  Georgia  Begulars,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
[William]  Martin  commanding,  with  Major  [B.  A.]  Wayne — maintained 
during  their  short  service  with  the  command  the  high  reputation  they 
won  elsewhere.  Lieut.  T.  E.  Buckman,  chief  of  ordnance,  rendered 
most  valuable  service  during  the  operations,  and  is  entitled  to  the 
highest  praise  for  his  bravery,  his  skill,  and  his  indefatigable  energy. 
Private  Francis  Sould,  of  Captain  West's  company,  First  Special  Bat- 
talion, commanding  gun  detachment,  is  justly  entitled  to  distinguished 
commendation  for  the  firmness  with  which,  on  several  different  occa- 
sions, he  stood  by  his  gun  under  the  enemy’s  heavy  and  accurate  fire, 

• and  for  the  admirable  skill  and  efficiency  with  which  he  commanded  his 
gun.  Private  James  Chesnut,  of  Captain  Chambers’  company,  also  de- 
serves special  notice  for  valuable  services  rendered  day  and  night  at 
an  exposed  and  isolated  point  immediately  under  the  enemy's  guns. 

The  brigadier-general  commanding  congratulates  the  troops  on  the 
result  of  their  labors.  With  small  loss  to  themselves  they  have  inflicted 
considerable  punishment  on  the  enemy  and  rendered  his  occupation  of 
the  town  fruitless. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan,  commanding : 

W.  CALL, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  March  31,  1863. 

A.  J.  Gonzales, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance , Charleston  : 

Colonel  : The  commanding  general  instructs  me  to  direct  that  you 
will  remove  all  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  not  necessary  for  the  de- 


852 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


fense  of  Charleston  to  some  safe  place,  and  when  this  has  heen  effected 
you  will  report  the  execution  of  the  order  to  these  headquarters. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CLIFTON  H.  SMITH, 

• Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  March  31,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District: 

General  : It  is  the  direction  of  the  commanding  general  as  follows : 
All  heavy  baggage  must  be  removed  to  some  secure  place  of  storage. 
The  troops  must  be  held  in  light  marching  order,  ready  for  any  emer- 
gency and  movements  of  the  utmost  celerity. 

The  planters  must  be  warned  of  the  impendency  of  invasion  and  ad- 
vised to  remove  their  negroes  to  some  more  secure  locality. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

(Copy  sent  to  W.  S.  Walker,  commanding  Third  Military  District.) 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  March  31,  1863. 

Hutson  Lee, 

Major  and  Chief  Quartermaster , (fee.,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Major  : All  quartermaster’s  supplies,  including  clothing,  not  neces- 
sary for  issue  within  the  next  thirty  days,  must  be  removed  from  the 
city  without  delay  to  some  convenient  and  secure  places  of  storage. 
Report  the  execution  of  this  order. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  <7.,  March  31,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah  : 

General  : I am  instructed  to  direct  you  to  organize  and  hold  ready 
in  light  marching  order  a command  of  at  least  2,500  men,  including 
three  light  batteries,  to  move  on  this  place  (via  Augusta,  if  necessary) 
at  a moment’s  notice. 

The  cars  need  not  be  held  in  depot  at  present,  but  the  presidents  of 
the  railroads  intrusted  must  be  duly  advised  of  the  possible  exigency. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Chap.  XXVI.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  853 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  March  31,  1863* 

Brig.  Gen.  B.  S.  Kipley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District . Charleston : 

General  : I am  instructed  to  inquire  whether  all  the  forts  and  bat- 
teries under  your  command  are  properly  provided  with  lanterns  and  all 
the  requisite  appliances  for  the  most  effective  night  service.  If  this 
should  not  prove  to  be  so,  it  is  the  wish  of  the  commanding  general  that 
the  deficiencies  should  be  supplied  and  all  the  batteries  placed  at  once 
on  the  most  efficient  footing  possible. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JOED  AN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  March  31,  1863. 

Col.  J.  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance , Richmond , Va. : 

Sir:  I report  for  the  information  of  the  War  Department  that  I 
nave  inspected  the  artillery  and  ordnance  stores  at  this  place.  I trans- 
mit herewith — 

1st.  A tracing  of  Savanuah  and  its  environs,  on  which  is  marked  in 
red  [heavy  black]  the  positions  of  the  different  works. 

2d.  A list  of  the  number  and  caliber  of  guns  in  each  work. 

3d.  Two  diagrams  [Inclosure  No.  3 and  No.  4]  of  the  form,  &c.,  of  some 
of  these  works.  The  works  are  well  constructed  and  are  all  now  in  a 
condition  for  service,  but  several  are  not  finished,  and  more  labor  is  re- 
quired for  their  preservation.  The  armament  is  in  very  fair  order  and 
well  supplied  with  ammunition,  but  the  caliber  of  most  of  the  guns  is 
small,  and  the  most  urgent  want  for  the  proper  defense  of  this  place  is 
guns  of  greater  weight  of  metal.  To  oppose  the  passage  of  the  enemy’s 
vessels  up  the  river  there  are  the  obstructions  at  the  head  of  Elba  Island, 
1J  miles  below  Fort  Jackson.  The  iron-clad  steam  battery  State  of 
Georgia,  four  guns,  is  stationed  at  the  head  of  Elba  Island.  From  the 
obstructions  at  this  point  to  Fort  Jackson  the  river  is  commanded  by 
Fort  Jackson  (eight  guns),  Battery  Lee  (eight  guns  and  three  10-inch 
mortars),  Battery  Cheves  (seven  guns),  Battery  Lawton  (six  guns); 
total,  twenty-nine  guns  and  three  mortars — thirty-two  pieces.  After 
I passing  these  works  the  guns  bearing  on  the  river  are  Fort  Boggs  (ten 
guns,  two  10-inch  mortars),  Hutchinson  Island  Battery  (three  guns), 
and  Bay  Battery,  on  edge  of  town  (two  guns  and  one  10-inch  mortar) ; 
fifteen  32-pounder  guns  and  one  mortar.  Total  armament  of  batteries 
I on  the  river,  44  guns  and  four  mortars — forty-eight  pieces. 

To  prevent  landings  on  the  water-courses  to  the  southward  and  east- 
ward of  the  city  there  are  the  battery  at  Genesis  Point,  Fort  McAllis- 
ter, south  side  of  Ogeechee  Biver  (seven  guns  and  one  mortar),  Eose- 
dew  Battery  (two  guns),  Beaulieu  Battery  (nine  guns),  line  of  Isle  of 
Hope,  siege  train  (seven  guns),  Thunderbolt  Battery  (fourteen  guns), 
Greenwich  Battery  (three  guns),  Fort  Bartow,  at  Garston’s  Bluff,  within 
range  of  Fort  Jackson  (seven  guns,  two  mortars,  and  a park  of  twelve 
field  pieces ;)  total,  forty-nine  guns,  three  10-inch  mortars,  and  twelve 
field  guns — sixty -four  pieces. 

On  the  lines  extending  from  the  swamp  west  of  the  city  around  the  ap- 
proaches from  the  south  and  east  to  Fort  Boggs  on  the  river  the  total 
number  of  guns  now  in  position  is  forty-one,  as  per  inclosed  list.  The 


854 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [CHAr.  XXVI. 


30-pounders  are  old  24-pounders  reamed  up  and  fitted  with  grape  and 
canister  to  fire  small  charges.  Old  carronades  and  different  pattern 
howitzers  are  fitted  up  to  command  the  roads  and  approaches.  The 
whole  number  of  guns  now  mounted  in  the  above-described  positions 
is  one  hundred  and  fifty-three,  including  the  field  pieces.  The  supply 
of  ammunition  is  sufficient,  each  gun  having  from  200  to  50  rounds,  ac- 
cording to  its  position.  The  works  do  credit  to  the  engineer  depart- 
ment and  the  ordnance  officer.  Lieutenant  Cunningham  has  shown 
great  resource  in  creating  supplies  and  improving  the  condition  of  the 
ordnance  stores.  The  Navy  Department  have,  besides  the  State  of 
Georgia  before  mentioned,  the  iron-clad  steamer  Atlanta,  now  at  Thun- 
derbolt, and  the  Savannah,  just  built  and  put  in  commission,  will  soon 
be  ready  for  service.  These  vessels  make  powerful  moving  batteries, 
and  add  much  to  the  defenses  of  the  approaches  by  water. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General , Inspector  Artillery  and  Ordnance . 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE, 


855 


[Inclosure  No.  1. 1 


^ f>0  / * JT  4 S 7 T f f ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ f f f f ^ 


856 


COASTS  OP  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXTL 


[In closure  No.  2.] 

List  of  guns  on  Savannah  defenses. 

Lunette  No.  1. — One  24-pounder  flank  casemate  howitzer. 

Lunette  No.  2. 

Lunette  No.  3. — One  30-pounder  gun,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  4. 

Lunette  No.  5. — One  24-pounder  flank  casemate  howitzer;  one  18. 
pounder,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  6. — One  42-pounder  carronade,  siege  carriage. 

Lunette  No.  7. — One  32-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  8. — Oue  32  pounder,  short,  seige  carriage. 

Lunette  No.  9. — One  30-pounder,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  10. — One  32-pounder,  short,  siege  carriage. 

Lunette  No.  11. — One  32-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  12. — One  18- pounder,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  13. — One  32-pounder,  short,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  14. — One  18-pounder,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  15. — One  24-pounder,  howitzer,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  16. — One  24  pounder  flank  casemate  howitzer. 

Lunette  No.  17. — One  42  pounder  carronade,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  18. — One  32-pounder  carronade,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  19.— -One  42-pounder  carronade,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  20. — One  32-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  21. — One  18-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  22. — One  32-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  23. — One  32 -pounder,  short,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  24. — One  32-pounder,  short,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  25. — One  24-pounder  flank  casemate  howitzer. 

Cremaillere  line : 

No.  1. — 32-pounder  carronade,  siege. 

No.  2. — 42-pounder  carronade,  siege. 

No.  3. — 24-pounder  flank  casemate  howitzer. 

No.  4. 

No.  5. 

No.  6. — 32-pounder,  short,  not  mounted. 

No.  7. — 32-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

No.  8. — 30-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

No.  9.— 30-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Fort  Brown. — Four  32-pounders,  siege;  one  30-pounder,  barbette;  one 
18-pounder,  barbette. 

Fort  Mercer. — Two  30-pounders,  long,  barbette ; two  8-inch  siege  how- 
itzers, barbette ; one  24-pounder  howitzer. 

Fort  Boggs. — Two  10-inch  mortars ; one  24-pounder  howitzer,  field  car- 
riage; one  12-pounder  howitzer,  field  carriage;  ten  32-pounders ; three 
3-inch  rifles,  field  carriage ; one  6-pounder,  field  carriage. 

Fort  Bartow. — Two  10-inch  mortars,  two  8-inch  columbiads,  two  8-inch 
navy  guus,  two  32-pounders,  one  24-pounder  field  howitzer,  two  12- 
pounder  field  howitzers,  three  3-inch  rifles,  two  8-pounders,  two  6- 
pounders,  two  24-pounders,  rifled ; one  12-pounder  rifled. 

Rosedew  Battery. — One  24-pounder,  rifled ; one  18-pounder,  rifled. 
Beaulieu  Battery. — One  4-inch  62  rifled  gun,  siege;  two  42-pounders, 
five  32-pounder  (two  short) ; one  8-inch  columbiad. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  857 

Thunderbolt  Battery.—' One  24-pounder,  rifled ; two  8-incli  columbiads, 
two  8-incli  navy  guns,  two  42-pounders,  seven  32-pounders. 

Lake  Bluff  Battery.— Two  24-pounders,  rifled;  one  24-pounder. 

Genesis  Point  Battery.—' One  10-inch  columbiad,  one  10-inch  mortar, 
one  8-inch  columbiad,  one  42-pounder,  three  32-pounders,  one  32-pounder, 
rifled ; one  12-pounder  mountain  howitzer. 

Greenwich  Battery. — Three  32-pounders. 

Siege  train.— Four  8-inch  siege  howitzers,  two  4-inch  Blakely  rifles, 
one  20-pounder  Parrott. 

Hutchinson  Island  Battery.— Three  32-pounder  guns. 

Fort  Jackson.—^ Two  8-inch  columbiads,  five  32-pounders,  one  32- 
pounder,  rifled ; one  12-pounder  mountain  howitzer. 

Battery  Lawton. — Two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  8-inch  columbiads, 
one  42-pounder,  one  32-pounder,  rifled;  one  12-pounder  mountain  how- 
itzer 

Battery  Cheves.—Five  32-pounders,  two  24-pounder  Blakely  rifles. 

Battery  Lee. — Three  10-inch  mortars,  three  10-inch  columbiads,  three 
8-inch  columbiads,  one  42-pounder,  one  32-pounder. 

Bay  Battery. — Two  32-ponnders,  one  10-inch  mortar. 


858 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  LChap.  XXYL 


[[Enclosure  No.  3.] 


Chap.  XXVI  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 


859 


S 

£5 

£ 

I 


to  | 

s''k 

^ <?*• 

^ "Q 
O 

c4  <s* 

1 § 

s 3 


$ *S 

fi 

i 


> 3 2 Fdr.  Tong. 

' I Tong. 

dr^j  3 2 Fdr.  Tony. 


y 3 2 Fdr.  sTiortr 
~^j'32Fdr/  short. 

^^32  Fdr.  long  JBcFhette, 
18  Fdr.  Jong . 


\ 32  Fdr.  short: 
~/30JPdrv  long. 


14  ~\32Fdr. 

50  JCarron- 
' odes , 
Siege. 

k(  A 32  Fdr. 
N ) Cavron- 
S cules, 
Sieye 
y\~\24Fdr. 
jHonv  Uxer , 

fej  \s2Fdr 
_yZ!arron 
ode: 


9 


32Fdr. 
long  j f(M, 
belte. 


9 


y 


42 Fdr.  Curronnde. 


28  Fdr.  Tong. 


) 18  Fdr. 
TongSiye) 

& \ 32  Fdr} 
Flong  Far 
~better. 

§ \ 32  Fdr.  Short 
-1 Siege.  ■ 

<0  A 30 Fdr.  Tong 
_y  UtiT-bette. 

<fe  ^ 32  Fdr.  Short? 
_/  Siege.. 


) 32  Fdr.  ioTig 

JEtarbette. 


®5  1 42 

J ao 


ft 

fcq  ta 
v S1 
11 


f 

! 


£ 


Fdr.  Cnrron - 
ade  Siege. 

\8irt.  S’ge  JEToiv. 
\24  Fdr.  Howitzer, 

"X. 


860 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 
Abstract  from  Monthly  Returns  of  troops  in  East  and  Middle  Florida  for  March,  1863. 


Command. 


Dibtbict  ov  East  Florida  (Brigadier-General  FnnsGAK). 

1st  Georgia  Regulars _ 

2d  Florida  Cavalry  (4  companies)  .v 

Twelve  companies  of  infantry  and  one  dismounted  company  . . . 
Three  batteries  of  artillery 

Total 

District  of  Middle  Florida  (Brigadier-General  Cobb). 

1st  Georgia  Regulars,  Colonel  Magill 

1st  Florida  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hopkins 

Cobb  Guards 

Captain  Curry’s  company 

2d  Florida  Cavalry ' 

Robinson’s  Partisan  Rangers 

Echol’s  (Georgia)  artillery,  Captain  Tiller 

Leon  (Florida)  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Gamble 

Total 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

20 

210 

290 

433 

ie 

350 

408 

452 

41 

682 

820 

1, 164 

13 

305 

331 

342 

90 

1,  547 

1,849 

2,  391 

22 

223 

315 

428 

20 

357 

402 

523 

3 

54 

64 

86 

4 

104 

108 

125 

16 

350 

419 

502 

4 

84 

90 

106 

3 

113 

124 

155 

5 

167 

179 

203 

77 

1,452 

1, 701 

2, 128 

. 167 

2, 999 

3,  550 

4,519 

Residence,  East  Bank  Saint  John’s  [River], 

Near  Palatka,  Fla.,  April  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan: 

Sir  : On  Monday,  the  23d  ultimo,  a large  side- wheel  steamer  came  up 
the  river  as  far  as  Palatka  and  fired  four  shells  over  the  town.  She  then 
returned  to  Orange  Mill,  and  lay  off  that  place  until  2 o’clock  Tuesday 
evening,  and  went  down  the  river.  While  at  the  mill  the  Yankees  butch- 
ered a beef,  killed  several  sheep,  and  took  on  board  a negro  man  named 
John,  belonging  to  Mr.  Frank  Hernandez. 

On  Thursday  morning  a large  propeller  came  up  the  river  and  lay  off 
the  mill  until  evening,  when  she  came  up  opposite  Palatka,  abreast  of 
the  residence  of  Mr.  Antonio  Baza.  A large  force  of  negroes  was  landed 
from  the  propeller  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  0.  Dupont,  and  also  at  Orange 
Mill,  which  said  force  marched  by  land  to  Mr.  Baza’s  and  Mr.  Sanchez’s 
place,  opposite  Palatka,  where  they  joined  the  force  on  board  the  pro- 
peller. TMs  force  by  land  visited  the  plantation  of  Colonel  Dancy  and 
caught  two  of  his  negroes,  one  of  which  afterward  escaped.  They  cooked 
and  ate  at  this  place  and  carried  off  all  the  poultry.  The  colonel’s  place 
on  the  river  was  also  ransacked  by  the  negroes.  They  also  visited  the 
plantation  of  Major  Balling,  destroying  all  they  could,  but  did  not  suc- 
ceed in  getting  any  negroes,  as,  fortunately,  they  had  been  removed  a 
few  days  previous.  This  land  force,  on  arriving  at  the  residences  of 
Messrs.  Sanchez  and  Baza,  surrounded  the  places,  and  took  3 negroes 
from  Mr.  Morris  Sauchez  and  other  things  of  value  from  the  yard. 
They  did  not  succeed  in  catching  Mr.  Baza’s  negroes,  but  took  from 
him  three  horses  and  one  cart,  all  of  his  poultry,  hogs,  pots,  salt,  and 
everything  else  they  could  lay  their  hands  upon.  They  also  butchered 
two  beeves  iu  the  yard.  The  negroes  kept  the  houses  surrounded,  and 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  861 

abused  and  insulted  the  women  just  as  they  pleased.  They  encamped 
that  night  on  the  banks  of  the  river  in  Mr.  Baza’s  field. 

On  Friday  morning  the  propeller  started  and  proceeded  slowly  over 
to  Palatka  and  went  up  to  the  wharf,  landed  a number  of  men  on  the 
wharf,  and  was  in  the  act  of  landing  some  artillery,  when  Capt.  J.  J. 
Dickison  and  his  company,  who  had  been  patiently  waiting,  fired  into 
them.  The  propeller  then,  as  fast  as  steam  could  carry  her,  backed  out 
from  the  wharf,  firing  shell,  grape,  canister,  and  small-arms.  After 
they  fired  for  a while  she  proceeded  over  the  river  to  Mr.  Baza’s  point, 
and  communicated  with  a company  of  negroes  that  had  been  left  over 
there.  The  company  of  negroes  then  proceeded  back  by  land  to  Orange 
Mill,  and  the  propeller  went  back  down  the  river  and  took  them  on 
board.  Every  vestige  of  furniture  was  taken  by  the  negroes  from  the 
residences  of  Dr.  R.  G.  Mays,  Maj.  E.  C.  Simkins  [quartermaster],  and 
Maj.  A.  H.  Cole  [quartermaster].  Mr.  Antonio  Baza  was  taken  prisoner 
by  the  negroes,  but  succeeded  in  making  his  escape.  The  Yankees  on 
the  way  down  the  river  again  stopped  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  0.  Dupont 
and  demanded  the  negroes  who  were  hid,  stating  if  the  negroes  were 
not  immediately  delivered  they  would  burn  the  houses.  Mrs.  Dupont, 
who  was  much  alarmed,  accordingly  delivered  up  the  negroes,  against 
their  wishes  and  urgent  appeals. 

' In  a conversation  with  Colonel  Montgomery,  of  the  negro  regiment 
(I  having  been  surrounded  and  taken  prisoner,  but  afterward  released), 
he  informed  me  that  he  had  come  up  for  the  purpose  of  permanently  oc- 
cupying Palatka,  and  that  they  intended  restoring  Florida  to  the  Union 
at  all  hazards ; that  he  would  have  a force  of  some  5,000  men  at  Palatka 
in  a few  days;  that  they  had  been  acting  in  a mild  way  all  along,  but 
that  they  intended  now  to  let  us  feel  what  war  actually  was;  that  the 
| United  States  marshal  for  Florida  was  along  and  pointed  him  out  to 
me;  that  all  the  negroes  were  declared  free  and  be  intended  to  take  all 
he  could  find. 

Thus  you  will  perceive,  general,  what  we  are  to  expect,  and  had  it 
not  been  for  the  brave  and  gallant  conduct  of  Captain  Dickison,  his 
officers  and  men,  Palatka  would  this  day  have  been  in  possession  of  the 
negro  enemy.  Captain  Dickison  has  been  one  of  the  most  untiring  and 
energetic  officers  I have  ever  met  with.  He  is  always  on  the  alert,  and 
had  he  sufficient  force  would  never  let  the  enemy  land  on  either  side  of 
the  river  up  here.  I visited  Palatka  since  the  propeller  left,  and  from 
the  great  quantity  of  blood  about  on  the  wharf  and  pieces  of  bones 
picked  up  many  of  the  eneury  evidently  were  killed.  Every  bullet  fired 
by  Captain  Dickison’s  men  must  have  took  effect.  This  company  de- 
i serves  the  thanks  of  the  people  of  Florida  and  the  Government,  for  1 
think  they  have  well  merited  the  same. 

Allow  me,  general,  to  suggest  to  you  the  propriety  of  taking  some  ac- 
tion in  regard  to  the  vast  quantity  of  cattle  on  the  east  side  of  the  Saint 
John’s,  as  the  enemy  are  continually  butchering  for  the  use  of  their 
troops,  and  as  the  citizens  are  entirely  helpless  to  defend  themselves. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted  by  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  T.  RUSSELL. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  April  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan,  Comdg.  District  of  East  Florida : 

General:  Your  indorsement  upon  the  communication  of  Colonel 
Clinch  has  been  duly  considered. 


862 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


The  commanding  general  fully  appreciates  the  difficulties  that  you 
will  have  to  encounter  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  intrusted  to  you, 
but  is  unable  to  afford  any  further  assistance  in  the  exigency.  It  will 
be  impossible  for  him,  with  the  limited  means  at  his  command,  to  do 
more  than  to  defend  or  attempt  to  defend  positions  and  localities  such 
as  Charleston  and  Savannah. 

Your  recent  telegram  has  induced  the  hope  that  the  enemy  have 
changed  their  plans  somewhat,  and  have  been  diverted  from  any  oper- 
ations on  the  Saint  John’s,  at  least  of  the  serious  and  imposing  charac- 
ter at  first  anticipated. 

Satisfied  with  your  past  administration  of  the  district,  the  command- 
ing general  relies  on  your  energy  and  judgment,  and  is  assured  that 
you  will  do  whatsoever  may  be  practicable  to  make  head  against  the 
enemy  within  the  limits  of  your  command.  You  can  be  expected  to  do 
no  more. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff, 


Distribution  of  troops  in  the  Third  Military  District , April  1,  1863. 

' , GREEN  POND. 

Three  companies  Twenty-fourth  Infantry  at  Ballooville,  4 miles  east 
of  Combahee  Ferry. 

Chestatee  Artillery,  Captain  Bomar,  head  of  Cheehaw  road. 

Three  companies  Fifth  Cavalry  at  Chisolmville,  6 miles  from  railroad. 

Company  B,  First  Battalion  South  Carolina  Sharpshooters,  as  heavy 
artillery,  Combahee  Ferry. 

One  piece  Preston’s  light  battery,  Combahee  Ferry. 

POCOTALIGO. 

Forty-Seventh  and  Forty-eighth  Regiments  North  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, Cooke’s  brigade,  one-half  mile  from  railroad. 

Seven  companies  Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Stevens,  2 miles  from  railroad. 

Company  I,  Eleventli  Infantry,  as  light  artillery,  Salkehatchie  (Old 
Pocotaligo)  road,  3 miles  from  railroad. 

Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery  at  Pocotaligo,  on  railroad. 

Nelson  Light  Artillery  at  Pocotaligo. 

Preston’s  light  battery  (three  pieces),  Salkehatchie  road,  3 miles  from 
railroad. 

Nine  companies  cavalry  around  and  near  Pocotaligo  Station. 

Partisan  Rangers,  Captain  Kirk,  on  Port  Royal  road,  6 miles  from 
railroad. 


COOSAWHATCHIE. 

Fifteenth  and  Twenty-seventh  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  Cooke’s 
brigade,  at  Coosawhatchie,  1 mile  from  railroad. 

Companies  A and  C,  First  Battalion  South  Carolina  Sharpshooters, 
at  Coosawhatchie,  1 mile  from  railroad. 

Light  Artillery,  Captain  Cooper,  at  Coosawhatchie,  1 mile  from  rail- 
road. % 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  863 

La  Fayette  Artillery,  Captain  Kanapaux,  at  Coosawhatchie,  1 mile 
from  railroad. 

Companies  F and  H,  as  heavy  artillery,  at  Bee’s  Creek  Battery,  4 
miles  from  railroad. 

Four  companies  Fifth  Begiment  Cavalry,  on  road  to  Grahamville,  2 
miles  from  Bee’s  Creek  Battery. 

Four  companies  Fifth  Begiment  Cavalry,  at  Grahamville. 

HARDEE  VIliLE . 

Company  G,  Eleventh  Infantry,  at  Savannah  Biver  trestle. 

Company  E,  Eleventh  Infantry,  at  Bluffton. 

Company  K,  Eleventh  Infantry,  near  New  Biver. 

Company  B,  Eleventh  Infantry,  at  Bluffton. 

Company  D,  Eleventh  Infantry,  at  Hardeeville. 

Forty-seventh  Georgia  (eight  companies),  near  Bed  Bluff. 

Company  A,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery,  at  Camp  Allen, 
near  New  Biver  Bridge. 

Four  companies  Butledge  Cavalry,  2 miles  south  of  New  Biver 
Bridge. 

Company  F,  Fifth  Begiment  Cavalry,  at  Camp  De  Saussure,  12  miles 
from  railroad,  on  Screven’s  Ferry  road. 

W.  S.  WALKEB, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  > Camp  Finegan,  East  Florida, 

No.  18.  f April  2,  1863. 

Capt.  William  E.  Chambers  will  proceed  with  a detachment  of  12 
men  of  his  company  to  the  neighborhood  known  as  the  Econiah  Scrub, 
in  Putnam  County,  where  he  will  make  diligent  and  careful  investiga- 
tion as  to  the  truth  and  extent  of  certain  revelations  made  by  the  slave 
Toby,  recently  arrested  at  Jacksonville,  concerning  alleged  conspiracies 
of  the  negroes  in  that  section  to  leave  their  owners  and  go  to  the  enemy. 
Captain  Chambers  will  arrest  such  negroes  as  may  be  implicated,  and 
should  he  have  reasonable  grounds  for  suspecting  that  any  white  per- 
sons are  also  implicated  he  will  not  hesitate  to  arrest  them.  Much  dis- 
j cretion  is  necessarily  given  to  Captain  Chambers  as  to  the  measures 
necessary  to  arrive  at  the  facts  in  this  matter.  He  will,  however,  act 
coolly  and  temperately,  and  not  use  unnecessary  harshness  not  after- 
ward to  be  justified. 

After  completing  his  investigations  he  will  return  with  his  detach- 
ment and  report  result  to  the  officer  in  command.  Capt.  S.  W.  Mays, 
being  familiar  with  the  localities  in  that  section,  will  accompany  detach- 
ment and  render  all  aid  and  whatever  information  he  can  necessary  to 
Captain  Chambers’  careful  investigations. 

T.  W.  BBEVABD, 

Major , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Military  District  of  Georgia, 

Savannah , April  3,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  you  herewith  report  of  the 


864 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


board  of  general  officers  appointed  by  Special  Orders,  No.  64,  para- 
graph IY,  “ to  assemble  in  Savannah  for  the  purpose  of  examining  into 
and  reporting  upon  certain  points  in  connection  with  the  defense  of 
Savannah  and  its  approaches;”  also  Appendixes  A,  B,  C,  D,  and  E, 
annexed  thereto. 

******* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

H.  W.  MEECEE, 

Brigadier -General,  Provisional  Army  Confederate  States. 


[Inclosure.] 

Proceedings  of  a Board  of  General  Officers  convened  at  Oglethorpe  Bar - 
racks , by  virtue  of  the  following  orders , viz: 

Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  64.  i Charleston , March  14,  1863. 

* * » * * * # 

IY.  A board  of  general  officers  is  appointed  to  assemble  in  Savannah, 
Ga.,  as  soon  as  practicable  for  the  purpose  of  examining  into  and  re- 
porting upon  the  following  points  in  connection  with  the  defenses  of 
Savannah  and  its  approaches,  viz: 

1st.  Amount  and  description  of  heavy  ordnance  deficient  or  neces- 
sary for  the  efficient  defense  of  the  Savannah  Fiver. 

2d.  The  number  and  character  of  heavy  ordnance  called  for  and  sup- 
plied since  the  1st  of  June,  1862. 

3d.  What  additional  ordnance,  if  any,  and  description  may  be  neces- 
sary to  complete  the  armament  of  the  works  constructed,  under  con- 
struction, or  ordered,  to  defend  the  approaches  to  Savannah. 

4th.  What  works,  if  any,  are  essential  for  the  defense  of  Savannah  in 
addition  to  those  already  constructed,  under  construction,  or  ordered. 

5th.  What  additional  force  of  artillery  and  infantry  respectively  is 
required  for  the  proper  defense  of  Savannah  and  the  approaches  thereto, 
including  a movable  reserve  column,  the  effective  strength  of  each 
arm  at  present  available  being  reported. 

6th.  What  number  of  negroes  have  been  called  for  during  the  last 
four  months,  the  number  received  for  the  same  time,  and  the  average 
number  employed  each  month. 

Y.  The  board  is  authorized  to  call  upon  Colonel  Anderson  and  Cap- 
tain McCrady,  or  any  staff  officer  in  the  department,,  to  appear  before  it 
and  to  supply  such  information,  including  official  reports  and  papers, 
as  may  be  deemed  proper  for  the  discharge  of  the  special  duties  herein 
assigned. 

DETAIL  FOR  THE  BOARD. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  commanding  District  of  Georgia. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  B.  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States. 

Brigadier-General  Mercer  will  select  some  staff  officer  as  recorder. 

* * # * * * * 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


865 


Special  Orders,  > Headquarters  District  of  Georgia, 

75.  j Savannah , March  17,  1863. 

I.  In  compliance  with  paragraph  IV,  Special  Orders,  No.  64,  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  the  board  of  general 
officers  therein  constituted  will  assemble  at  Oglethorpe  Barracks  at  10 
a,  in.,  17th  instant,  and  daily  thereafter  until  adjournment. 

Capt.  W.  W.  Gordon,  assistant  adjutant- general,  is  hereby  appointed 
as  recorder. 

Bv  order  of  Brigadier-General  Mercer : 

GEO.  A.  MERCEB, 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Oglethorpe  Barracks, 

Savannah , Ga .,  March  18,  1863 — 10.30  a.  m. 

The  board  met  pursuant  to  the  above  orders. 

Present:  Brigadier-General  Mercer;  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro; 
Brigadier-General  Walker  ; Capt.  W.  W.  Gordon,  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  recorder. 

The  recorder  read  the  orders  convening  the  board. 

Col.  E.  C.  Anderson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  river  batteries,  having 
been  called  before  the  board,  made  the  following  statement : 

In  the  first  line  of  batteries  upon  the  river,  which  can  alone  be  relied  on  for  the  de- 
fense of  the  obstructions  and  which  are  indeed  almost  the  only  defenses  of  the  river, 
there  are  but  twenty-eight  guns,  exclusive  of  three  10-inch  mortars,  which  would  not 
be  available  against  moving  objects ; of  these  eleven  only  are  heavy  guns.  They  are 
distributed  as  follows:  Lawton  Battery,  six  guns;  Fort  Jackson,  eight  guns;  Lee 
Battery,  ten  guns,  including  three  mortars ; Naval  Battery,  seven  guns;  total,  thirty - 

0IThe  armament  of  Fort  Jackson  amounts  to  nothing.  There  are  but  two  8-inch 
guns,  the  rest  being  32-pounders.  Armed  with  10-inch  guns  it  would  be  efficient 
against  iron-clads,  being  the  only  battery  immediately  upon  the  river  which  has  ele- 
vation sufficient  to  admit  of  a plunging  fire. 

I recommend  that  all  the  guns  in  the  naval  battery  be  replaced  by  heavier  guns. 

J recommend  that  the  32-pounder  in  Battery  Lee  be  replaced  by  a 10-mch  gun. 

The  heavy  guns  in  the  lower  batteries  are  mounted  on  platforms  built  on  a yielding 
soil  of  mud.  They  tip  with  every  change  of  position  and  are  thereby  very  difficult 
j to  traverse.  The  apparatus  in  use  lor  traversing  the  guns  of  like  caliber  in  Fort 
Sumter  would  in  a very  material  degree  add  to  the  efficiency  here.  As  now  arranged 
it  requires  from  four  to  six  men  to  traverse  them.  With  Yates’  patent  one  man 
I could  train  them  easily.  I request  that  nine  of  these  appliances  may  be  supplied  from 
Charleston,  as  there  are  no  means  of  obtaining  them  in  Savannah. 

I recommend  that  a work  be  erected  at  a suitable  spot  on  Mackay’s  Point,  to  com- 
mand Elba  Island,  Augustine  Creek,  aud  the  main  Ship  Channel  in  the  Savannah 
; River  north  of  Elba  Island. 

On  Hutchinson  Island  there  are  three  32-pounder  guns.  Two  of  these  are  old  guns, 
that  were  dug  up  out  of  the  mud  on  that  point,  reamed  out,  and  can  only  be  used 
j with  very  light  charges  and  shells  made  specially  for  them.  I recommend  that  these 
i be  replaced  by  one  10-inch  columbiad  and  two  7-lneli  rifled  guns. 

I have  under  my  command  700 — I require  at  least  1,000 — effective  men  as  artillerists 
! for  my  batteries,  consisting  of  the  four  before  mentioned,  forming  the  exterior  or  lower 
i line  of  the  Hutchinson  Island  Battery,  the  Bay  Battery,  and  the  battery  ordered  to 
j be  constructed  at  Screven’s  Ferry. 

Captain  McCrady,  chief  engineer  of  the  district,  having  been  called 
before  the  board,  made  the  following  statement : 

There  should  be  no  smooth-bore  guns  in  the  river  batteries  below  the  caliber  of 
8-inch.  There  should  be — 

In  Lawton  Battery  one  7-inch  rifled  gun,  one  6£  inch  rifled  gun. 

In  Naval  Battery  four  8- inch  columbiads,  three  61-inch  rifled  guns. 

55  R R— VOL  XIY 


866 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Id  Fort  Jackson  two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  61-inch  rifled  guns,  in  place  of  the 
present  guns,  and  one  8-inch  columbiad. 

In  Battery  Lee  two  7-inch  rifled  guns,  in  place  of  the  32  and  42-pounders,  smooth- 
bore. 

In  Fort  Boggs  two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  8-inch  columbiad,  two  7-inch  rifled  guns, 
two  6£-[nch  rifled  guns. 

There  should  be — 

On  Fig  Island  two  10-inch  columbaids,  one  7-inch  rifled  gun. 

On  Hutchinson  Island  two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  7-inch  rifled  guns. 

On  Screven’s  Ferry  two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  7-inch  rifled  guns. 

Bay  Batteries,  on  Savannah  Bluff,  four  32-pounder  rifled  guns,  four  42-pounder  rifled 
guns,  four  8-inch  columbiads,  two  10-inch  mortars. 

I think  there  should  be  at  least  500  men  in  Fort  Boggs,  of  whom  half  should  be 
heavy  artillerists  and  half  infantry. 

In  Fort  Bartow  there  should  be  500  heavy  artillerists  and  1,000  infantry. 

For  the  guns  upon  the  city  lines  there  should  be  2,000  heavy  artillerists,  exclusive 
of  the  movable  field-battery  artillerists.  In  addition  to  the  artillery  there  should 
be  a minimum  force  of  15,000  infantry  and  2,000  cavalry  for  the  permanent  garrison 
of  Savannah  and  its  defense,  and  a movable  column  of  20,000  men  to  be  kept  in  the 
immediate  neighborhood  of  Savannah. 

The  board  then  considered  a report  of  Lieut.  William  D.  Harden, 
ordnance  officer,  being  “ List  of  ordnance  in  position  in  the  Military 
District  of  Georgia,”  which  is  hereunto  annexed  as  Appendix  A. 

The  board  adjourned  to  meet  again  at  10  a.  m.  19th  instant. 

Oglethorpe  Barracks, 

Savannah , March  19,  1863 — 10.30  a.  m. 

The  board  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present:  Brigadier- General  Mercer,  commanding  District  of  Georgia ; 
Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States ; Brigadier- General  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confede- 
rate States;  Capt.  W.  W.  Gordou,  recorder. 

The  proceedings  of  yesterday  were  read  over. 

In  connection  with  the  second  point  submitted  the  board  then  con- 
sidered the  official  correspondence  at  district  headquarters,  by  which  j 
it  appeared  that  Brigadier  General  Mercer,  commanding  District  of 
Georgia,  made  the  following  applications,  viz : 

To  Secretary  of  War,  July  7,  1862,  for  two  42-pounder  rifled  guns  for  Genesis  Point. 

To  Secretary  of  War,  August  3, 1862,  for  three  10-inch  columbiads  for  Carston’s  Bluff 
and  Beaulieu. 

To  Secretary  of  War,  August  6,  1862,  for  one  additional  heavy  rifled  gun  for  Gen- 
esis Point. 

To  Colonel  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  September  15,  1862,  for  three  32-pounder 
rifled  guns  lying  at  Wilmington,  N.  C. 

To  Colonel  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  February  12, 1863,  for  two  Whitworth  guns 
at  the  arsenal  at  Augusta,  Ga. 

The  board  then  considered  the  official  correspondence  of  Lieut.  W. 
D.  Harden,  ordnance  officer,  by  which  it  appeared  that  Brigadier- Gen- 
eral Mercer,  commanding  District  of  Georgia,  through  his  ordnance 
officer,  Lieutenant  Harden,  represented  to  Colonel  Gorgas,  Chief  of 
Ordnance  at  Richmond,  by  letter  under  date  of  21st  August,  1862,  the 
condition  of  the  guns  upon  the  city  lines,  and  stated  that  thirty-five 
additional  heavy  guns  would  be  necessary  for  the  defense  of  said  lines. 

It  was  then  stated  to  the  board  by  Brigadier- General  Mercer  that 
General  Beauregard,  soon  after  assuming  command  of  the  Department 
of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  made  a personal  examination 
of  the  defenses  of  Savannah,  and  in  consequence  thereof  made  requi- 
sition upon  the  authorities  at  Richmond  for  five  10-incli  columbiads, 
five  8-inch  columbiads,  five  42-pounder  rifled  guns,  five  32-pounder 


867 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

rifled  guns,  and  five  10  or  13  inch  mortars,  as  necessary  for  an  efficient 
defense. 

Captain  MeCrady,  chief  engineer  of  the  district,  having  been  called 
before  the  board,  stated  that  on  the  26th  January,  1863,  he  recom- 
mended to  Major  Harris,  chief  engineer  of  the  department,  that  the 
following  additional  guns  should  be  furnished  as  necessary  for  the  bat- 
teries in  defense  of  Savannah,  viz:  six  10-inch  columbiads,  seven  8-inch 
columbiads,  five  42-pounder  rifled  guns,  thirteen  32-pounder  rifled  guns, 
one  24-pounder  rifled  gun,  and  four  10-inch  mortars. 

The  board  then  considered  the  report  of  Lieut.  A.  T.  Cunningham, 
ordnance  officer,  being  UA  list  of  the  guns  received  in  this  district  since 
June  1,  1862,”  which  is  hereunto  annexed  as  Appendix  B,  by  which  it 
appeared  that  there  have  been  received  in  this  district  two  10-inch  mor- 
tars from  Charleston,  two  42-pounder  carronades  from  Charleston,  one 
8-inch  naval  columbiad  from  Charleston,  and  one  8-inch  naval  columbiad 
borrowed  from  the  Navy;  and,  in  addition  thereto,  thirty  guns  of  various 
calibers  scarcely  to  be  classed  under  the  head  of  heavy  ordnance. 

The  board  adjourned  to  meet  again  at  10  o’clock  a.  m.,  Saturday,  21st 
instant. 


Oglethorpe  Barracks, 

Savannah , March  21,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  board  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present:  Brigadier- General  Mercer,  commanding  District  of  Georgia; 
Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States ; Brigadier- General  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confed- 
erate States;  Capt.  W.  W.  Gordon,  recorder. 

In  connection  with  the  third  point  submitted,  Captain  MeCrady,  chief 
engineer  of  the  district,  having  been  called  before  the  board,  stated  that 
the  heavy  ordnance  necessary  to  complete  the  works  constructed  and 
under  construction  was  as  follows : 

For  River  Batteries,  as  stated  by  him  in  first  day’s  proceedings  of  this  board,  see 
page  5. 

Fort  Bartow,  at  Carston’s  Bluff:  Two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  7-inch  rifled  gun, 
two  fij-inch  rifled  guns. 

Water  Battery  No.  2,  at  Carston’s  Bluff : Two  8-inch  columbiads. 

Greenwich  Battery : Two  8-inch  navy  shell  guns,  which  could  be  supplied  from  Fort 
Bartow  when  the  10-inch  columbiads  above  called  for  are  furnished  to  Fort  Bartow. 

Thunderbolt  Battery:  Two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  7-inch  rifled  gun,  two  

mortars. 

Beaulieu  Battery:  Two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  8-inch  columbiad,  one  7-inch 
rifled  gun,  two mortars. 

Rosedew  Battery:  Two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  8-inch  columbiad,  one  7-inch 
rifled  gun, two  32-pounder  smooth-bores,  two mortars. 

Genesis  Point  Battery : Two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  7-inch  rifled  gun,  one  10-inch 
mortar. 

Fort  Boggs : As  stated  by  him  in  the  first  day’s  proceedings  of  this  board,  see  page 
5 of  this  report. 

City  Lines— Interior  lines  of  city  defense : Eight  4.62-inch  rifled  garrison  guns,  to 
form  one  battery ; six  8-inch  columbiads,  viz,  two  for  the  right  flank,  two  for  Fort 
Mercer,  and  two  for  Fort  Brown. 

There  are  now  nominally  upon  these  city  lines  forty-six  guns,  but  of 
these  four  have  been  taken  for  the  siege  train.  Four  more  are  to  be 
taken  for  the  siege  train  and  seven  are  old  guns,  very  unsafe  and  likely 
to  burst,  being  24-pounders  reamed  out  to  30-pounders.  These  fifteen 
guns  should  be  replaced  by  ten  32-pounders  and  five  8-inch  siege  how- 
itzers. 

Captain  MeCrady,  chief  engineer  of  the  district,  then  stated  that,  in 


868 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MLD.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


consequence  of  examinations  made  by  General  Beauregard,  Brigadier- 
General  Mercer,  Major  Harris,  chief  engineer  of  department,  and  himself, 
he  intended  so  soon  as  laborers  were  to  be  had  to  construct  works,  for 
the  armament  of  which  the  following  heavy  ordnance  was  necessary: 

On  the  interior  line  of  river  defense — 

For  battery  at  Screven’s  Ferry,  on  the  Carolina  bank,  to  give  a cross-fire  with  Fort 
Boggs  upon  the  river,  two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  7-inch  rifled  gnns. 

Battery  on  Fig  Island,  two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  7-iuch  rifled  gun. 

Battery  on  Hutchinson  Island,  to  be  reconstructed,  two  10-inch  columbiads,  two 
7-inch  rifled  guns. 

The  board  adjourned  to  meet  again  Monday,  23d  instant,  at  10  a.  m. 

Oglethorpe  Barracks, 

Savannah,  March  23,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

The  board  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present : Brigadier-General  Mercer,  commanding  District  of  Georgia ; 
Brigadier  General  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States;  Brigadier-General  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States ; Capt.  W.  W.  Gordon,  recorder. 

Captain  McCrady,  chief  engineer  of  the  district,  having  been  called 
before  the  board,  was  asked  the  following  questions  by  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Taliaferro  and  made  the  following  answers  : 

Question.  Do  you  understand  your  authority  to  be  full  to  order  works 
to  be  constructed  at  any  point  you  deem  important  for  the  defense  of 
Savannah  ? 

Answer.  Yes ; reporting  at  the  same  time  my  order  to  Brigadier-General  Mercer, 
commanding  district,  and  Major  Harris,  chief  engineer  of  department,  and  my  reasons 
therefor. 

Question.  Will  you  state  what  works  have  been  ordered  to  be  con- 
structed by  the  Engineer  Department  for  the  defense  of  Savannah  be- 
sides those  constructed  and  in  the  course  of  construction? 

Answer.  A battery  at  Screven’s  Ferry,  a battery  at  Fig  Island,  inclosed  work  at 
Deptford,  inclosed  work  in  rear  of  Fort  Bartow  upon  the  road  to  Fort  Jackson,  en- 
filading or  reverse  battery  in  rear  and  to  the  right  of  Fort  Bartow,  battery  command- 
ing Greenwich  Point  and  Timber  Landing  Creek,  battery  commanding  opposite  side 
of  Timber  Landing  Creek  marsh,  inclosed  work  at  head  of  Timber  Landing  Creek 
marsh,  position  for  field  battery  on  Bethesda  Point. 

Captain  McCrady,  chief  engineer  of  the  district,  further  stated  the 
armament  for  the  above  works  should  be  as  follows,  viz : 

Screven’s  Ferry  : Two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  7-inch  rifled  guns. 

Fig  Island:  Two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  7-inch  rifled  gun. 

Deptford:  Two  10-inch  mortars,  one  24-pounder  howitzer,  two  12-pounder  how- 
itzers, two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  8-inch  columbiad,  two  7-inch  rifled  guns,  two 
61-inch  rifled  guns,  three  32-pouuder  guns,  three  3-inch  rifled  gnus,  two  6-pounder 
gnns. 

Inclosed  work  in  rear  of  Fort  Bartow  : Two  8-inch  columbiads,  four  32  or  42  pounder 
gnns,  two  4.62-inch  rifled  guns. 

Enfilading  battery  in  rear  of  Fort  Bartow:  Two  42-pounder  guns,  two  32-pounder 
guns. 

Flank  battery  to  right  of  Fort  Bartow:  One  8-icch  columbiad,  one  42-pounder  gun, 
two  32-pounder  guns. 

Battery  commanding  Greenwich  and  Timber  Landing  Creek  : Ono  8-inch  columbiad, 
one  42-pounder  gun,  two  32-pounder  guns. 

Battery  commanding  marsh  opposite  side  Timber  Landing  Creek:  One  42-pounder 
gun,  four  32-pounder  guns. 

Inclosed  work  at  bead  of  Timber  Landing  Creek  : Six  32- pounder  guns. 

Iii  connection  with  the  fourth  point  submitted  to  the  board  Captain 
McCrady,  chief  engineer  District  of  Georgia,  stated  as  follows,  viz  : 


Chap.  XXVl.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


869 


Works  should  be  constructed  upon  the  west  and  southwest  of  Savannah,  to  cover 
the  Ogeechee  and  Louisville  roads  and  the  Central  Railroad.  Actual  surveys  are  now 
in  progress  which  will  develop  the  points  to  be  selected.  From  personal  surveys  there 
should  be  field  works  to  defend  the  causeways  leading  from  the  Ogeechee  road  through 
O wens’  Backwater  to  the  Louisville  road  ; a field  work  to  defend  the  bridge  over  the 
North  Branch  of  the  Little  Ogeechee ; a field  work  to  defend  the  bridge  over  the  South 
Branch  of  the  Littie  Ogeechee ; field  works  to  defend  the  peninsula  between  the  Little 
aud  Great  Ogeechee;  a field  work  to  defend  Jencks’  Bridge  across  the  Great  Ogeechee ; 
field  works  to  defend  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  Bridge,  especially  one  at 
the  intersection  of  the  Purysburg  road  with  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad. 

In  connection  with  the  fifth  point  submitted  to  the  board  it  appears 
by  the  statement  of  Col.  E.  C.  Anderson,  in  first  day’s  proceedings  of  this 
board  (see  pages  4 and  5 of  this  report),  that  he  needs  1,000  effective 
heavy  artillerists  to  man  the  batteries  under  his  command,  and  by 
statement  of  Captain  MeCrady,  in  first  day’s  proceedings  of  this  board 
(see  page  0 of  this  report),  that  there  should  be  3,000  heavy  artillerists 
for  the  city  lines,  including  Fort  Boggs  and  Fort  Bartow;  for  the  gar- 
rison of  Savannah  15,000  infantry  and  2,000  cavalry,  besides  a movable 
column  of  20,000  men. 

By  reference  to  official  reports  at  these  headquarters  it  appeared  that 
the  effective  force  of  each  arm  of  service  now  available  for  defense  of 
Savannah  is  as  follows:  Infantry,  5,311;  light  artillery,  543;  heavy 
artillery,  1,968;  cavalry,  1,450;  total,  9,272. 

The  board  adjourned  to  meet  again  Thursday,  26th  instant,  at  10 
a.  m. 

Oglethorpe  Barracks, 
Savannah , March  26,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  board  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present:  Brigadier-General  Mercer,  commanding  District  of  Georgia; 
Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States;  Brigadier  General  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States ; Capt.  W.  W.  Gordon,  recorder. 

Owing  to  the  want  of  papers  called  for,  the  board  adjourned  to  meet 
again  Saturday,  28th  March,  at  11  a.  m. 

Oglethorpe  Barracks, 
Savannah , March  28,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  board  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present:  Brigadier-General  Mercer,  commanding  District  of  Georgia; 
Brigadier- General  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States;  Brigadier-General  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States;  Capt.  W.  W.  Gordon,  recorder. 

In  connection  with  the  sixth  point  submitted  to  the  board  Captain 
MeCrady,  chief  engineer  of  the  District  of  Georgia,  having  been  called 
before  tiie  board,  stated  as  follows  : 

A call  was  made  upon  His  Excellency  Governor  Brown  the  22d  November,  1862,  for 
1,500  negroes  as  laborers  upon  the  works  for  the  defense  of  Savannah. 

At  the  request  of  the  Governor  to  “ equalize  the  impressment”  3,000  negroes  were 
accepted  and  erpploved. 

The  average  number  of  effective  hands  (negroes)  employed  was,  for  December,  1,500 ; 
January,  2,000;  February,  2,000;  first  half  of  March,  1,500.  These  hands  have  all 
been  discharger! . 

New  works  having  been  ordered,  anew  call  was  made  upon  His  Excellency  the  Gov- 
ernor the  16th  March,  1863,  for  1,500  negroes.  This  call  has  been  referred  by  the 
Governor  to  the  Legislature  and  lias  not  yet  been  acted  upon  by  the  Legislature. 

The  board  have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

1st.  The  board  report,  as  necessary  for  the  efficient  defense  of  the  Sa- 
vannah River,  that  twenty  eight  guns  now  in  position  be  replaced  by 


870 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 


the  same  number  of  guns  of  heavier  caliber,  and  that  twenty  heavy 
guns  be  added  thereto,  and  refer  to  Appendix  C,  a tabular  statement 
of  guns  in  position  and  recommended. 

The  board  most  earnestly  call  attention  to  the  fact,  as  shown  in 
Appendix  0,  that  there  are  but  twenty-eight  guns  in  the  exterior  line 
of  river  defense,  and  of  these  eleven  only  are  heavy  guns. 

The  board  also  call  particular  attention  to  the  insufficient  armament 
of  Fort  Boggs,  a most  important  work  in  the  interior  line  of  the  river 
defenses,  and  the  urgent  necessity  for  the  seven  heavy  guns  recom- 
mended. 

Should  the  guns  called  for  be  furnished,  the  guns  they  replace  could 
be  transferred  to  the  city  lines  and  interior  lines  of  defense. 

2d.  The  board  report  that  since  the  1st  June,  1862,  Brigadier- General 
Mercer  called  for  forty- six  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance ; General  Beaure- 
gard reported  as  necessary  twenty-five  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance,  and 
Captain  McCrady  recommended  as  necessary  thirty-six  pieces  of  heavy 
ordnance. 

The  board  report  as  received  since  1st  June,  1862,  six  pieces  of  heavy 
ordnance. 

The  board  refer  to  Appendix  D,  a tabular  statement  of  heavy  ord- 
nance called  for  and  supplied  since  June  1,  1862. 

3d.  The  board  report  as  necessary  to  complete  the  armament  of 
works  constructed  and  under  construction  that  the  batteries  for  the 
defense  of  the  Savannah  River  be  increased  and  strengthened,  as  stated 
* under  first  point.  That  in  the  batteries  at  Fort  Bartow,  Greenwich, 
Thunderbolt,  Beaulieu,  Rosedew,  Fort  McAllister,  and  the  city  lines, 
exclusive  of  Fort  Boggs,  thirty-three  guns  now  in  position  be  replaced 
by  twenty-eight  guns  of  heavier  caliber  and  five  mortars,  and  thirty 
guns  of  heavy  caliber  and  two  mortars  be  added  thereto. 

The  board  report  as  necessary  for  the  armament  of  works  ordered 
fifty-one  guns  of  heavy  caliber. 

The  board  recommend  in  the  strongest  terms  that  the  armament  of 
Fort  Bartow  be  increased  by  four  columbiads  and  three  rifled  guns 
called  for  above.  Fort  Bartow  is  the  key  of  the  exterior  line  of  river 
batteries. 

4th.  The  board  report  that  in  addition  to  the  works  constructed,  under 
construction,  or  ordered,  works  are  essential  to  the  west  and  southwest 
of  Savannah.  A survey  is  now  in  progress,  and  until  a report  is  made 
by  the  engineer  in  charge  it  will  be  impossible  to  specify  more  particu- 
larly than  has  been  done  in  pages  14  and  15  of  the  report  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  this  board.*  It  may  be  stated  in  general  terms  that  the 
board  consider  the  Central  Railroad  of  vital  importance  to  Savannah, 
and  that  the  approaches  thereto  should  be  defended  by  the  erection  of 
works  mainly  for  field  artillery. 

5th.  The  board  report  that  the  effective  force  of  each  arm  of  service 
now  available  for  defense  of  Savannah  is  as  follows  : Infantry,  5,311 ; 
light  artillery,  543 ; heavy  artillery,  1,968  ; cavalry,  1,450  ; total,  9,272. 

The  board  report  that  for  the  proper  defense  of  Savannah  the 
respective  arms  of  service  should  be  increased  as  follows  : 


10. 000  infantry,  making  in  all 15, 000 

light  artillery,  making  in  all 500 

4. 000  heavy  artillery,  making  in  all 4, 000 

500  cavalry,  making  in  all 2,000 


Total 21,500 


Twelve  thousand  five  hundred  increase. 


See  p.  869. 


!HAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


871 


The  board  report  that  in  addition  to  the  above  there  should  be  a 
novable  column  of  20,000  men.  . 

6th.  The  board  report  that  the  number  of  negroes  called  for  during 
;he  last  four  months  was  1,500 ; that  the  number  received  was  3,000  ; 
-hat  the  average  number  of  effective  hands  employed  was,  for  Decem- 
ber, 1,500  ; for  January,  2,000  ; for  February,  2,000 ; first  half  of  March, 

L,500.  r ^ , 

The  board  further  report  that  all  these  negroes  have  been  discharged, 
and  that  an  additional  force  of  1,500  negroes  has  been  called  for  but 
not  yet  received. 

The  board  adjourned  to  meet  again  Monday,  March  30, 1863,  at  11  a.  m. 

Oglethorpe  Barracks, 
Savannah , March  30,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  board  met  pursuant  to  adjournment. 

Present : Brigadier-General  Mercer,  commanding  District  of  Georgia ; 
Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States;  Brigadier-General  Walker,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confed- 
erate States  ; Capt.  W.  W.  Gordon,  recorder. 

The  official  report  of  “ Guns  applied  for  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard 
for  the  defense  of  Savannah  ” was  submitted  to  the  board,  showing  an 
aggregate  of  fifty-four  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance,  instead  of  twenty-five 
pieces,  as  heretofore  stated.  The  board  ordered  that  this  report  be 
annexed  hereto  as  Appendix  E.  I 

REPORT  CONTINUED. 

In  conclusion,  that  they  may  not  be  regarded  as  extravagant  in  the 
estimate  of  forces,  defenses,  and  heavy  guns  recommended  by  them  as 
necessary  for  the  defense  of  Savannah,  the  board  would  very  briefly 
state  the  controlling  reasons  upon  which  their  judgment  is  based. 

1st.  In  the  first  place  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  extent  of  the 
defenses,  &c.,  necessary  unless  they  could  know  the  extent  of  the  force 
to  be  repelled ; but  it  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  the  enemy  would  not 
attempt  to  make  a real  attack  upon  a fortified  city  without  bringing  to 
bear  upon  it  a formidable  force  and  all  the  available  means  at  his  dis- 
posal. The  estimate  of  that  force  is  much  greater  than  that  reported 
by  the  board  as  necessary  for  the  defense. 

2d.  The  city  is  approached  not  only  by  the  Savannah  River,  but  by  the 
Augustine  Creek,  the  Wassaw,  the  Vernon,  and  the  Ogeechee  Rivers  to 
within  distances  ranging  from  4 to  12  miles.  To  guard  these  several 
water  approaches  outworks  have  been  constructed  and  partially  armed. 
It  is  evident  that  these  works,  being  located  upon  different  and  not  the 
successive  defenses  of  the  same  water-course,  are  of  equal  importance 
and  mutually  dependent  upon  each  other;  for  should  one  of  them  fall, 
and  the  enemy  be  thus  enabled  to  land,  the  others  would  be  turned  by 
a land  force  and  could  be  taken  in  reverse  and  rendered  unavailable. 
This  chain  of  works  should  therefore  be  composed  of  links  of  equal 
strength,  and  if  possible  rendered  formidable  enough  everywhere  to 
resist  the  naval  forces  of  the  enemy. 

3d.  The  city  is  approached  by  six  plain  and  good  roads,  radiating  from 
it.  The  enemy  after  effecting  a landing  could  and  probably  would  ad- 
i vance  by  more  than  one  of  these  roads  at  the  same  time.  To  hold  the 
enemy  in  check  here  troops  would  be  required  in  addition  to  the  troops 
employed  in  manning  the  interior  line,  for  were  the  troops  taken  from 


872 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


the  lines  to  constitute  the  movable  force  their  efficiency  would  be 
greatly  impaired  by  the  fatigue  and  casualties  of  an  action,  and  they 
might  be  not  available  when  most  needed  for  the  lines. 

4th.  Whilst  the  city  is  defended  by  a stronginteriorlinefrom  the  Savan- 
nah Fiver  to  the  Springfield  Plantation,  which  might  be  capable  of  re- 
sisting any  assault,  the  means  of  communication  with  the  interior  might 
be  cat  off  at  a distance  beyond  the  lines  and  the  fall  of  the  city  as  effect- 
ually accomplished.  In  this  view  the  board  regard  the  protection  of 
the  Central  Eailroad  as  indispensable  to  the  defense  of  Savannah.  It 
is  the  main  artery  of  its  communication  with  the  interior,  and  should  be 
in  fact  as  much  an  object  of  defense  as  the  city  itself,  which  is  dependent 
on  it.  To  protect  this  road  a large  movable  force  is  absolutely  necessary, 
which  must  operate  at  some  distance  from  the  city  and  be  to  some  ex- 
tent independent  of  it,  drawing  its  supplies  from  the  country  beyond. 

The  board  would  also  call  attention  to  the  approaches  on  the  Carolina 
side  of  the  Savannah  and  the  necessity  of  meeting  an  advance  to  them 
by  a force  independent  of  the  garrisons  of  the  several  works. 

It  is  proper  and  just  that  the  board  in  this  report  should  bear  testi- 
mony to  the  efforts  which  have  been  made  from  time  to  time  by  the 
officers  commanding  the  department  and  district  to  forward  the  de- 
fenses and  to  procure  the  troops  and  means  necessary  to  successfully 
repel  the  enemy. 

H.  W.  MEECEE, 

Brio.  Gen..  Prov.  Army  G.  and  President  of  the  Board. 

WM.  B.  TALIAFEEEO, 

Brigadier- General. 

W.  H.  T.  WALKEE, 

Brigadier- General. 

There  being  no  further  business  before  it,  the  board  adjourned  sine  die . 

H.  W.  MEECEE, 

Brig.  Gen.,  Prov.  Army  C.  S.,  and  President  of  the  Board. 

W.  W.  Gordon, 

Gapt.  and  A.  A.  G.,  Recorder  of  Board. 


[Appendix  A.] 

Battery  Lee , Savannah  River. — Three  10  inch  mortars,  two  10-inch 
columbiads,  three  8 inch  columbiads,  one  42-pounder  gun,  one  32-pounder 
gun.  1 

Battery  Lawton.  Savannah  River. — Two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  8-inch 
columbiads,  one  42-pounder  gun,  one  32-pounder  gun,  rifled  and  banded; 
one  12-pounder  mountain  howitzer,  bronze.  1 

Fort  Jackson , Savannah  River. — Two  8-incli  columbiads,  five  32-j 
pounder  guns,  one  32-pounder  gun,  rifled  and  banded;  one  12-pounder 
mountain  howitzer,  bronze. 

Battery  Gheves,  Savannah  River. — Five  32-pounder  guns,  two  24- 
pounder  Blakely  rifles,  English. 

Hutchinson  Island  Battery , Savannah  River. — Three  32-pounder  guns,  j 

Bay  Batteries , Savannah  River. — One  10-inch  mortar,  one  8-inch  colum- 
biad,  two  32-pounder  guns. 

Total  guns  of  river  batteries. — Four  10-inch  mortars,  four  10  inch  co- 
lumbiads, eight  8-incli  columbiads,  two-42-pounders,  sixteen  32 -pounders,! 
two  32-pounders,  rifled  and  banded ; two  24-pounder  Blakely  rifles,  two 
12-pounder  mountain  howitzers;  forty  pieces  of  ordnance  in  all. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


873 


Fort  Bartow , Carstoris  Bluff.— Two  10-inch  mortars,  two  8-inch  Co- 
lumbians, two  8-inch  navy  shell  guns,  two  32-pounder  guns,  two  24- 
pounder  guns,  rifled  and  banded 5 one  12  pounder  gun,  rifled  and  banded; 
one  24  pounder  howitzer,  field,  iron;  two  8-pounder  guns,  field,  iron; 
two  6-pounder  guns,  field,'  iron ; three  3-inch  rifled  guns,  field,  iron ; two 
12-pounder  howitzers,  field,  iron. 

Thunderbolt  Battery.—' Two  8-inch  columbiads,  two  8-mch  navy  shell 
guns,  two  42-pounder  guns,  six  32-pounder  guns,  one  32-pounder  gun, 
reamed  up  to  caliber  6.55 ; one  5.82-inch  rifle ; — 8-inch  columbiad,  rifled. 

Greenwich  Battery.— Three  32-pounder  guns. 

Beaulieu  Battery.— Two  42-pounder  guns,  three  32-pounder  guns, 
two  32-pounders  short  navy  guns,  one  4.62-incli  rifle  siege  gun. 

Genesis  Point , Fort  McAllister.— One  10-inch  mortar,  one  10-inch  co- 
lumbiad, one  8-inch  columbiad,  one  42-pounder  gun,  three  32-pounder 
guns,  one  32  pounder  gun,  rifled  and  banded;  one  12-pounder  mountain 
howitzer,  bronze. 

Bosedew  Battery. — One  24-pounder  gun,  rifled  and  banded;  one  18- 
pounder  gun,  rifled  and  banded.  1 

Lake  Bluff  Battery , Altamaha  River.— Two  24-pounder  guns,  rifled, 
not  banded ; one  24- pounder  smooth-bore. 

Siege  Train , Major  Buisk— Four  8-inch  siege  howitzers,  one  20-pounder 
Parrott  gun,  two  4 inch  Blakely  guns. 

City  Lines , Lunette  No.  1.— One  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  one  24-pounder 
flank  casemate  howitzer. 

Lunette  No.  2.— One  18-pounder  siege  howitzer  (removed  for  siege 
train). 

Lunette  No.  3.— One  30-pounder,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  4.— One  8 inch  howitzer  siege  (removed  for  siege  train). 

Lunette  No.  5.— One  8-inch  howitzer,  siege  (removed);  one  18-pounder, 
barbette;  one  24  pounder  howitzer,  flank  casemate. 

Lunette  No.  6.— One  42-pounder  carronade. 

Lunette  No.  7.— One  32-pounder,  long,  barbette;  two  6-pounders  guns, 
bronze,  field. 

Lunette  No.  8 — One  32-pounder,  short,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  9. — One  30-pounder,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  10.— One  32-pounder,  short,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  11.— One  32-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  12.— One  38-pounder,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  23. — One  32-pounder,  short,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  14.— One  18  pounder,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  15.— One  24-pounder  sea-coast  howitzer,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  16.— One  24-pounder  howitzer,  flank  casemate,  carriage. 

Lunette  No.  17.— One  42-pounder  carronade,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  18. — Two  32-pounder  carronades  are  near  this  lunette, 
not  mounted  for  want  of  carriages. 

Lunette  No.  19.— One  42-pounder  carronade,  siege. 

Lunette  No.  20. — One  32  pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  21. — One  18-pounder,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  22.— One  32-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  23.— One  32-pounder,  short,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  24.— One  32-pounder  navy,  short,  barbette. 

Lunette  No.  25.— One  24-pounder  howitzer. 

Fort  Mercer.— Two  30-pounders,  barbette  ; two  8-inch  siege  howitzers  ; 
one  24-pounder  sea-coast  howitzer ; one  12-pounder  howitzer,  iron,  field ; 
two  24-pounder  mortar  howitzers,  field,  iron;  two  6-pounder  guns,  field, 
iron. 


874 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 


Cremaillere  line : 

Salient  Xo.  1. — One  32-pounder  carronade. 

Salient  Xo.  2. — One  42-pounder  carronade. 

Salient  Xo.  3. — One  24-pounder  howitzer  flank,  casemate. 

Salient  Xo.  4. 

Salient  Xo.  5. 

Salient  Xo.  6. 

Salient  Xo.  7. — One  32-pounder,  long,  barbette. 

Salient  Xo.  8. — One  30 -pounder,  barbette. 

Salient  Xo.  9. — One  30-pounder,  barbette. 

Fort  Brown. — Three  32-pounder,  short  navy,  siege  ; two  12-pounder 
howitzers,  iron,  field;  one  32-pounder,  short  navy,  barbette;  two  3-inch 
rifles,  iron,  field;  one  30-pounder,  barbette;  three  6-pounder  guns, 
bronze,  field;  one  18-pounder,  barbette. 

Fort  Boggs. — Two  10-inch  mortars;  one  24-pounder  howitzer,  field, 
iron  ; two  12-pounder  howitzers,  field,  iron ; seven  32-pounder  long 
naval  guns,  old  pattern ; three  32-pounder  long  naval  guns,  new  pattern ; 
three  3-inch  rifle  guns,  field,  iron ; two  6-pounder  guns,  field,  bronze. 

Hdqrs.  District  of  Georgia,  Ordnance  Office, 

Savannah , March  17,  1863. 

The  foregoing  is  a list  of  all  the  ordnance  in  position  in  this  military 
district,  but  does  not  include  the  seven  light  batteries  nor  the  guns  in 
store,  which  are  all  field  pieces  I believe,  and  few  in  number.  I would 
particularly  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  are  but  five  10-inch 
columbiads  and  thirteen  8-inch  eolumbiads  in  this  district,  while  there 
are  fourteen  heavy  batteries. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

WM.  D.  HARDEX, 

First  Lieutenant  Artillery  and  Ordnance  Officer, 

[Appendix  B.] 

Savannah  Depot,  March  19,  1863. 

One  24-pounder  iron  howitzer,  from  Richmond;  two  24-pounder  iron 
howitzers,  from  Charleston  ; one  24-pounder  iron  gun,  from  Charleston; 
one  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  from  Richmond ; two  8-incli  siege  howitzers, 
from  Macon;  two  32-pounder  guns,  from  Green  Pond,  S.  C.;  three  10- 
inch  mortars,  cast  here;  two  10-inch  mortars,  from  Charleston;  one  12- 
pounder  iron  gun,  rifled  and  banded,  from  Richmond ; one  12-pounder 
State  rifle,  banded,  from  Richmond ; two  32-pounder  carronades,  from 
Charleston;  two  42-pounder  carronades,  from  Charleston;  one  24- 
pounder  iron  gun,  rifled,  from  Atlanta,  bauded  here;  two  24-pouuder 
iron  guns,  rifled  and  banded,  from  Charleston ; two  24-pounder  iron  guns, 
rifled,  from  Charleston;  one  15-inch  stone  mortar,  cast  here;  one  10- 
pounder  Parrott  gun,  from  Richmond ; one  20-pounder  Parrott  gun, 
from  Charleston  ; one  8-inch  naval  columbiad,  from  Charleston ; one  8- 
inch  naval  columbiad,  from  the  Xavy  here ; two  6-pounder  rifled  guns, 
u Cameron,”  from  Charleston ; two  4-inch  rifled  steel  guns,  from  Charles- 
ton ; two  3J-inch  rifled  steel  guns,  from  Charleston — total,  thirty-six. 

The  above  is  a list  of  the  guns  received  here  since  the  1st  June,  1862. 

A.  T.  CUXXIXGHAM, 

First  Lieutenant  Artillery  and  Ordnance. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


875 


[Appendix  C.J 

1.  Amount  and  description  of  heavy  ordnance  deficient  or  necessary  for  the 
efficient  defense  of  the  Savannah  River — Ordnance  now  in  position — 
Heavy  ordnance  recommended . 

EXTERIOR  OR  LOWER  LINE,  DEFENDING  OBSTRUCTIONS. 

I * 

Battery  Lee. — Three  10-inch  mortars,  two  10-inch  columbiads,  three 
8 inch  columbiads,  one  42-pounder  gun,  to  be  replaced  by  one  7-inch 
rifled  gun ; one  32-pounder  gun,  to  be  replaced  by  one  10-inch  colum- 
biad; total,  ten  guns. 

Battery  Lawton. — Two  10-inch  columbiads,  two  8-inch  columbiads,  one 
42  pounder  gun,  to  be  replaced  by  one  7 -inch  rifled  gun ; one  32-pounder 
gun,  rifled  and  banded,  to  be  replaced  by  one  6J-inch  rifled  gun  5 (one) 
12-pounder  mountain  howitzer;  total,  six  guns. 

Fort  Jackson.— Two  8-inch  columbiads,  five  32-pounder  guns,  to  be 
replaced  by  three  10-inch  columbiads  and  two  7 -inch  rifled  guns ; one  32- 
pounder  gun, rifled  and  banded;  (one)  12-pounder  mountain  howitzer; 
total,  eight  guns. 

Battery  Gheves , or  Naval  Battery.— Five  32-pounder  guns,  to  be  replaced 
by  four  8-inch  columbiads ; two  24-inch  Blakely,  rifled,  to  be  replaced  by 
three  OJ-inch  rifled  guns;,  total,  seven  guns. 

INTERIOR  OR  UPPER  LINE,  FOR  OBSTRUCTIONS  TO  BE  SUNK. 

Screven's  Ferry  Battery  (to  be  constructed). — To  be  added,  two  10- 
inch  columbiads;  two  7-inch  rifled  guns;  total,  four  guns. 

Hutchinson  Island  Battery  (to  be  reconstructed). — Three  32-pounder 
guns,  to  be  replaced  by  two  10-inch  columbiads  and  one  7-inch  rifled 
gun.  To  be  added,  one  7-inch  rifled  gun;  total,  four  guns. 

Fig  Island  Battery  (to  be  constructed).— To  be  added,  two  10-inch 
columbiads ; one  7-inch  rifled  gun ; total,  three  guns. 

Fort  Boggs . — Two  10-inch  mortars,  one  24-pounder  howitzer,  two  12- 
pounder  howitzers,  seven  32-pounder  long  naval  guns,  old  pattern,  to  be 
replaced  by  two  10-inch  columbiads;  three  32-pounder  long  naval  guns, 
new,  and  one  8-inch  columbiad;  three  3-inch  rifled  guns  and  two  7-incli 
rifled  guns;  two  6-pounder  guns  and  two  GJ-inch  rifled  guns;  total, 
twenty  guns. 

Bay  Batteries  (part  to  be  constructed). — One  10-inch  mortar  (removed 
to  Bosedew),  one  8-inch  columbiad  (removed  to  Beaulieu),  two  32- 
pounder  guns,  to  be  replaced  by  four  32-pounder  rifled  guns;  to  be 
added,  four  42-pounder  rifled  guns,  four  8-inch  columbiads,  two  10- 
inch  mortars  ; total,  fourteen  guns. 

RECAPITULATION. 

Two  42-pounder  guns,  to  be  replaced  by  two  7-inch  rifled  guns;  twen- 
ty-four 32-pounder  guns,  to  be  replaced  by  eight  10-inch  columbiads, 
and  five  8-inch  columbiads,  five  7 -inch  rifled  guns,  four  6J-inch  rifled 
guns,  and  two  32-pounder  rifled  guns;  two  24-pounder  guns,  to  be 
replaced  by  two  6J-inch  rifled  guns;  total,  twenty-eight  guns.  To  be 
added,  four  10  inch  columbiads,  four  8-inch  columbiads,  four  7-inch 
rifled  guns,  four  42-pounder  rifled  guns,  two  32-pounder  rifled  guns, 
two  10-inch  mortars ; total,  twenty  guns.  Total  of  all  calibers  recom- 
mended, forty-eight. 


876  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

[Appendix  D.] 

2.  The  number  and  character  of  heavy  ordnance  called  for  and  supplied 

since  J une  1.  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Mercer  applied  by  letter  to  Secretary  of  War  July 
7,  1862,  for  two  42-pounder  riried  guns  for  Genesis  Point ; August  3, 

1862,  for  two  10-inch  columbiads  for  Carston’s  Bluff;  August  3, *1862, 
for  one  10-iiicli  columbiad  for  Beaulieu  ; August  6, 1862,  for  one  heavy 
rifled  gun  for  Genesis  Point.  Brigadier-General  Mercer  applied  by 
letter  to  Colonel  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  September  15,  1862,  for 
three  32-pounder  rifled  guns  lying  at  Wilmington,  N.  C.;  February  12, 

1863,  for  two  Whitworth  guns  lying  at  arsenal,  Augusta,  Ga.  Briga- 
dier-General Mercer,  through  Lieutenant  Harden,  ordnance  officer,  by 
letter  to  Colonel  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  applied  for,  as  necessary, 
August  21,  1862,  thirty-five  heavy  guns  for  city  lines;  total,  forty-six. 

General  Beauregard  reported  to  Adjutant  and  Inspector-General 
S.  Cooper  additional  heavy  guns  necessary  for  efficient  defense  of 
Savannah,  viz:  Five  10  inch  columbiads,  five  8 inch  columbiads, 
five  42  pounder  rifled  guns,  five  32  pounder  rifled  guns,  five  10  or 
13  inch  mortars ; total,  twenty-five. 

Captain  McCrady,  chief  engineer  of  district,  recommended  to  Major 
Harris,  chief  engineer  of  department,  additional  heavy  guns  as  neces- 
sary for  efficient  defense  of  Savaunah,  as  follows:  January  26,  1863, 
six  10  inch  columbiads,  seven  8 inch  columbiads,  five  42-pounder  rifled 
guns,  thirteen  32-pounder  rifled  guns,  one  24-pounder  rifled  gun,  four 
10-inch  mortars;  total,  thirty-six. 


Number  and  character  of  heavy  ordnance  received  since  June  1,  1862. 


From— 

By- 

No.  of 
guns. 

.. 

Character  of  guns. 

Charleston 

Navy  at  Savannah 
(borrowed). 

Total 

Lieutenant  Cunningham,  ordnance  officer. .. 
Lieutenant  Cunningham,  or  dnance  officer  . . 
Lieutenant  Cunningham,  ordnance  officer. . . 
Lieutenant  Cunningham,  ordnance  officer  . . 

2 

2 

1 

1 

6 

10-inch  mortars. 

42-pounder  earronades. 
8-inch  naval  columbiad.  ^ 
8-inch  naval  columbiad. ' 

In  addition  to  the  above  thirty  guns  from  various  sources  and 
various  caliber  less  than  heavy  ordnance. 


of 


RECAPITULATION. 

Number  of  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance  since  June  1,  1862  : 


Called  for  by  Brigadier-General  Mercer 46  I 

Reported  as  necessary  by  General  Beauregard 25 

Recommended  as  necessary  by  Captain  McCrady 36 


Total 


107 


Number  of  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance  since  June  1,  1862,  received, 
six. 


Chap  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


877 


[Appendix  E.] 


Guns  applied  for  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard  for  the  defense  of  Savannah. 


Application. 

1 

I 

i 

Date  of  application. 

10-inch  columbiads. 

1 

utf 

■d 

Jj 

ro 

© 

A 

G 

■S 

oo 

d 

d 

© 

-d 

® CJ 

g d 

gd 

5 a 

g a 

Pt 

<N 

I 32-pounders,  rifled 

and  banded. 

I Whitworth. 

1 

Letter  - 

September  30, 1862. 

20 

5 

6 

Order  .... ...... ...... 

September  30, 1862. 

15 

10 

5 

Letter  . .....  

November  1, 1862. 

5 

5 

5 

5 

Tt«l  p a*  mm  _ 

January  3, 1863. 

2 

Pa 

February  3, 1863.* 

' 

Do  

February  3, 1863.t 

1 

* Two  or  more  32  or  24  pounders  for  Genesis  Point, 
t Applies  for  heavy  guns  ; don’t  state  number  or  caliber. 


For  information  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  commanding  District  of 
Georgia,  Savannah,  Ga. 


Charleston,  April  4,  1863. 

General  Cooper  : 

Seven  monitors  now  in  North  Edisto ; twenty  vessels  entered  Stono 
late  in  afternoon,  and  enernv  evidentlv  drawing  near  in  force. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Richmond,  April  4,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 

The  President  directs  me  to  inquire  whether  the  twenty  vessels  in 
Stono  are  war  vessels  or  transports,  and  whether  any  landing  has  been 
made  on  James  Island. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


Charleston,  April  4,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Vessels  in  Stono  are  twelve  to-day,  consisting  of  gunboats,  trans- 
ports, and  schooners 'altogether.  There  are  also  about  1,000  men  re- 
ported landed  on  Cole’s  Island,  mouth  of  Stono ; none  yet  on  James 
Island.  Seven  monitors  are  in  North  Edisto  and  Port  Royal,  with 
gunboats,  transports,  &c.,  in  both. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C\,  April  4,  1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District , Charleston : 

General  : The  commanding  general  desires  that  you  should  at  once 


878  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.xXVI. 

place  in  position  at  the  Cummings  Point  Battery  another  heavy  gun, 
either  a 10-inch  columbiad  or  a 42-pounder  rifled  piece,  which  you  will 
please  remove  from  such  other  position  as  in  your  opinion  may  be  least 
disadvantageous,  as,  for  example,  Forts  Sumter  or  Ripley. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  4,  1803—12.45  a.  m.  ] 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , S.  C. : 

Send  forward  Stevens’  regiment  and  Preston’s  battery  at  once.  Hold, 
Cooke’s  brigade  in  readiness ; three  days’  provisions  and  light  march- 
ing order. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  5,  1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

Eight  monitors  and  all  large  steamships  left  Edisto  this  morning. 
Four  of  the  monitors  just  appeared  off  the  bar.  Must  refer  Department; 
to  my  estimates  of  the  force  necessary  in  event  of  attack. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , April  5,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

The  enemy  do  not  seem  concentrating  for  attack  by  land.  Attack 
might  yet  be  diverted  to  Wilmington.  Prudence  requires  that  the  force 
there,  the  only  troops  possible  to  be  spared,  should  still  be  retained.  I 
will  telegraph  General  Whiting  to  hold  Ransom’s  brigade  in  readiness. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  5, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  W.  C\: 

Eight  monitors  and  three  ironsides  off  the  bar;  have  made  landing  of 
four  regiments  on  Cole’s  Island.  Please  have  the  telegraph  line  opened 
to  Richmond  at  once,  if  possible,  for  my  dispatches. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  South  Carolina, 

April  5,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : I inclose  description  of  four  additional  iron  clads,  which 
came  into  North  Edisto  yesterday.  There  are  in  that  river,  reported 
last  night,  forty-four  vessels  of  all  kinds,  including  eight  monitors  and 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  870 

three  additional  transports  which  have  not  debarked  any  troops.  From 
the  most  accurate,  observations  that  can  be  made  I am  induced  to  think 
there  are  landed  on  Seabrook  Island  about  3,300  troops.  At  1 o’clock 
yesterday  three  transports  were  debarking  troops  on  the  southwestern 
part  of  Cole’s  Island  (sometimes  called  Goat’s  Island),  and  one  transport 
was  lying  off  the  beach  empty.  Three  gunboats,  one  schooner,  and  one 
small  steamer  in  the  river  off  Cole’s  Island.  The  scout  also  saw  what 
he  thought  was  a flat  filled  with  men ; it  may  be  the  raft  referred  to  in 
yesterday’s  report.  A large  number  of  men  are  also  reported  on  Cole’s- 
Island ; I am  inclined  to  think  about  as  many  as  on  Seabrook  Island. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Sulliyan’s  Island,  April  5,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston: 

Dear  General  : Presuming  upon  our  ancient  friendship,  I take  the 
liberty  of  throwing  out  a few  suggestions  touching  the  defense  of 
Charleston,  which  I am  sure  you  will  receive  in  the  same  spirit  in  which 
they  are  given,  unless,  indeed,  you  are  greatly  changed  in  disposition 
since  we  “ were  boys  together,”  which  I have  no  reason  to  suspect. 

And,  first,  do  you  not  think  it  will  be  well  to  put  a mortar  or  two  in 
the  Half- Moon  Battery  at  Hampstead,  or  somewhere  thereabouts,  with 
a view  to  control  the  anchorage  in  Cooper  Biver  above  the  custom- 
house; another  on  the  rising  ground  near  the  head  of  new  bridge,  for 
the  same  purpose  on  that  side  of  the  city,  and  one  or  two  more  at  White 
Point  Garden  ? 

If  the  enemy’s  policy  should  be,  instead  of  stopping  to  engage  the 
forts  and  batteries  in  our  first  and  strongest  line  of  defense,  to  run  by 
them  with  the  purpose,  after  having  reduced  our  interior  and  weaker 
defenses,  of  seizing  our  communications  with  this  and  the  adjacent 
islands,  it  would  (as  it  seems  to  me)  be  a matter  of  vital  importance  that 
we  should  have  the  means  of  defeating  such  a plan  of  operations  or  at 
least  of  seriously  interfering  with  its  execution,  and  there  is  none  so  well 
adapted,  I think,  to  the  desired  end  as  mortar  batteries  erected  at  the 
points  suggested.  There  is  not  a spot  in  the  harbor  or  in  either  river 
where  an  enemy  could  lie  in  safety. 

With  respect  to  the  line  which  the  enemy  will  choose  upon  which  to 
operate  with  his  land  forces  permit  me  to  express  my  views : I have 
always  believed  that  he  would  operate  through  James  Island,  and  as  he 
begins  to  develop  his  attack  I am  strengthened  in  that  opinion. 

There  may  be  said  to  be  three  lines  open  to  his  choice,  one  from  North 
Edisto  via  Church  Flats  and  Rantowles ; one  from  Stono  through  James 
Island,  and  one  through  Christ  Church  Parish.  If  the  first  be  adopted, 
North  Edisto  is  his  base;  if  the  second,  Stono;  if  the  third,  Bull’s 
Bay.  With  regard  to  the  latter,  my  knowledge  of  the  country  and  a 
recent  reconnaissance  enable  me  to  pronounce  it  impracticable,  for  two 
reasons,  one  of  which  is  that  in  consequence  of  the  extreme  shallow- 
\ ness  of  the  water  in  Bull’s  Bay  neither  the  transportation  nor  guns 
I could  be  landed ; and  another,  that  by  reason  of  the  extreme  poverty 
of  the  country  which  the  enemy  would  have  to  traverse  in  his  march 
toward  the  city  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  subsist  his  army 
except  by  the  transportation  of  every  ration  as  well  as  every  pound  of 


880 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 


forage.  Besides,  after  having  reached  Mount  Pleasant  the  city  would 
still  be  out  of  his  reach. 

He  would  have  to  choose  then,  in  my  judgment,  between  the  James 
Island  line  and  that  by  Rantowles.  The  former,  as  it  appears  to  me, 
offers  infinitely  greater  advantages.  In  the  first  place  it  is  a shorter 
line,  a matter  of  momentous  importance  where  transportation  is  limited, 
as  is  probably  the  case  with  our  enemy.  In  the  second  place  it  will  be 
a safer  line,  as  both  his  flanks  and  rear  would  be  perfectly  secure ; a con- 
dition of  things  which  would  certainly  not  obtain  should  he  operate 
from  North  Edisto.  And  in  the  third  place,  having  obtained  possession 
of  James  Island,  he  would,  by  the  erection  of  heavily  armed  batteries 
along  its  shore,  be  master  of  the  greater  portion  of  Charleston  Harbor, 
and  would  control  entirely  our  communications  with  Fort  Sumter  and 
its  outposts  on  Morris  Island  and  embarrass  seriously  those  with  Sul- 
livan’s Island. 

The  possession  of  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish  would  give  him  no  such 
enormous  advantages,  and  he  would  be  kept  in  a constant  state  of  ! 
anxiety  and  alarm  for  the  safety  of  his  flanks  and  rear;  nor  would  he 
be  very  much  nearer  his  objective  point.  The  Ashley  would  in  either 
case  still  be  between  it  and  him. 

The  resources  of  the  engineers’ art  have  been  as  lavishly  used  and  as 
judiciously  applied  on  the  one  line  as  the  other,  and  I cannot  see  but 
that  in  this  respect  it  would  be  with  our  enemy  but  a “choice  of  evils.” 

It  may  be,  indeed  it  is  probable,  that  he  will  make  feints  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Adams  Run,  Rantowles,  Pocotaligo,  and  Coosawbatcliie;  false 
attacks  even  he  may  make  at  one  or  more  of  these  points  ; but  I in- 
cline strongly  to  the  opinion  that  the  real  attack  will  be  through  James 
Island. 

Should  his  plan  of  attack  be  to  lay  siege  to  Forts  Sumter  and  Moul- 
trie through  Morris  and  Sullivan’s  Islands  respectively,  the  securing 
our  communication  with  the  city  would  then  become  a matter  of  para- 
- mount  importance;  and  in  this  view  of  the  subject  the  value  of  such 
means  as  may  enable  us  to  keep  open  those  communications  cannot  be 
exaggerated. 

I hope  you  will  not  think  me  either  presumptuous  or  officious  in  pre- 
senting these  views  for  your  consideration,  my  dear  general.  For  what 
they  are  worth  I offer  them  to  you  as  an  old  friend,  and  one  who,  in 
.addition  to  the  deep  interest  he  feels  in  your  successful  defense  of  the 
old  city,  will  rejoice  to  have  fresh  laurels  added  to  your  already  green. 

Believe  me,  very  truly,  yours, 

J.  H.  TRAPIER. 


p.  s. — i don’t  expect  you  to  answer  this  letter,  of  course  ; certainly 
not  in  extenso. 


J.  H.  T. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  April  5,  18(53. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier, 

Commanding , (fie.,  Sullivan’s  Island , S.  C. : 

Dear  General  : Your  views  relative  to  the  piobable  attack  of  the 
enemy  on  this  city  have  been  received.  They  agree  quite  fully  with 
my  own,  except  that  I do  not  think  the  enemy  can  try  the  Edisto  and 
Church  Flats  line  for  want  of  transportation  and  the  difficulties  they 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  881 

would  have  to  encounter.  The  James  Island  line  is  their  best ; but 
that  also  is  very  strong.  I think  it  is  more  probable'they  will  move  from 
Stono  Inlet  along  Folly  Island,  thence  Morris  Island,  to  endeavor  to 
take  Fort  Sumter  a la  Pulaski;  but  they  mav  find  that  to  be  a piece  of 

folly. 

With  regard  to  the  mortars  for  the  defense  of  the  city  I have  long 
felt  the  necessity,  and  have  made  several  applications,  but  in  vain,  for 
several  more,  to  be  located  at  the  points  designated  by  you  and  in  some 
of  the  entire  line  of  works,  intending,  as  a dernier  ressort , to  borrow  them 
from  Savannah  at  the  eleventh  hour,  which  was  done  as  soon  as  the 
enemy’s  monitors  appeared  this  morning  off  the  bar. 

Thanking  you  for  your  communication,  I remain,  yours,  truly, 

• G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  5,  1863. 

Captain  Page,  or 

Officer  Comdg.  C.  S.  Nayal  Forces  afloat,  Savannah , Ga.  : 
Iron  clads  have  all  left  Port  Eoyal  and  four  are  already  off*  the  bar 
here.  This  would  seem  a proper  time  for  a diversion  against  Port  Eoyal 
by  one  of  our  iron-clads  from  Savannah. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  5, 1863 — 2.30  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Four  monitors  are  outside  and  four  more  on  the  way.  Send  immedi- 
ately three  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars,  with  implements  complete,  and 
detachments  of  men  under  Captain  Martin  to  serve  them.  Platforms 
and  ammunition  are  not  required.  Hold  movable  column  and  siege 
train  ready  to  come  at  moment’s  notice — before  troops  from  Pocotaligo. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  5, 1863 — 3 p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

All  monitors  are  outside.  Send  movable  column  immediately  to  stop 
on  Savannah  turnpike,  2J  miles  from  new  bridge  across  Ashley  Eiver. 
Siege  train  will  come  afterward  or  via  Augusta.  Inform  when  troops 
leave 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

- Charleston , S.  C .,  April  5,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  E.  Gist, 

Commanding , James  Island: 

General  : The  movable  column  from  Savannah  has  been  ordered  to 
halt  2J  miles  from  the  new  bridge.  The  commanding  general  desires  that 

56  r r — YOL  XIY 


882  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  LCiur,  XXVL 

you  will  have  an  officer  at  that  point  to  receive  and  locate  the  command 
and  to  give  it  such  information  as  may  he  requisite. 

The  Savannah  siege  train  has  also  been  ordered  to  report  here,  and 
you  will  please  designate  the  position  for  its  batteries,  say  two  or  three, 
of  four  guns  each. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charl&ton , S.  C .,  April  5,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  Ditrict : 

General  : There  will  be  three  mortars  here  from  Savannah  to-night, 
which  the  commanding  general  desires  to  be  in  position  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible, to  wit,  one  at  battery  this  side  of  the  new  bridge  ; one  at  White 
Point  Battery,  and  the  other  at  Battery  James.  An  officer  should  be 
detailed  specially  to  see  that  no  time  is  lost  in  getting  these  mortars 
in  place  after  their  arrival. 

The  Citadel  Cadets  will  be  ordered  to  take  immediate  charge  of  the 
new  bridge  battery. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  53.  j Charlotte , S.  <7.,  April  5, 1863. 

I.  Field  and  company  officers  are  specially  enjoined  to  instruct  their 
men  under  all  circumstances  to  fire  with  deliberation  at  the  feet  of  the 
enemy ; they  will  thus  avoid  overshooting,  and  besides  wounded  men 
give  more  trouble  to  our  adversary  than  his  dead,  as  they  have  to  be 
taken  from  the  field. 

II.  Officers  in  commaud  must  be  cool  and  collected  in  action,  hold 
their  men  in  hand,  and  caution  them  against  useless,  aimless  firing. 
The  men  must  be  instructed  and  required  each  one  to  single  out  his 
mark.  It  was  the  deliberate  sharpshooting  of  our  forefathers  in  the 
Revolution  of  1776  and  at  New  Orleans  in  1815  which  made  them  so 
formidable  against  the  odds  with  which  they  were  engaged. 

III.  In  the  beginning  of  a battle,  except  by  troops  deployed  by  skir- 
mishers, the  fire  by  file  will  be  avoided ; it  excites  the  men  and  renders 
their  subsequent  control  difficult;  fire  by  wing  or  company  should  be 
resorted  to  instead.  During  the  battle  the  non-commissioned  officers 
must  keep  the  men  in  ranks,  enforce  obedience,  and  encourage  and 
stimulate  them  if  necessary. 

IY.  Soldiers  must  not  be  permitted  to  quit  the  ranks  to  strip  or  rob 
the  dead,  nor  even  to  assist  in  removing  our  dead  unless  by  special  per- 
mission, which  shall  only  be  given  when  the  action  has  been  decided. 
The  surest  way  to  protect  our  wounded  is  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the 
field ; the  most  pressing,  highest  duty  is  to  win  the  victory. 

V.  Before  the  battle  the  quartermaster  of  the  division  will  make  all 
the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  immediate  transportation  ot  the 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


883 


wounded  from  the  field.  After  consulting  with  the  medical  officers  he 
will  establish  the  ambulance  depot  in  the  rear  and  give  his  assistants 
the  necessary  instructions  for  the  efficient  service  of  the  ambulance 
wagons  and  other  means  of  transportation. 

VI.  The  ambulance  depot,  to  which  the  wounded  are  to  be  conveyed 
or  directed  for  immediate  treatment,  should  be  established  at  the  most 
convenient  building  nearest  the  field  of  battle.  A red  flag  marks  the 
place  and  way  to  it. 

VII.  Before  and  immediately  after  battle  the  roll  of  each  company 
will  be  called,  and  absentees  must  strictly  account  for  their  absence 
from  the  ranks.  To  quit  their  standard  on  the  battle-field  under  fire 
under  the  pretense  of  removing  or  aiding  the  wounded  will  not  be  per- 
mitted ; any  one  persisting  in  it  will  be  shot  on  the  spot,  and  whoever 
shall  be  found  to  have  quit  the  field  or  his  regiment  or  company  with- 
out authority  will  be  regarded  and  proclaimed  as  a coward  and  dealt 
with  accordingly. 

VIII.  The  active  ambulances  will  follow  the  troops  to  succor  the 
wounded  and  to  remove  them  to  the  depots.  Before  the  engagement 
infirmary  detachments  will  also  be  detailed  and  organized  of  three 
(the  least  effective  under  arms)  from  each  company,  whose  duties  will 
be  hereinafter  prescribed.  These  men  must  not  loiter  about  the  depots, 
but  will  return  promptly  to  the  field  as  soon  as  possible. 

IX.  The  infirmary  detachments  will  be  under  the  immediate  orders 
of  the  medical  officers  on  the  field.  This  corps  will  go  upon  the  field 
unarmed,  except  the  non-commissioned  officers,  who  are  to  protect  the 
corps  against  stragglers  and  marauders.  The  members  will  be  provided 
with  one  litter  to  every  two  men,  and  each  with  a badge,  by  which  he 
can  be  easily  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the  command;  also  with 
leather  shoulder  straps,  a canteen  of  water,  a tin  cup,  a haversack  con- 
taining one-eighth  pound  of  lint,  four  bandages,  two  long  and  two  short 
splints  of  wood,  sponges  and  tourniquets,  and  a pint  bottle  of  alcoholic 
stimulant. 

X.  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  this  corps,  under  the  immediate  direction 
of  the  assistant  surgeon  of  the  regiment,  accompanied  by  the  ambulance 
or  wagons,  to  follow  uj>  promptly  the  action,  administering  to  the  im- 
mediate wants  of  the  wounded  by  giving  stimulants,  checking  hemor- 
rhage, and  the  temporary  splinting  of  fractures. 

XI.  Those  who  are  too  much  disabled  to  walk  will  be  removed  to 
some  ambulance  depot  previously  agreed  upon,  where  they  will  be  left 
in  charge  of  the  surgeon  of  the  regiment.  The  removal  of  the  wounded 
from  the  field  will  devolve  upon  the  infirmary  corps,  and  all  men  strag- 
gling from  the  ranks  under  pretext  of  aiding  this  corps  will  be  summarily 
dealt  with,  to  which  end  the  medical  officers  in  charge  and  the  non- 
commissioned officers  are  specially  required  to  report  to  the  regimental 
commanders  of  the  stragglers  their  names  and  the  company  to  which 
they  may  belong. 

XII.  The  assistant  surgeon  in  charge  of  the  infirmary  corps  should 
provide  himself  with  a pocket  case,  ligatures,  needles,  pins,  chloroform, 
napkins,  brandy  or  whisky,  tourniquets,  bandages,  lint,  and  splints. 
To  obviate  the  shock  of  the  nervous  system,  to  suppress  hemorrhage, 
to  put  fractures  in  some  temporary  apparatus,  so  as  to  facilitate  the 
removal  of  the  wounded,  should  be  his  first  care.  This  last  is  to  be  ac- 
complished by  placing  under  the  fractured  limb  a piece  of  old  linen  or 
cotton  of  the  form  of  a pocket  handkerchief ; on  the  opposite  and  outer 
edges  of  this  are  placed  the  splints,  which  are  rolled  up  in  it  toward  the 
lint  on  each  side  until  the  fracture  is  snugly  supported  in  the  inter- 


884  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI.  |! 

vening  space,  the  whole  to  be  secured  by  two  or  three  bands  of  tape  or 
bandage. 

XIII.  The  regimental  surgeon  should  before  an  action  satisfy  him- 
self by  personal  inspection  that  all  the  means  and  appliances  for  car- 
rying the  wounded  are  at  hand  ; give  instructions  to  the  infirmary  corps 
as  to  the  application  of  a tourniquet  to  restrain  dangerous  hemorrhage; 
to  establish  depots  for  the  wounded  under  the  supervision  of  the  medi- 
cal director,  and  render  to  the  men  of  his  regiment  all  necessary  surgical 
aid,  performing  there  all  operations  that  are  required,  and  he  will  be 
held  responsible  that  he  has  at  his  disposition  all  the  means,  supplies, 
and  appliances  for  the  proper  performance  of  the  service  enjoined  or 
has  taken  all  proper  measures  to  secure  them.  He  will  instruct  all  de-  , 
tailed  to  assist  him  not  to  allow  ambulances  to  be  monopolized  by 
wounded  officers  to  the  exclusion  of  others.  He  will  forbid  any  of  the 
infirmary  corps  to  hold  officers*  horses  on  the  field  or  to  do  anything 
but  what  strictly  appertains  to  their  duty.  The  surgeon  should  not 
devote  himself  exclusively  to  a wounded  officer  nor  leave  his  post  to 
accompany  him  to  the  rear. 

XIV.  Wounds  will  be  dressed  and  operations  performed  as  far  as 
practicable  on  the  field,  and  patients  made  as  comfortable  as  circum- 
stances will  admit  for  transportation  to  hospitals  in  the  interior. 

XV.  Surgeons  will  supply  themselves  with  hospital  flags,  and  will 
have  them  attached  to  the  ambulances  and  placed  conspicuously  over 
the  field  infirmaries  and  hospitals. 

XVI.  As  soon  as  possible  after  an  action  surgeons  will  transmit  to 
the  medical  director  a return  of  casualties  according  to  the  following- 
form: 


XVII.  The  material  for  the  badges  and  for  the  ambulance  flags  pre- 
scribed in  paragraph  VI  of  this  order  will  be  provided  by  the  quarter- 
master’s department. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard: 

THOMAS  JOEDAX, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  April  6, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Ironsides  steamer  and  eight  monitors  Jhave  been  trying  the  bar  this 
morning:  have  not  yet  passed.  Tide  now  on  ebb. 

G,  T.  BEAUftEOAED, 

General. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


885 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  6,  1863. 

M.  L.  Bonham, 

Governor  of  South  Carolina , Columbia , S.  C.  : 

Two  iron  clads  appear  to  have  passed  within  bar,  but  make  no  demon- 
strations of  attack;  other  seven  still  remain  outside.  Great  activity 
in  fleet.  Some  5,000  troops  apparently  landed  on  small  islands  about 
mouth  Stono.  Will  keep  you  advised. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

(Duplicate  to  Hon.  James  L.  Orr,  Richmond,  Ya.) 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  6,  1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Iron-clads  moving  in,  2.40  p.  m. ; nearest  in  line  with  beach  Morris 
Island  at  low  water.  Thirty-three  vessels  in  Stono. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  April  6,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General : 

Twenty-four  wooden  vessels,  the  Ironsides,  and  six  monitors  off  bar. 
Two  monitors  apparently  this  side  of  bar.  Sixteen  steamers  and  eight 
schooners  in  Stono  off  Cole’s  and  Goat’s  Islands.  Steamers  moving 
about  all  night.  Activity  in  fleet  all  night,  and  this  morning  enemy 
landiug  on  Goat’s  Island. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  6,  1863. 

Capt.  Francis  D.  Lee, 

Confederate  States  Engineer , Charleston , S.  C. : 

Captain:  I am  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  direct  that 
all  the  necessary  arrangements  be  made  to  insure  the  complete  destruc- 
tion of  the  torpedo  ram  under  your  charge  at  a moment’s  warning. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  TOUTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  6,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga.  : 

Enemy’s  iron  clads  (nine)  have  all  crossed  bar,  and  are  moving  in  as  if 
to  engage  us.  Cannot  the  naval  commander  Savannah  be  induced  to 
make  a descent  at  once  on  Port  Royal  and  effect  a diversion? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


886 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Engineer  Bureau,  Richmond , April  G,  1863. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris, 

Corps  of  Engineers,  Charleston , 8.  C.  : 

Major  : I have  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  letters  of  27th  and 
29th  ultimo,  the  former  transmitting  a copy  of  Captain  McCrady’s  re- 
port upon  the  defensive  works  in  the  District  of  Georgia  and  the  wants 
of  the  engineer  service,  and  suggesting  wherein  its  efficiency  may  be 
increased ; the  latter  inclosing  a statement  of  the  present  armament  of 
the  works  around  Savannah. 

I notice  in  Captain  McCrady’s  report  of  the  26th  January  last  that 
he  states,  after  describing  the  obstructions  placed  in  the  Savannah 
River  at  the  head  of  Elba  Island,  that — 

The  obstructions  would  be  in  every  respect  satisfactory  were  it  not  for  the  two  fol- 
lowing objections : 

1st.  That  it  is  an  average  distance  of  11  miles  from  the  river  battery. 

2d.  That  the  west  end  of  Elba  Island  interposes  between  the  obstructions  of  the 
main  Ship  Channel  and  that  of  the  South  Channel. 

For  reasons  given  Captain  McCrady  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  dis- 
tance named  (1  \ miles)  renders  the  river  batteries  incapable  of  prevent- 
ing the  enemy  from  getting  possession  of  the  obstructions,  and  that 
Elba  Island  affords  additional  advantages  to  the  enemy. 

Cannot  this  error  in  the  relative  locations  of  batteries  and  obstruc- 
tions be  remedied  in  part  by  constructing  good  shelter  for  sharpshooters 
at  points  below  the  batteries  and  within  good  range  of  the  obstructions? 
Again,  why  not  build  a battery  nearer  the  obstructions  and  transfer  to 
it  a part  of  the  guns  now  mounted  in  the  existing  ones  ? The  ground 
is  all  of  the  same  level,  and  it  is  presumed  the  change  of  locality  could 
be  made  without  impairing  the  efficiency  of  the  guns  in  firing  upon  the 
approaches  of  the  enemy.  Covered  communications  between  the  bat- 
teries and  any  advanced  shelters  for  sharpshooters  should  be  estab- 
lished. From  the  existing  state  of  things,  Captain  McCrady  says, 
“results  the  necessity  of  an  interior  line  of  obstructions  nearer  the 
city.” 

I must  request  you  to  give  this  point  your  special  consideration  be- 
fore authorizing  the  construction  of  an  interior  line  of  obstructions. 
The  air  line  distance  from  Fort  Jackson  to  the  Exchange  building  in 
the  city  of  Savannah  is  3 miles,  and  to  the  eastern  suburbs  only  2J 
miles.  Long-range  guns,  therefore,  fired  from  an  iron-clad  in  the  river 
opposite  Fort  Jackson  will  throw  projectiles  into  the  city,  and  without 
ascending  to  the  line  proposed  for  the  interior  obstructions  the  enemy 
can  destroy  one-half  of  the  place. 

Will  the  second  obstructions,  therefore,  be  of  any  advantage  ? They 
certainly  cannot  protect  Savannah  against  a bombardment  at  long 
range. 

I have  been  urging  the  importance  of  sending  the  heavy  guns  wanted 
at  Savannah,  but  up  to  this  time  the  Ordnance  Department  has  not 
responded,  and  for  the  reason,  as  I am  informed,  that  urgent  calls  are 
made  for  all  the  guns  that  can  be  manufactured  to  be  sent  to  other 
vital  points.  I have  again  pressed  the  matter  upon  the  Chief  of  Ord- 
nance with  the  hope  that  a part  of  the  requisition  made  by  General 
Beauregard  in  November  last  may  be  still  supplied.  Steps  have  been 
taken  by  this  bureau  to  import  instruments,  intrenching  tools,  and 
stationery  for  the  use  of  the  engineer  service.  Should  they  prove  un- 
successful the  establishment  of  shops  for  the  manufacture  of  imple- 
ments will  become  a necessity. 


887 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 

I sent  you  a telegram  to-day  suggesting  that  the  east  and  northeast 
points  of  Fort  Sumter  might  be  strengthened  by  building  a sand-bag 
wall  7 or  8 feet  thick  against  the  outer  surface  of  the  scarp  wall.  Ihe 
enrockment  exterior  to  the  fort  will  furnish  a good  foundation  lor  the 
sand  bags.  It  might  be  judicious  to  make  the  lower  portion  ol  the  wall 
of  bags  continuous,  thus  closing  the  lower  embrasures.  The  guns  ol 
the  first  tier  could  be  mounted  on  the  second,  it  is  believed,  and  used 
with  as  much  efficiency  as  to  have  them  distributed  along  the  lower 
tier  at  wide  intervals.  The  closing  of  the  lower  embrasures  would  give 
much  security  against  the  effects  of  ricochet  shots.  But  without  chang- 
ing the  guns  structures  of  sand  bags  can  be  erected  so  as  to  afford  pro- 
tection to  the  masonry  of  the  scarp-walls. 

Very  respectfully,  &c,  j F.  GILMER, 

Colonel  Engineers  and  Chief  of  Bureau . 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  April  6,  1863. 

Maj.  H.  C.  Guerin, 

Chief  of  Subsistence , Charleston: 

Major  : I have  to  acquaint  you  that  some  2,500  troops  have  arrived 
within  the  limits  of  the  First  Military  District  from  Savannah,  for  which 
it  will  be  necessary  that  you  shall  make  the  proper  provisions. 
Respectfully,  your  obedieut  -vant^^ 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Secessionville,  April  7,  1863 — 8.15  a.  m. 
Captain  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Increase  of  three  or  four  vessels  since  yesterday  in  Stono.  Thirty- 
five  or  thirty-six  in  all.  Weather  very  thick ; observation  not  good. 
Pickets  exchanged  shots  across  Green  Creek  yesterday  afternoon. 

C.  H.  STEVENS, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Charleston,  April  7,  1863—11  a.  m. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Ten  iron-clads  outside  ; did  not  really  cross  bar,  as  reported  yesterday. 
Twenty-seven  vessels  in  Stono  5 p.  m.  yesterday,  and  fifty-five,  many 
of  them  crowded  with  troops,  in  North  Edisto  at  3.40  p.  m. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  8.  C.,  April  7,  1863. 

Capt.  John  R.  Tucker, 

Comdg.  C.  S.  Naval  Forces  afloat , Charleston , S.  C. : 

Captain  : As  it  is  probable  the  enemy,  for  the  purpose  of  exploding 
our  torpedoes,  will  precede  their  monitors  with  the  one  or  two  armed 
u alligators,”  the  latter  must  be  an  easy  prey  for  a few  boats  of  the 


888  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chav.  XXVt. 

flotilla  armed  with  the  spar  torpedoes.  I would  suggest  therefore  that 
three  or  four  of  said  boats  should  be  stationed  in  rear  of  Cummings  Point 
for  that  special  purpose,  having  it  well  understood  with  the  command- 
ing officers  of  the  forts  when  to  cease  firing  on  those  “alligators,”  to 
enable  the  boat  party  to  assail  them. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  April  7,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  Comdg.  First  Military  District: 

General:  It  is  the  wish  of  the  commanding  general  that  all  possible 
precautions  shall  be  taken  to  conceal  from  the  enemy  the  range,  caliber, 
and  number  of  our  guns  on  Morris  Island,  to  which  end  the  pieces  must 
be  masked  as  far  as  possible,  and  we  should  not  be  drawn  into  an  en- 
gagement with  the  iron- clads  except  at  the  closest  range  practicable, 
so  long  as  the  batteries  are  not  endangered  by  their  silence. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Bun , April  7,  1863. 
Brigadier-General  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : The  enemy  are  not  reported  to  have  brought  with  them 
as  yet  to  Seabrook  Island  any  horses  except  with  the  first  detachment 
that  landed,  and  from  information  received  from  the  prisoner  captured 
that  night  there  could  not  have  been  more  than  enough  to  man  one 
field  battery  and  perhaps  mount  a company  of  cavalry.  I had  esti- 
mated the  number  landed  up  to  yesterday  at  about  3,300,  and  the  five 
transports  which  came  in  yesterday  (large  steam  vessels),  represented 
as  filled  with  troops,  must  have  raised  their  number  in  North  Edisto  to 
about  7,000. 

From  the  absence  of  horses  I am  more  than  ever  impressed  with  the 
idea  that  these  troops  are  to  move  across  John’s  Island  to  Legareville, 
the  same  route  taken  by  them  last  year,  thus  affording  an  excellent 
opportunity  of  striking  him  upon  the  march.  He  may  slip  across  at 
any  moment  unless  a force  sufficient  to  fight  him  is  on  John’s  Island 
all  the  time.  With  my  present  force  I have  only  felt  authorized  to 
keep  upon  the  island  about  200  mounted  infantry  and  a section  of  artil- 
lery, in  the  nature  of  an  advanced  guard  to  my  position  on  the  main. 
It  would  be  impossible  to  move  against  him  from  the  main,  even  if  my 
force  was  large  enough,  within  less  than  eighteen  hours,  and  it  would 
not  take  him  over  six>  to  make  the  march  across  the  island.  This  mat- 
ter is  again  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  commanding  general,  with 
the  hope  that  re-enforcements  can  now  be  spared  me  for  the  purpose 
indicated.  With  sufficient  force  lam  satisfied  a damaging  blow  can 
be  struck  on  John’s  Island,  and  if  the  same  line  of  operations  is  adopted 
by  the  enemy  as  last  year  it  will  be  the  only  chance  we  will  have  of 
acting  offensively  against  him  except  when  under  his  gunboats. 

Our  troops  on  John’s  Island  would  be  about  18  miles  from  Rautowles 
Station.  It  is  proper  to  add  that  it  is  practicable  for  the  enemy  to 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


889 


march  from  their  present  position  to  a point  on  the  Stono,  keeping  all 
the  time  on  Seabrook  and  Kiawali  Islands,  in  which  event  we  could  do 
nothing  with  him.  This  does  not,  however,  strike  me  as  at  all  probable. 
Very  respectfully, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 

[Indorsement.] 

Have  not  the  forces.  He  must  annoy  with  cavalry  and  artillery. 

B. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1S63. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , S.  C. : 

You  can  now  destroy  enemy’s  vessel  at  mouth  of  Ashepoo  in  best 
manner  practicable. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  Troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  April  7,  1863. 


Present  for  duty. 

a 

a 

« 

Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Total  effective 
infantry. 

Total  effective 
cavalry. 

Total  effective 
artillery. 

Aggregate  presei 

<v  ^ 

£ p 

Pi  a> 

<©  co 

% 'S 

bfi 

S-i 

bJD 

fcX 

<5 

Brig.  Gen.  It.  S.  Ripley 

First  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

G,  807 

1,117 

3,  305 

12,  856 

15,  023 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Hagood 

Second  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

1,819 

742 

288 

3, 147 

3,  636 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker 

Third  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

3,  655 

1,  686 

496 

6,  645 

8, 177 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer 

District  of  Georgia 

5,  G61 

1,880 

2,  584 

11,694 

13,  371 

Bi  ig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb  

District  of  Middlo  Florida. . 

731 

382 

261 

1,555 

1,993 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan 

District  of  East  Florida 

222 

441 

140 

916 

1,  249 

Grand  total 

18,  895 

6,248 

7,  074 

36,813 

1 

43,  449 

Note.— Heavy  artillery  included  -with  light  artillery  in  the  First  District  of  South  Carolina  and  the 
District  of  Georgia. 


RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 


First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 11,  229 

Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina  2,  849 

Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 5,  837 

District  of  Georgia 10, 125 

District  of  Middle  Florida 1,  374 

District  of  East  Florida 803 


Total  effective 32,  217 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  8,  1863. 
J.  F.  Gilmer,  Chief  Engineer , Richmond , Va.  : 

Send  immediately  all  the  sand  bags  you  can  spare.* 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Similar  dispatch  sent  to  quartermasters  at  Atlanta,  Augusta,  Columbia,  and  Macon. 


890 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  8, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  AY.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

So  long  as  enemy’s  monitors  are  here  within  this  bar  your  position 
can  be  in  no  danger  nor  can  you  be  attacked  without  notice.  Send 
spare  columbiad  carriages  here  soon  as  possible.  Keokuk  sunk. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  8, 1863 — 11.20  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  Fort  Sumter , S.  G. : 

The  general  commanding  is  particularly  anxious  that  the  rope  ob- 
struction and  the  big  torpedo  should  be  closely  watched  by  the  boat 
flotilla. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters,  Morris  Island , April  8,  1863. 
Capt.  W.  F.  Nance  : 

I send  parts  of  a signal-book  picked  up  on  the  beach.  Pieces  of 
furniture  have  floated  ashore,  having  blood  upon  them.  I also  send 
reports  of  picket  guard. 

R.  F.  GRAHAM, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , S.  C.,  April  8,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  in  the  absence  of  the  brigadier- 
general  commanding,  that  Commander  Lynch  will  be  assigned  to  the 
battery  at  Cummings  Point,  and  the  detachment  now  there  will  be  re- 
turned to  Fort  Sumter.  Flag-Officer  Ingraham  has  been  notified  of  this, 
and  he  will  be  sent  thither  upon  arrival  with  all  possible  dispatch. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Sumter,  April  8,  1863 — 12.30. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance: 

Twenty-two  blockaders  off  the  bar;  seven  turreted  iron-clads  and 
Ironsides  inside.  Hard  at  work  repairing  damages. 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , April  8,  1863. 
General  Wade  Hampton,  Columbia , S.  C.: 

Lead  your  furloughed  men  and  any  others  eager  for  the  fray  to 
Charleston,  and  God  speed  yon. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War . 


891 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,Ga.,  & Fla., 
No.  141.  .(  Charleston , April  8,  1863. 

# # * # * ' * * 

II.  Brigadier-General  Gist  will  select  a strong  company  of  heavy 
artillery  from  his  command,  which  will  proceed  to  Morris  Island  and 
report  to  Major  Huger  for  service  as  quickly  as  possible.  Quarter- 
master will  furnish  transportation. 

Bv  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley: 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 


Charleston,  April  9, 1863. 


General  W.  S.  Walker  destroyed  an  armed  steamer  in  the  Coosaw 
River  at  daylight  this  morning;  no  casualties  on  our  side.  All  quiet. 
Six  monitors  and  Ironsides  still  within  bar. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  9, 1863. 


James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 


Information  induces  me  to  look  for  early  renewal  of  attack  by  enemy’s 
iron-clads  and  of  strong  diversion  with  his  land  forces  trom  direction  of 
Bull’s  Bay  or  Mount  Pleasant.  I cannot  safely  withdraw  more  troops 
from  Savannah  or  Pocotaligo,  and  am  constrained  to  ask  for  that  bri- 
gade from  North  Carolina  soon  as  possible. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


(Duplicate  to  Messrs.  Orr  and  Barnwell,  Richmond,  Va.) 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Gharltston , S.  0.,  April  9,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Comdg.  First  Military  District , Charleston , S.  C. : 

General:  Indications  make  it  necessary  to  be  prepared  for  a move- 
ment of  the  enemy  from  the  quarter  of  Bull’s  Bay.  You  are  therefore 
desired  to  hold  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker’s  command,  including  bat- 
teries, except  one  regiment,  in  readiness  for  movement  at  a moment’s 
notice  to  Mount  Pleasant,  with  three  days’  provisions.  At  the  same 
time  have  Colquitt’s  regiment  held  ready  likewise  to  move  to  the  same 
point. 

It  is  the  desire  of  the  commanding  general  that  this  order  should  be 
given  to  the  troops  in  question  as  soon  as  possible. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


892  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XX VI. 

Morris  Island,  April  9,  1863 — 2.30  p.  m. 

General  R.  S.  Ripley: 

I am  ordered  back  to  Wilmington,  on  which  the  Navy  Department 
seems  to  apprehend  an  attack ; but  1 will  leave  the  detachment  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant  Kerr  and  will  not  recall  it  one  moment 
sooner  than  1 can  avoid. 

W.  F.  LYNCH. 


Fort  Sumter,  April  9,  1863. 
Captain  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

The  following  dispatch  from  the  fleet  has  just  been  received:  “Be 
there  an  attack  this  p.  m.?”  Question  from  the  Powhatan  to  the  Iron- 
sides. Answer:  “No  attack  to-day.” 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel. 


Fort  Sumter,  April  9,  1863. 

Captain  Nance: 

The  torpedo  raft  is  to  be  sent  in  to-night.  She  is  anchored  midway 
between  the  2,500-yard  buoy  and  the  first  iron -clad.  She  is  to  cast  .loose 
by  small  boats. 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 
Lieutenant- Colonel.  Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , April  9,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  All  necessary  precautions  have  been  taken. 
Captain  Tucker  and  all  the  harbor  forts  have  been  notified. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General.  Commanding. 


Fort  Sumter,  April  9,  1863. 

Captain  Nance: 

The  following  dispatches  have  been  received  from  the  Ironsides : 1st. 
“To  Captain  G. : A good  steamer  had  better  watch  Bull’s  Bay,  as  it  is 
now  the  principal  approach  to  Charleston.”  2d.  “Send  raft.” 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 
Lieutenant- Colonel , Commanding. 


A tug  has  brought  in  the  raft  to  the  nearest  iron-clad.  No  other 
changes. 


JOSEPH  A.  YATES. 


The  strange  raft  referred  to  in  this  morning’s  dispatch  turns  out  to 
be  supposed  torpedo  raft.  She  is  now  alongside  of  one  of  the  monitors 
in  tow  of  the  tug. 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


893 


Fort  Sumter,  April  10,  1863. 

General  Jordan: 

Have  seen  Trapier.  His  troops  have  arrived.  Has  given  directions 
to  keep  a lookout  from  Bull’s  Bay  down.  All  right  on  Sullivan’s  Island. 
Have  seen  Graham.  Got  signal-book  of  some  kind  Irom  Keokuk. 
Twenty-ninth  Georgia  and  artillery  arrived.  Nothing  new  on  Folly 
Island.  The  encampment  is  2 miles  or  more  from  inlet.  Have  directed 
a reconnaissance  to  be  made  on  that  island  as  soon  as  possible.  Engi- 
neer in  charge  of  batteries  constructing  south  of  Morris  Island  been  off 
for  a day.  Have  ordered  the  work  to  be  pushed  on.  The  raft  inside  is 
evidently  intended  for  destruction  of  boom.  Another  one  outside. 
Weather  is  extremely  rough.  I will  be  up  in  an  hour  or  two  if  interpre- 
tation of  dispatches  prove  true  and  schooners  sail. 

It.  S.  ItlPLEY, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Fort  Moultrie,  April  10,  1863. 

General  Ripley: 

I beg  you  not  to  move  any  more  guns  from  Battery  Bee  to  Fort  Moul- 
trie. In  the  final  fight  Battery  Bee  is  invaluable.  Small  guns  are  use- 
less in  Bee.  The  officers  and  men  are  wedded  to  those  guns  ; they  will 
be  mortified  at  their  removal. 

L.  M.  KEITT, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  O.,  April  10,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Comdg.  First  Military  District , Charleston , 8.  C.: 

General:  I am  instructed  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  dur- 
ing the  recent  action,  7th  instant,  our  batteries  fired  in  all  at  least  2,200 
balls  in  two  and  one-half  hours’  time;  the  enemy  meanwhile  having 
fired  not  to  exceed  125  shots.  It  is  the  belief  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral that  there  was  a great,  waste  on  our  side,  which,  if  repeated  in  sub- 
sequent encounters,  will  end  in  our  disaster,  and  to  prevent  which  the 
most  stringent  measures  and  orders  must  be  given  and  rigidly  enforced. 
The  firing  must  be  slow,  deliberate,  carefully  aimed,  and  within  short 
range.  All  care  must  be  given  to  this  momentous  matter,  and  it  is 
hoped  that  officers  will  not  again  throw  away  so  much  precious  ammu- 
nition. 

Battery  Bee,  for  example,  never  nearer  than  2,000  yards  to  any  of  the 
iron-clads,  is  reported  to  have  fired  283  shots,  and  Battery  Beauregard 
157,  at  the  same  distance.  At  this  distance  only  a chance  shot  can  be 
expected  to  do  any  harm  to  one  of  the  monitors. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  10, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , 8.  C. : 

Hold  Cooke’s  brigade  iu  readiness  light  marching  order,  with  one 


894  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA  [Chap.  XXVI. 

light  battery  to  be  sent  here  at  a moment’s  notice  ; five  days’  subsist- 
ence. 

THOMAS  JOED  AN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  April  11, 1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

Arrived  last  night.  No  further  developments  of  enemy’s  plans.  He 
has  six  monitors  and  the  Ironsides  inside  of  bar,  fifty  vessels  of  all 
kinds  in  Stono,  and  from  8,000  to  10,000  men  on  Cole’s,  Folly,  and  other 
islands  about  its  mouth,  and  about  5,000  men  on  Seabrook  Island, 
North  Edisto.  Great  importance  is  attached  to  having  an  additional 
brigade  on  hand  to  meet  any  movement  of  enemy  from  Bull’s  Bay 
through  Christ  Church  Parish  against  Moultrie  and  other  works  on 
Sullivan’s  Island.  It  is  urged  that  enemy  is  near  Charleston  5 that  a 
movement  against  Wilmington  would  be  at  once  known  here  5 that 
owing  to  ability  to  concentrate  rolling  stock  troops  can  be  more  expediti- 
ously moved  hence  to  Wilmington  than  the  reverse,  and  that  conse- 
quently a brigade  might  be  spared  from  Wilmington  for  this  point. 

G.  W.  C.  LEE, 
Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  11, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Focotaligo , S.  C.: 

Movements  of  enemy’s  boats  in  Broad  Eiver  is  probably  a feint,  but 
use  balance  of  Cooke’s  brigade  to  best  advantage  until  further  orders. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  11, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  II.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  N.  C . : 

Enemy’s  fleet  mostly  collected  iu  Stono  and  North  Edisto,  only  a few 
hours  from  Bull’s  Bay.  Will  telegraph  when  they  leave.  If  I whip 
enemy  here  will  send  you  troops  enough  to  exterminate  Foster. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  April  11,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  B.  S.  Bipley, 

Comdg.  First  Military  District , Charleston , S.  C.  : 

General  : I consider  it  advisable  that  General  Gist  should  occupy 
Black  Island,  on  Light-House  Inlet,  as  soon  as  practicable,  with  about 
two  companies  of  infantry,  one  or  two  light  rifled  guns,  and  one  or  two 
howitzers,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  taking  possession  of  that  portion 
from  which  Secessionville  is  seen  in  reverse  and  the  eastern  lines  are 
enfiladed.  Moreover,  from  there  the  navigation  of  Light-House  Inlet 
Creek  would  be  commanded. 

The  island  was  examined  some  three  weeks  since  by  Maj.  D.  B.  Har- 
ris, accompanied  by  Colonel  Hatch,  both  of  whom  can  give  all  neces- 
sary information  on  the  subject. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD, 

General , Commanding . 


Chap.  IX7I]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


895 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C,9  April  11,  1863. 

Lieutenant  Webb, 

In  Charge  of  Boarding  Expedition , Charleston : 

Dear  Sir:  Upon  further  reflection,  after  the  discussion  of  yesterday 
with  Captain  Tucker  and  yourself,  I think  it  would  be  preferable  to  attack 
each  of  the  enemy’s  seven  iron  clads  (six  monitors  and  one  ironsides), 
now  inside  of  the  bar,  with  at  least  two  of  your  spar-torpedo  row-boats, 
instead  of  the  number  (six  in  all)  already  agreed  upon.  I believe  it  to 
be  as  easy  to  surprise  at  the  same  time  the  whole  of  those  iron  clads  as 
a part  of  them. 

If  you  permit  me  I will  give  you  here  my  general  views  upon  the  ex- 
pedition. 

About  dark  on  the  first  calm  night  (the  sooner  the  better)  I would 
rendezvous  all  my  boats  at  the  mouth  of  the  creek  in  rear  of  Cummings 
Point,  Morris  Island.  There  I would  await  the  proper  hour  of  the  night, 
which  should  not  be  too  late,  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  the  present 
condition  of  the  moon I would  then  coast  quietly  along  the  beach  of 
Morris  Island  to  a point  nearest  the  enemy’s  present  position,  where 
General  Ripley  shall  station  a picket  to  communicate  with  you  and  to 
show  proper  lights  immediately  after  your  attack  to  guide  the  return  of 
your  boats. 

Having  arrived  at  the  point  of  the  beach  designated  I would  form  line 
of  attack,  putting  also  my  torpedoes  in  position,  and  would  give  orders 
that  my  boats  should  attack  by  twos  any  monitor  or  ironsides  they  should 
encounter  on  their  way  out,  answering  to  the  enemy’s  hail,  “Boats  on 
secret  expedition”  or  merely  “Contrabands.” 

After  the  attack  each  boat  should  make  for  the  nearest  point  of  the 
shore,  where,  if  necessary  to  save  itself  from  pursuit,  it  can  be  stranded ; 
otherwise  it  will  return  to  the  rendezvous  at  Cummings  Point.  Care 
should  be  taken  to  have  a proper  understanding  with  commanding  offi- 
cers of  the  batteries  in  that  vicinity,  so  as  not  to  be  fired  into. 

I feel  convinced  that  with  nerve  and  proper  precaution  on  the  part  of 
your  boats’  crews,  and  with  the  protection  of  a kind  Providence,  not  one 
of  the  enemy’s  monsters,  so  much  boasted  of  by  them,  would  live  to  see 
the  next  morning’s  sun. 

Please  submit  this  letter  to  Captain  Tucker,  and  assure  him  that  what- 
ever assistance  I can  give  for  this  expedition,  the  success  of  which  must 
contribute  so  materially  to  the  safety  of  this  important  city,  will  be  freely 
and  heartily  furnished. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


[April  11,  1863] 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant-  General : . 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copy  of  dispatches  received 
from  Ironsides  during  the  last  few  days. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* ALFRED  RHETT, 

(7 olonel,  Commanding , 


896 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cuai*.  XXYI. 


[Id  closure.] 

April  9,  1863. 

First : 

Captain  G. : He  is  in  bad  condition,  having  been days  out  in  a gale. 

Second : 

Captain  G. : A good  steamer  had  better  watch  Bull’s  Bay,  as  it  is  now  the  principal 
approach  to  Charleston.  Send  raft. 

Admiral  D. 

Third : 

If  Captain  Reynolds  desires  to  come  in  by  the  tug  to  the  Ironsides  to  do  so. 

Fourth : 


Captain  G. : Send  schooner  immediately  to  Port  Royal. 

First : 

Report  vessels  unknown  when  sailed  for  Port  Royal. 

Second : 


April  10,  1863. 


Get  hawsers  from  ordnance  schooner. 

Admiral  D. 

Third : 

Detain  provision  schooner. 

Admiral  D. 

Fourth : 

Captain  G. : I learn  that  our  mail  was  forwarded  by  an  army  steamer.  Send  Bibb 
for  it  to  Stono. 

Admiral  D. 

Fifth : 

Captain  G. : Send  aid  immediately  to  ordnance ; making  signals.  Send  all  ordnance 
schooners  to  North  Edisto. 

Admiral  D. 

Sixth: 

Was  sent  from  Port  Royal. 

RODGERS,  G.  B.  S. 


Seventh : 

Any  means  of  finding  out  by  W.  S.  A.  T. 

April  11,  1863. 

First : 

Where  is  the  Bibb  ? Shall  want  her  near  the  bar. 


Second : 

♦ 

Captain  G. : Send  the  Ha to  Port  Royal. 


Admiral  DuPONT. 


Richmond,  April  11, 1863. 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston , 8.  C.: 

Dear  General:  We  inclose  you  the  telegram  which  we  prepared 
ip  reply  to  your  telegram  asking  re-enforcements  $ it  was  declined  at 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


897 


the  office,  and  we  sent  you  a less  specific  answer  than  the  one  inclosed. 
We  can  give  you  no  further  information  as  to  the  action  of  the  Secre- 
tary. About  the  time  the  Secretary  of  War  telegraphed  you  that  he 
would  hold  troops  in  hand  to  re-enforce  from  Wilmington  when  the 
enemy  certainly  indicated  the  point  of  attack  he  made  the  same  state- 
ment to  us,  and  he  is  not  now  able  to  redeem  the  promise  in  consequence 
of  Ransom’s  command  having  been  removed  by  order  of  General  Long- 
street  in  the  direction  of  New  Berne.  Evans’  brigade  is  the  only  force 
left  at  Wilmington,  and  our  effort  has  been  to  get  the  Secretary  to  order 
back  Bansom’s  brigade  so  that  Evans  can  go  at  once  to  Charleston. 
We  have  hopes  that  the  order  will  yet  be  issued  by  the  Secretary,  though 
it  is  not  by  any  means  certain.  Ransom’s  brigade  was  ordered  off  with- 
out the  knowledge  of  the  Secretary  of  War  by  General  Longstreet,  and 
is  now  on  such  service  as  renders  it  doubtful  whether  they  can  at  once 
be  ordered  back  without  great  hazard  to  an  expedition  on  foot  against 


New  Berne  and  Washington. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 


R.  W.  BARNWELL. 
JAMES  L.  ORR. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 


Richmond,  April  11, 1863. 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Ransom’s  brigade  has  been  removed  by  Longstreet  without  the 
knowledge  of  the  Secretary  of  War.  Whiting  has  been  telegraphed  to 
send  Evans’  brigade  if  possible.  Longstreet  will  probably  be  tele- 
graphed to  send  Ransom’s  brigade  back  to  Wilmington,  so  as  to  insure 
the  marching  of  Evans.  Are  the  demonstrations  still  threatening  from 

Bull’s  Bay?  K w BARNWELL. 

JAMES  L.  ORR. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

April  11, 1863. 

Messrs.  Barnwell  and  Orr,  Senators: 

Your  message  is  “ contraband,”  and  so  decidedly  in  conflict  with  our 
instructions  that  it  cannot  be  transmitted  without  the  approval  of  the 
Secretary  of  War  or  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

Very  respectfully,  _ 

GEORGE  R.  PACE, 

C.  S.  Telegraph  Cos. 


Charleston,  April  12, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Iron-clads  have  all  left  harbor,  recrossing  bar  about  3 p.  m. ; six  moni- 
tors going  south,  three  being  towed.  Ironsides  at  anchor  outside. 
Land  forces  still  in  same  situation  as  last  reported. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

(Same  to  Barnwell,  Mercer,  Orr,  and  Whiting.) 

57  R R— VOL  XIV 


$98 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  April  12, 1863. 

Messrs.  Orr  and  Barnwell, 

Confederate  States  Senators , Richmond: 

Have  advised  a secret  expedition  which  will  shake  Abolitiondom  to 
foundation  if  successful.  My  hopes  are  strong.  I regret  much  Lee’s 
torpedo  ram  is  not  finished.  It  is  the  greatest  invention  of  the  day. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

April  13,  1863. 

Capt.  John  B.  Tucker, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces  Afloat , Charleston , S.  C. : 

Captain  : Our  intention  of  attacking  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  last 
night  having  been  disappointed  by  the  departure  of  his  monitors  for 
the  south,  I beg  to  propose  that  we  should  attempt  to  destroy  the  Iron- 
sides, just  outside  of  the  bar,  and  raise  the  blockade,  as  follows : 

To-night,  or  as  soon  as  practicable,  to  move  out  with  four  or  five-  of 
our  harbor  steamboats  and  blockade  runners  (burning  anthracite  coal 
to  avoid  making  smoke),  having  each  in  tow  four  of  the  spar-torpedo 
row-boats ; these  must  be  accompanied  by  the  two  gunboats,  moving 
in  a direction  nearly  opposite  to  the  supposed  position  of  the  Ironsides. 
So  soon  as  the  first  line  of  steamers  shall  have  arrived  close  enough 
to  distinguish  well  (without  itself  being  seen)  the  lights  or  positions  of 
the  blockaders  the  torpedo  boats  must  be  cast  loose,  the  two  first  on 
the  left  to  attack  the  first  light  or  enemy’s  vessel  in  that  direction,  the 
tiext  two  the  second  light,  the  third  two  the  third  light,  &c.,  toward 
the  right,  thus  using  these  torpedo  boats  as  flankers  to  the  gunboats. 
Simultaneous  with  this  attack  the  two  gunboats  should  make  at  once 
directly  for  the  position  of  the  Ironsides,  sinking  the  latter  as  soon  as 
practicable. 

The  small  boats  will  make  for  the  nearest  point  of  shore  immediately 
after  their  attack  and  then  retire  to  the  protection  of  the  forts;  the 
two  gunboats  will  remain  outside  long  enough  to  effectually  raise  the 
blockade  in  such  a way  that  it  cannot  this  time  be  gainsaid;  they  should 
not,  however,  remain  long  enough  to  be  overpowered  by  the  return  of 
the  enemy’s  monitors. 

With  proper  precautions  in  the  details  of  this  expedition  I have  no 
doubt,  captain,  of  its  entire  success.  General  Bipley,  commanding  this 
district,  will  furnish  you  all  the  assistance  in  his  power. 

I remain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD, 

General , Commanding. 


Signal  Office,  April  13, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Have  obtained  key  to  signals  of  enemy.  Can  read  many  dispatches 
of  the  fleet,  but  am  watchful  of  deception.  Will  send  you  key. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 

Bespectfully  submitted  to  the  President. 

J.  A.  SEDDOIST, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


899 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  14, 1863—12.15  p.  m. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War: 

Ironsides  still  outside.  No  monitors  5 two  reported  yesterday  re- 
turned to  Port  Royal.  None  in  Edisto.  Many  transports  still  there. 
Only  eight  gunboats  and  transports  in  Stono.  Land  forces  as  hereto- 
fore, but  strength  not  known. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

(Duplicate  to  Messrs.  Orr  and  Barnwell,  Confederate  States  Senators, 
Richmond,  Ya.) 


Charleston,  April  15,  1863. 
His  Excellency  the  President,  Richmond  : 

Mr.  President  : As  reported  by  telegraph,  I arrived  here  last  Friday 
night  (10th  instant).  The  next  morning  I called  upon  General  Beaure- 
gard, and  afterward  sent  you  a dispatch  giving  the  state  of  affairs  as 
far  as  in  my  power.  On  Monday  1 telegraphed  you  that  the  monitors 
had  gone  south ; three  of  them  have  been  seen  at  Port  Royal  and  the 
others  are  supposed  to  be  there,  as  they  are  neither  in  the  Stono  nor 
North  Edisto. 

The  condition  of  affairs  here,  as  far  as  I know,  is  about  the  same  as 
at  the  date  of  my  last  dispatch  (Monday).  The  Ironsides  and  the  other 
blockading  vessels  occupy  their  usual  positions  outside  the  bar.  Most 
of  the  vessels  in  the  Stono  have  left,  but  the  islands  at  its  mouth  (Folly, 
Cole’s,  &c.),  are  still  occupied  by  the  enemy,  in  what  force  is  not  known. 
An  expedition  is  on  foot,  I am  informed,  to  ascertain  with  what  force 
these  islands  are  held. 

I have  had  so  little  to  tell  you  that  I have  refrained  from  telegraph- 
ing since  the  withdrawal  of  the  monitors,  as  I could  have  only  repeated 
General  Beauregard’s  dispatches  to  the  War  Department,  which  are 
sent  off  every  morning  and  evening,  and  I have  learned  so  little  upon 
which  to  form  any  judgment  as  to  the  enemy’s  designs  and  probable 
movements  in  the  future  that  even  now  I have  but  little  object  in  writ- 
ing on  the  subject,  except  to  show  you  how  little  I know  of  it.  Much 
confidence  is  expressed  in  the  ability  to  successfully  meet  any  move- 
ment by  land  upon  this  city,  and  since  the  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  an 
equal  confidence  is  felt  in  the  ability  to  repel  an  attack  by  water.  It 
is  thought  that  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  were  badly  used,  and  that  they 
will  not,  for  at  least  some  time  to  come,  risk  another  trial  with  our  forts. 

Some  apprehension  has  been  felt  lest  the  monitors  might  attempt  to 
retrieve  their  fortunes  upon  Savannah,  and  preparations  have  been 
begun  to  meet  them  there,  but  there  is  now  no  evidence  of  any  such 
intention  on  their  part.  I will  remain  a day  or  two  longer,  and  if 
everything  remains  quiet  will  start  for  Richmond,  where  I hope  to  find 
you  much  improved  in  health. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  0.  LEE, 
Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  April  15,  1863. 

Maj.  J.  P.  Thomas, 

Commanding  Volunteer  Battalion , Wappoo  Bridge  : 

Dear  Major  : Your  favor  of  this  day  has  just  been  received.  I am 


900  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

happy  to  be  able  to  relieve  your  anxiety  by  informing  you  that  the 
defeat  of  the  enemy  on  the  7th  instant  and  his  subsequent  hasty  re- 
treat from  this  vicinity  permits  me  to  release  your  battalion  from  further 
duty  here  at  present.'  I have  in  consequence  given  orders  to  that  effect. 

I beg  you,  major,  to  accept  for  yourself  and  the  gentlemen  under 
your  orders  my  sincere  thanks  for  their  prompt  and  patriotic  response 
to  my  call  for  assistance  in  the  defense  of  this  city.  I hope  if  we  are 
ever  threatened  anew  by  the  same  dangers  that  you  will  all  again  come 
to  the  rescue. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  16, 1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  i 

Enemy’s  monitors  reported  in  Port  Royal ; his  land  forces  reported 
leaving  Cole’s  and  Seabrook  Islands;  have  ordered  back  to  Wilming- 
ton part  of  Evans’  brigade  already  here.  Will  soon  return  to  Savannah, 
troops  from  there  which  may  be  required  there  before  long. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  16, 1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

French  consul  and  vice-consul  have  returned  per  steamer  Calmut. 
English  steamer  Rinaldo  is  also  outside.  Both  draw  too  much  water  to 

come  in.  * 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  16, 1863. 

Messrs.  Orr  and  Barnwell, 

Confederate  States  Senators , Richmond , Va. : 

Cannot  iron-plating  be  obtained  for  finishing  Lee’s  torpedo  ram,  now 
nearly  completed  ? It  is  far  superior  to  any  gunboat  for  attacking 
iron-clads.  I regret  cannot  convince  War  and  Navy  Departments  of 
that  fact.  Enemy  appear  to  be  returning  to  Port  Royal. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  17, 1863. 
Gen.  S.  Cooper,  Richmond , Va. : 

Generals  Evans  and  Clingman  desire  that  their  brigades  exchange 
stations.  Evans  thinks  can  best  recruit  his  regiments  by  the  transfer. 
Clingman  proposes  to  send  back  to  Wilmington  one  of  his  regiments 
instead  of  one  of  Evans’,  now  here,  about  to  be  ordered  to  Wilmington. 
Can  I do  it  ? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


901 


Secessionville,  April  17,  1863. 

Captain  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

After  exchanging  four  shots  found  that  the  balls  in  the  chests  were 
too  large  for  the  Parrott  guns,  and  one  ball  being  jammed,  I withdrew 
the  guns.  The  enemy  kept  up  a warm  fire  for  some  time,  but  hurt 

n°The*e'nemy  are  leaving  Folly  Island.  Some,  however, , are > still  there. 

C.  H.  STEVENS, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 


No.  85. 


Charleston , April  17. 


1863. 


I.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker’s  command,  except  the  regiment  on 
Morris  Island,  will  return  without  delay  to  District  of  Georgia.  The 
quartermaster’s  department  will  furnish  the  necessary  means  ot  trans- 
portation. 


By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 


JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  April  18, 1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Your  telegram  of  yesterday  received.  The  Secretary  desires  that 
vou  retain  Evans’  brigade  and  substitute  for  it  in  North  Carolina  Cooke  s 
brigade.  He  also  desires  that  you  retain  for  the  present  Clmgman  s 

brigade-  S.  COOPEB, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  18, 1863. 

Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Edgeicood , near  Edgefield , S.  C. : 

Dear  Governor:  I thank  you  for  your  kind  invitation  of  the  14th 
instant,  which  I would  be  most  happy  to  accept  for  myself  and  a tew 
friends  if  my  occupations  permitted,  but,  although  much  m need  of  rest, 
I shall  take  none  until  we  shall  have  got  through  with  whipping  the 
Abolitionists  and  driving  them  oft  of  the  soil  of  ^\C1^nfed,eTac.^’  ^ 
that  I ask  for  the  present  is  that  my  health  should  hold  out  to  the  end 

of  the  struggle. 

The  injury  to  Fort  Sumter  has  no  doubt  been  much  exaggerated  to 
you.  The  east  wall  was  pretty  badly  struck  in  two  or  three  places,  but 
the  fort,  will  soon  be  as  strong  as  ever— no  doubt  much  more  so  and 
much  sooner  than  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  can  be  repaired;  his  15-mcn 
and  rifled  7-inch  shells  did  about  the  same  amount  ot  injury.  Upon  tne 
whole,  I think  the  Abolitionists  will  come  to  the  conclusion,  it  they  have 
not  already  done  so,  that  their  monitors  are  great  humbugs;  “ore  ter- 
rible in  imagination  than  in  reality.  Forts  McAllister  and  Sumte**  have 


902 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

been  terrible  blows  to  them,  and  they  will  become  the  laughing-stock 
of  Europe. 

With  my  kind  regards  to  Mrs.  Pickens,  and  thanking  you  for  your 
congratulations,  I remain,  yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Office  of  Chief  Engineer, 
Charleston , S.  <7.,  April  19, 1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Captain  McCrady  (chief 
engineer  of  Georgia)  has  but  132  negroes  engaged  upon  the  earthworks 
near  Savannah.  Of  these  102  will  be  discharged  this  week.  The  re- 
maining 30  are  Mr.  Spratt’s  hands,  working  by  contract.  The  Legisla- 
ture of  Georgia,  Captain  McCrady  informs  me,  is  much  opposed  to 
making  another  impressment,  and  is  inclined  to  leave  it  to  yourself  or 
Brigadier-General  Mercer  to  make  a military  impressment  in  accordance 
with  the  recent  act  of  Congress.  This  would  lead  to  delay  and  might 
compromise  the  safety  of  Savannah,  as  the  works  for  which  the  labor  is 
required  are  important  for  her  defense. 

I would  therefore  respectfully  suggest  that  an  appeal  be  made  to  the 
Legislature  of  Georgia  to  adopt  such  method  of  supplying  this  labor  as 
will  be  attended  with  the  least  delay. 

The  number  of  slaves  required,  and  for  which  Captain  McCrady  has 
heretofore  made  urgent  application,  is  1,500,  which  had  better  be  fur- 
nished in  monthly  reliefs  so  long  as  needed. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Major  and  Chief  Engineer. 


Moultrie,  April  19,  1863. 
Captain  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Capt.  T.  Pinckney  reports  the  steamer  Saint  Johu,  Captain  Robin- 
son, as  having  been  chased  ashore  yesterday  morning  at  6 o’clock  on 
Light-House  Island,  and  after  being  deserted  by  captain  and  crew  was 
taken  possession  of  by  the  Yankees  and  towed  off  at  high  tide. 

J.  H.  TRAPIER, 
Brigadier- General. 


Sumter,  April  20,  1863. 

Captain  Nance: 

The  Yankee  fleet  fired  at  our  boat  at  the  wreck  Keokuk.  Confed- 
erate steamer  Chicora  steamed  out  near  the  wreck  and  is  exchanging 
shots  with  fleet  at  long  range.  None  of  the  fleet  have  crossed  the  bar. 
The  Ironsides  appears  to  be  coming  toward  our  boat. 

W.  H.  PERONNEAU, 

Captain. 


Chap.  XXVI.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


903 


Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Pocotaligo , April  20,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  Capt.  Janies  Lowndes,  assist- 
ant adjutant-general,  and  Lieut.  George  S.  Worthington,  aide-de  camp, 
were  sent  as  bearers  of  a flag  of  truce  to  Port  Royal  Perry,  in  compliance 
with  instructions  from  department  headquarters.  These  officers  were 
instructed  by  me  to  refuse  to  communicate  with  any  officer  of  the  negro 
regiments,  as  they  have  been  proclaimed  outlaws  and  felons  by  the 
President  of  the  Confederate  States. 

It  is  true  that  this  outlawry  extended  to  the  general  commanding,  but 
I could  not  but  regard  it  as  offensive  and  insulting  that  the  immediate 
agents  engaged  in  these  organizations  should  be  sent  to  receive  a flag 
of  truce  dispatched  from  my  headquarters. 

In  cases  of  necessity,  where  charity  to  the  dead  and  wounded  required: 
immediate  action,  I would  feel  forced  to  treat  with  any  representative 
the  enemy  might  choose  to  send.  But  no  such  necessity  now  exists,  and 
among  the  considerable  forces  now  assembled  in  our  front  their  com- 
manding officer  should  have  chosen  some  one  for  the  purpose  of  commu- 
nication not  obnoxious  to  the  well-known  sentiments  of  the  authorities 
of  the  Confederate  Government.  The  enemy  had  been  notified  the  day 
previous  that  a flag  of  truce  would  be  sent  with  a communication  for 
their  commanding  general.  Captain  Lowndes  was  met  by  an  officer 
who  announced  himself  as  Colonel  Higginson,  of  the  First  South  Caro- 
lina Regiment.  He  was  rowed  to  the  bulkhead  by  a negro  in  the  full 
uniform  of  a sergeant  of  infantry.  His  regiment  is  known  from  his 
special  reports  to  be  composed  of  negroes.  Captain  Lowndes  informed 
him  of  the  instructions  from  my  headquarters,  forbidding  him  to  hold 
communication  with  any  officer  of  a negro  regiment,  and  returned. 
Colonel  Higginson  stated  that  he  would  communicate  to  the  command- 
ing general  of  the  United  States  forces  the  refusal  to  communicate  with 
him  and  the  reasons  assigned. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  20, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldshorougli , N.  C.: 

Ro  troops  or  iron  clads  have  left  here  to  support  Foster  as  yet. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  April  20,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan, 

Commanding  District  of  East  Florida : 

General:  It  is  the  wish  of  the  commanding  general  that  the  cavalry 
I troops  in  your  district  should  be  as  effectively  organized,  armed,  drilled, 
and  disciplined  as  may  be  practicable  under  the  existing  conditions  of 
the  service,  to  which  end  he  expects  commanding  officers  of  cavalry  to 
pay  particular  attention  to  the  drill  of  their  men,  dismounted  as  well  as 


904 


COASTS  OF  S C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


'when  mounted.  There  should  be  uniformity  as  far  as  possible  in  the 
fire-arms  in  any  one  company,  to  secure  which  you  will  please  make  ex- 
changes when  necessary  between  the  companies. 

An  inspector-general  reports  that  some  of  your  infantry  are  armed 
with  Maynard  rifles.  This  would  be  a more  suitable  weapon  for  your 
cavalry  in  lieu  of  the  Enfield  rifles,  which  in  turn  would  be  far  better 
for  the  infantry, 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Office  of  Chief  Engineer, 
Charleston , S.  0.,  April  20,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida: 

General:  Since  writing  my  letter  of  yesterday’s  date  I have  the 
honor  to  inform  you  that  I have  received  a telegram  from  Captain  Mc- 
Crady,  stating  that  the  Georgia  Legislature  has  adjourned,  leaving  the 
question  of  slave  labor  for  the  defense  of  the  State  still  undecided. 

I would  therefore  respectfully  suggest  that  the  appeal  for  the  labor 
be  addressed  to  Governor  Brown,  instead  of  the  Legislature. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Major  and  Chief  Engineer. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  21,  1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  Bar,  Richmond , Va. : 

Yesterday  afternoon  six  enemy’s  monitors  and  some  transports  with 
troops  returned  into  North  Edisto.  Cole’s  Island,  at  mouth  of  Stono, 
has  been  evacuated.  Small  force  still  on  Folly  Island.  Cannot  the  two 
Brooke  naval  guns  lately  sent  here  be  kept  a few  davs  longer  ? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  21, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington , N.  C. ; 

Three  thousand  feet  submarine  wire  will  be  sent  you.  By  authority 
Secretary  of  War,  Cooke’s  brigade  will  be  sent  you  in  place  of  Evans’. 
Shall  send  Hall’s  regiment  soon.  Please  send  back  regiment  of  Evans 
by  the  transportation. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  April  21,  1863. 

Capt.  John  R.  Tucker, 

Comdg.  Naval  Forces  Afloat , Charleston , S.  C. : 

Captain  : General  Beauregard  communicates  the  information  that 
six  of  the  enemy’s  iron  clads  have  entered  (yesterday)  North  Edisto 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


905 


River,  probably  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  any  attempt  being  made 
to  raise  the  Keokuk.  The  general  suggests  at  the  same  time  the  pro- 
priety of  attacking  the  monitors  duriig  a favorable  night,  according  to 
the  plan  agreed  upon  sometime  since,  with  the  spar-torpedo  row-boats, 
as  soon  as  the  iron-clads  shall  have  entered  the  channel  to  this  place. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  TOUTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  0.,  April  21,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District: 

General:  The  general  commanding  directs  that,  if  they  can  possi- 
bly be  spared,  you  will  transfer  to  Savannah  from  For  Sumter  six  30 
pounder  guns  for  works  in  the  vicinity  of  the  former  place. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CLIFTON  H.  SMITH, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  (7.,  April  21,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah  : 

General  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  19th  instant  I have  to  inform 
you  that  one  of  the  10-inch  columbiads  in  question  reached  here  some 
days  ago,  and  in  view  of  an  apparently  impending  attack  by  the  monitor 
iron-clads  of  the  enemy  it  was  placed  in  position  at  Fort  Moultrie,  whence 
it  will  be  sent  to  you  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  other  gun  has  just 
arrived,  and  will  be  sent  on  without  delay,  unless  the  iron-clads  now  in 
the  North  Edisto  shall  again  appear  off  this  harbor.  Evidently  they 
can  contemplate  no  movement  against  Savannah  as  yet. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


April  22  [21],  1863 — 8.15  a.  m.[?] 

Brigadier-General  Hagood  : 

General:  Rockville  picket  at  12  o’clock  to-day  (21st  instant)  re- 
ported four  iron-clads,  thirteen  schooners,  and  twelve  steamers,  one  devil 
(what  they  take  for  the  devil  is,  however,  the  flat  with  boats  aboard, 
which  I reported  before).  This  afternoon  (21st)  they  report  in  North 
Edisto  nine  steamships,  four  iron-clads,  one  devil,  and  fourteen  schooners. 
The  transport  with  troops  that  came  in  yesterday  evening  and  anchored 
near  the  Point  of  Pines  Wharf  has  gone  down  opposite  to  Seabrook 
Island.  One  large  steamer  went  to  sea  about  1 o’clock  this  morning. 
From  Legareville  at  sunset  21st  five  schooners  and  a gunboat  (sup- 
posed the  Pawnee)  and  two  river  steamers,  one  up  at  Campbell’s  and 
another,  which  came  in  this  afternoon  (apparently  without  troops), 
anchored  off  Cole’s  Island.  There  is  also  a gunboat  up  Folly  River. 


906  COASTS  OF  S.  C , GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

The  tents  on  Folly  Point  are  more  numerous  than  when  last  reported — 
not  a large  encampment.  A small  white  steamer  came  in  this  morning 
from  northward;  a steamer  passed  the  bar  going  southward;  a schooner 
left  Stono  River  about  the  same  time  and  went  in  same  direction.  The 
want  of  good  glasses  probably  prevents  us  from  seeing  many  things 
which  might  be  of  importance  to  observe. 

Respectfully, 

JOHN  JENKINS, 

Major , Commanding  Advanced  Forces. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  22,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldshorough : 

Send  you  Cooke’s  brigade,  although  much  needed,  enemy  being  still 
in  force  at  Port  Royal  and  North  Edisto.  His  six  monitors  in  latter 
bav. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


(Duplicate  to  Whiting  at  Wilmington.) 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  April  22,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : The  work  on  the  marine  torpedo  ram  is  at  a stand-still 
for  want  of  material  and  money.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  work 
was  undertaken  with  the  understanding  that  the  sum  of  $50,000  would 
be  supplied  by  the  State  of  South  Carolina  and  such  material  as  the 
Navy  Department  had  available.  The  money  lias  been  received  and 
is  exhausted  ; some  material  has  been  furnished  by  the  Navy  Depart- 
ment, but  thus  far  the  substantial  assistance  of  iron-plating  has  been 
denied,  and  hence  the  progress  in  the  work  has  been  incommensurate 
with  its  importance,  and  very  far  behind  what  I was  led  to  expect  when 
1 was  induced  to  undertake  the  construction. 

Meantime  the  great  value  of  the  invention  has  been  demonstrated  so 
as  to  secure  general  conviction,  and  Captain  Tucker,  commanding  Con- 
federate States  naval  forces  afloat  on  this  station,  declares  unhesitat- 
ingly that  this  one  machine  of  war,  if  finished,  would  be  more  effective 
as  a means  of  defense  and  offense  than  nearly  all  the  iron  clads  here 
afloat  and  building,  a fact  of  which  I am  and  have  been  fully  assured. 
Had  it  been  finished  and  afloat  when  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  entered 
this  harbor  several  weeks  ago  but  few  of  them  probably  would  have 
escaped.  Be  that  as  it  may,  I trust  the  Department  will  have  the  mat- 
ter inquired  into ; that  is,  the  relative  value,  as  war  engines,  of  the  Lee 
torpedo  ram  and  of  the  iron-clad  rams  Chicora,  Palmetto  State,  and 
others  of  the  same  class  now  building  in  this  harbor,  to  the  absorption 
of  all  the  material  and  mechanical  resources  of  this  section  of  the 
country. 

I cannot  express  to  the  War  Department  in  too  strong  terms  my  sense 
of  the  importance  of  the  question  involved  and  of  its  intimate  connec- 
tion with  the  most  effective  defense  of  this  position.  I do  not  desire  to 
impose  my  views,  but  feel  it  my  duty  to  urge  an  immediate  iuvestiga- 


-hap.  XXVI.  J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


907 


tion  by  a mixed  board  of  competent  officers  to  determine  whether  it  be 
best  for  the  ends  in  view  to  continue  to  appropriate  all  the  material  and 
employ  the  mechanical  labor  of  the  country  in  the  construction  of  ves- 
sels that  are  forced  to  play  so  unimportant  and  passive  a part  as  that 
which  Captain  Tucker,  C.  S.  Navy,  their  commander,  officially  declares 
to  me  must  be  theirs  in  the  future  as  in  the  past. 

The  papers  herewith  will  give  the  information  necessary  to  show  the 
Department  under  what  circumstances  the  construction  of  the  Lee  tor- 
pedo ram  was  commenced. 

The  engineer  in  charge  estimates  that  it  will  take,  say,  $20,000  to  paj 
off  existing  obligations  for  workmanship  and  material  and  to  complete 
the  vessel,  with  the  exception  of  plating  her. 

The  plating  can  only  be  furnished  by  the  naval  authorities,  who  have 
control  of  the'rolling-mills  and  all  suitable  iron,  and  unless  they  will 
agree  to  divert  from  the  vessels  of  the  class  they  are  building  enough 
jkating  for  the  completion  of  the  ram  I may  as  well  give  up  further 
hope. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  BBAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  22,  1863. 

Hon.  W.  L.  Yancey,  Montgomery , Ala.  : 

Dear  Sir:  Your  favor  of  the  16th  instant  has  been  received.  It 
vould  afford  me  much  pleasure  to  have  your  son  on  my  staff  as  an  aide, 
out  unfortunately  the  position  referred  to  has  been  promised  to  one  of 
mv  young  volunteer  aides,  Mr.  Ferry,  who  was  with  me  at  Shiloh,  l 
wilL  however,  remember  your  application,  and  will  be  most  happy  to 
offer  him  the  first  vacancy  which  may  occur  on  my  personal  stall. 

I thank  you  for  your  congratulations  on  our  success  here  m our  light 
of  the  7th  instant  with  the  Yankee  monitors.  We  are  just  beginning 
to  find  out  that  our  victory  was  more  brilliant  than  we  had  anticipated 
but  who  could  have  believed  that  the  struggle  with  those  boasted  ma- 
rine monsters  would  have  lasted  only  two  and  a half  hours  . I Ta  . 
made  my  dispatch  as  moderate  as  I could  to  belie  the  accusation  which 
I understood  was  being  circulated  at  Richmond  that  I was  disposed  to 
overrate  my  successes.  I am  now  glad  that  the  result  in  this  instance 

has  been  quite  the  reverse.  , . 

But  the  monitors  are  again  near  here,  for  what  purpose  nothing  is 
yet  positively  known.  Should  they  come  over  our  bar  again,  however, 
I hope  that,  with  the  row-boat  spar- torpedoes  I have  had  prepared  tor 
their  reception,  not  one  of  the  monitors  will  ever  get  away  again. 
the  by,  I have  suggested  to  the  War  and  Navy  Departments  the  pro- 
priety of  using  these  boats  for  the  defense  of  our  rivers,  such  as  the 
Mississippi,  Tennessee,  Cumberland,  &c.  A small  flotilla  of  these  boats 
(having  a spar  and  torpedo  at  the  end  of  it  in  front  of  each  boa.;)  prop- 
erly located  where  the  enemy’s  gunboats  would  have  to  stop  for  a pai 
of  the  night  on  account  of  the  difficulties  of  navigation  or  for  the  pur- 
pose of  wooding,  &c.,  would  be  irresistible.  From  the  experiment  ve 
have  made  here  I have  no  doubt  that  two  of  these  row-boats,  properly 
manned  and  officered,  would  be  more  than  a match  for  a monitor  in 
smooth  water  and  a dark  night.  I sincerely  hope  that  my  advice  maj 
be  adopted  by  the  War  and  Navy  Departments. 

With  respect,  I remain,  yours,  very  truly,  BEAUREGARD> 


908 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


Fort  Sumter,  April  22, 1863. 
Captain  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

I have  consulted  some  old  man-of-war’s  men,  and  I find  the  Ironsides 
is  rigged  for  sea,  fore-mast  and  mizzen-mast  with  spars.  I,  however, 
cannot  see  that  she  looks  much  different  from  when  she  came  from  Port 
Royal.  Gunboat  Bienville  is  moving  about  her  busily,  and  men  on  the 
bow  and  wheel-house.  Cannot  make  out  what  she  is  doing. 

ALFRED  RHETT, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  April  23,  1863. 

Capt.  J.  R.  Tucker, 

Commanding  Afloat , Charleston , S.  C. : 

Captain:  Your  two  letters  of  this  date  have  been  received.*  I re- 
gret much  to  hear  of  the  condition  of  the  Chicora’s  boilers,  and  of  the 
order  detaching  from  your  command  the  officers  and  men  of  the  u special 
expedition,”  to  return  to  Richmond,  Ya.  I am  most  particularly  of  the 
opinion  that  their  services  may  be  required  here  so  long  as  the  enemy’s 
six  iron-clads  remain  in  North  Edisto,  for  they  no  doubt  intend,  if  not 
to  attack  Charleston,  to  prevent  any  endeavor  being  made  to  raise  the 
Keokuk.  Should  they  cross  over  the  bar  for  that  purpose  and  remain 
one  night  inside  I hope  we  may  then  be  able  to  try  upon  them  the 
efficiency  of  Lee’s  spar  torpedoes,  in  which  I am  free  to  confess  I have 
the  utmost  confidence. 

I would  respectfully  suggest  that  these  “ officers  and  men”  should  be 
retained  here  until  the  further  wishes  of  the  Navy  Department  can  be 
obtained. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  23, 1806. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

The  naval  officers  and  detachments  sent  here  to  board  monitors  in 
certain  contingency  have  been  ordered  back  to  Richmond.  I regard 
that  detachment  as  still  most  necessary  here.  It  is  not  prudent  to  look 
upon  enemy’s  attempt  on  Charleston  at  end  for  season.  Six  monitors 
are  at  North  Edisto. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Not  found. 


909 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  Troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Gnrgia,  and  Florida, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , April  23,  1863. 


Commanding  officer. 


Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Hagood 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker.. . . 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer  . 
Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb  — 
Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan 

Grand  total 


Present  for  duty. 

t 

rC 

I 

a 

Troops. 

Total  effective 

infantry. 

Total  effective  | 

cavalry. 

! 

Total  effective 

artillery. 

s 

s 

P< 

i 

n 

fee 

-4 

Aggregate  presei 

absent. 

First  Military  District  of 

11, 148 

1,131 

3,945 

18,  351 

21, 956 

South  Carolina. 

Second  Military  District  of 

1,866 

916 

298 

3, 361 

3,673 

South  Carolina. 

Third  Military  District  of 

2,  927 

1, 732 

610 

5,  991 

7, 251 

South  Carolina. 

District  of  Georgia 

2, 148 

1,840 

2,104 

7, 200 

8, 513 

District  of  Middle  Florida. . 

788 

452 

280 

1,701 

2, 128 

District  of  East  Florida 

222 

441 

140 

916 

1, 249 

19,  099 

6, 512 

7, 377 

37,  520 

44, 770 

Note.— Heavy  artillery  included  with  light  artillery  in  the  First  District  of  South  Carolina  and  the 
District  of  Georgia. 


RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 


First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina . . . 
Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 
Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina  . 

District  of  Georgia 

District  of  Middle  Florida 

District  of  East  Florida 


16,224 
3,  080 

5,  269 

6,  092 
1,520 

803 


Total  effectives 


32, 988 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  24, 1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va, : 

I wanted  the  Whitworth  guns— one  to  place  on  Morris  Island,  to 
cover  at  long  range  the  bar  and  enable  us  to  get  guns  off  Keokuk,  also 
to  keep  the  enemy  from  replacing  buoys  and  surveying  bar;  the  other 
to  place  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  to  cover  vessels  running  the  blockade 
frequently  run  ashore.  G T BEAUBEGARD. 


Private.]  Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  24,  1863. 

Hon.  J.  L.  Orr,  G.  8.  Senator , Richmond , Va.  : 

Dear  Colonel:  Your  letter  of  the  4th  instant  has  been  received,* 
but  the  events  of  the  7th  instant  have  prevented  me  from  answering  it 
sooner ; even  now  I have  time  ooly  for  a few  hasty  remarks. 

I feel  indeed  highly  flattered  by  the  confidence  shown  in  me  by  the 
Senate  in  this  affair  relative  to  the  increase,  &c.,  of  the  artdlery  force 
here.  You  may  well  imagine  my  surprise  at  the  position  assumed  in 


Not  found. 


910 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

tlie  debate  by  Senator  Phelan,  who  probably  takes  me  for  a Cromwell 
in  embryo!  Let  his  slumbers  be  sound.  I aim  at  but  one  thino-  the 
success  of  our  cause,  and  whoever  can  accomplish  that  shall  receive  mv 
hearty  support.  The  Senator’s  suspicion  of  antagonism  to  the  Presi- 
dent on  my  part  is  unfounded.  I had  no  such  idea,  and  no  expectation 
that  the  President  would  object  in  the  matter.  I had  repeatedly  applied 
to  the  War  Department  for  additional  artillery  force  as  essential  to  man 
the  works  here,  and  I was  answered  that  no  new  companies  could  be 
raised,  as  by  the  law  all  men  subject  to  conscription  must  be  absorbed 
by  organizations  in  existence  (April  16, 1862),  a correct  decision  I found 
on  examination.  I then  sought  to  obtain  the  authority  by  the  law  in 
question,  for  the  War  Department  has  invariably  expressed  a disposi- 
tion to  authorize  the  companies  but  for  the  legal  restriction.  At  first 
it  was  proposed  to  draw  up  a bill  to  authorize  a battalion  of  four  or  six 
companies,  but  on  reflection  it  was  thought  more  economical  (saving  a 
field  officer)  and  as  best  calculated  to  be  speedily  carried  out  by  adding 
two  companies  each  to  the  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery  and 
J ' irst  South  Carolina  Infantry,  which  last  was,  had  been  doing,  and  (from 
the  necessities  of  the  service)  must  continue  artillery  service.  It  was 
for  this  service  also  that  I desired  to  have  the  designation  of  the  regi- 
ment made  de  jure , to  accord  with  its  de  facto  condition,  which  I pre- 
sume had  not  been  done  by  the  War  Department  solely  for  a want  of 
power,  as  I could  think  of  no  other  objection  to  such  a measure  on  its 
part.  There  are  no  less  than  three  First  Regiments  of  South  Carolina 
troops  in  sight  of  Charleston,  all  on  artillery  duty  (Rhett’s,  Butler’s, 
anCl ATFre(^nck’s)>  the  result  being  much  confusion.  Moreover,  there  is 
another  First  Regiment  (Gregg’s  old  regiment)  in  Virginia. 

Please  communicate  this  to  Senator  Phelan,  who  may  be  assured  I 

des*re.  interfere  with  the  President’s  prerogatives,  as  he 

^Ci?nvin?ed  were  he  to  know  me  better.  I am  happy  to  find 
that  Wigfall  is  the  preux  chevalier  I always  took  him  to  be.  Give 
him  my  kind  thanks.  In  the  matter  of  Guerin,  let  me  say  that  the 
charges  were  forwarded  long  ago;  that  is,  as  soon  as  it  became  apparent 
the  President  had  determined  to  revise  the  matter  himself.  Meantime 
Guerm  had  been  only  in  mere  nominal  arrest.  He  was  never  disturbed 
m the  least  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  simply  because  I wished  to 
avoid  disturbance  with  Northrop  (his  relative  by  marriage)  and  with  j 
the  President.  Rarely  are  charges  ever  preferred  in  the  field,  or  when 
expecting  battle,  within  the  eight  days  prescribed  in  the  Articles  of 
War.  btan  officers  have  been  kept  in  arrest  or  off  duty  under  such  cir- 
cumstances for  many  months  in  the  regular  service,  and  Mr.  Seddon  ■ 
has  been  imposed  on,  he  may  rest  assured.  The  charges  against  Guerin 
are  as  yet  unacted  on.  It  is  even  said  by  his  friends  that  they  have  ] 
been  disapproved.  The  charges  are  not  trivial  or  frivolous,  and  could 
have  been  greatly  multiplied  under  each  head.  Besides,  Mr.  Seddon 
has  read  and  admitted  the  force  of  my  letter  showing  Guerin’s  untruth- 
ful conduct  in  relation  to  arrangements  about  hides.  He  will  not  say 
^ at  my  allegations  are  not  sustained,  and  yet  Guerin  remains  on  duty,  j 
lhe  fact  is  the  subsistence  department  here  (as  I fear  elsewhere)  is*a 
nest  of  corruption ; agents  are  getting  rich  with  impunity  under  my  very  j 
nose,  for  I cannot  reach  them.  Guerin’s  weakness  is  a gold  mine  to 

them.  I he  course  of  the  Government  towards  him  emboldens  them.  I 

™>t  personally  who  tries  my  delinquent  officers.  All  that  I ask  is 
tnat  the  guilty  shall  be  punished  and  the  worthless  turned  adrift.  I 
have  not  time,  if  I were  so  disposed,  to  favor  friends  or  persecute  ene-  ] 
mies.  My  whole  body  and  soul  are  in  this  contest,  which  is  one  of  life  j 


911 


Chai*.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

and  death  to  a nation  of  which  I,  my  family,  and  friends  form  a part, 
I believe  and  hope  that  my  love  of  country  is  unsullied  by  selfish  or  per- 
sonal consideration.  All  that  I had  or  owned,  my  wife  and  daughter, 
are  all  in  the  hands  of  an  unscrupulous  enemy.  When  I parted  from 
my  family  I expected  to  have  been  absent  only  two  weeks,  but  we  have 
now  been  separated  over  two  years.  Mrs.  Beauregard,  all  this  while, 
has  been  almost  on  the  point  of  death.  I do  not  say  this  to  praise  my- 
self, but  to  show  what  I have  at  stake  in  this  contest.  All  I ask  is  not 
to  be  cramped,  decried,  or  unnecessarily  driven  into  opposition  to  the 
Government,  where  a united  front  and  the  concentrated  efforts  of  all 
are  absolutely  required  to  withstand  the  gigantic  storm  which  threatens 
to  engulf  us  at  any  moment.  I am  well  aware  that  like  others  I have 
my  faults  and  my  deficiencies,  but,  thank  God,  selfishness"  and  ambition 
form  no  part  of  my  nature.  ^ . 

In  conclusion,  I can  but  express  my  thanks  to  the  Hon.  Secretary  ot 
War  for  his  good  intentions  to  assist  us  here.  I feel  convinced  that,  so 
far  as  he  is  concerned,  we  can  rely  upon  him.  I am  aware  also  that  his 
means  of  assistance  are  unfortunately  quite  limited.  But  the  essence 
of  war  after  all  is  to  know  what  to  give  up  in  time  to  save  or  gain  more 
than  we  can  lose,  and  always  to  do  quickly  what  has  to  be  done.  Not 
having  time  to  write  in  a legible  hand,  my  brother  has  done  so  for  me. 
I send  you  a copy  of  the  President’s  instructions  to  Colonel  Chesnut 

when  the  latter  came  here  last  month.  It  is  a . You  can  fill  up 

the  blank  yourself. 

With  kind  regards  to  Wigfall  and  other  friends,  I remain,  yours,  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

p.  s. The  truth  is  just  coming  out  in  the  Yankee  papers  relative  to 

the  battle  of  the  7th  instant.  It  seems  that  we  nearly  exterminated  the 
tribe  of  monitors  in  two  and  one-half  hours.  u What  a fall  was  there, 
my  countrymen ! ” 


Headquarters  State  of  South  Carolina, 

Columbia , April  24,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard  : 

Dear  Sir:  Major  Echols’  report  of  20th  instant,  upon  the  subject  of 
slave  labor,  with  your  indorsement  of  the  21st,  has  been  received. 

Be  assured  I have  been  keenly  alive  to  the  importance  of  this  labor 
from  the  first  moment,  which  interest  was  enhanced  by  my  recent  visit 
to  Morris  Island.  But  the  act  of  the  Legislature,  you  will  perceive  on 
looking  at  it,  is  intended  to  prevent  my  furnishing  the  labor  otherwise 
than  under  the  act  and  to  do  away  with  impressments.  In  order  to 
approximate  more  nearly  the  amount  called  for,  namely,  3,000,  I have 
directed  Colonel  Shannon  to  call  for  two  divisions,  the  First  and  Fourth, 
for  the  month  of  May,  which  I hope  will  enable  the  engineers  to  com- 
plete the  works,  as  the  cultivation  of  the  provision  crop  at  this  juncture 
is  growing  daily  more  important  and  there  is  great  unwillingness  on 
the  part  of  the  planters  to  send  their  hands  to  the  coast  at  this  particu- 
lar period.  I called  to  see  you  when  in  Charleston,  and  hoped  to  have 
an  opportunity  to  explain  to  you  that  this  unwillingness  had  been  oc- 
casioned heretofore  in  no  small  degree  by  the  detention  of  the  negroes 
beyond  their  time,  their  being  started  home  with  an  insufficient  supply 
of  rations,  rendered  insufficient  frequently  from  detentions  on  the  road, 


912 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


and  from  other  causes  of  complaint.  I shall  however  to  the  extent  of 
the  power  conferred  upon  me  furnish  you  every  hand  I possibly  can. 

Inclosed  I send  you  copies  of  Colonel  Shannon’s  report  and  of  a letter 
from  Senator  Mazyck  on  this  subject. 

Yours,  very  respectfully  and  truly. 

M.  L.  BONHAM. 


[Inclosures.] 

Camden,  S.  C.,  April  11,  1863. 

His  Excellency  M.  L.  Bonham, 

Governor  and  Commander -in-  Chief : 

Governor  : In  obedience  to  the  directions  of  the  statute  under  which 
I hold  my  appointment  I herewith  respectfully  submit  my  report,  cov- 
ering the  time  embraced  within  the  first  requisition  of  labor  for  coast 
defense  under  the  statute  above  referred  to. 

The  census  and  other  statistical  information  demonstrated  that  there 
was  a sufficiency  of  slave  labor  within  this  division  (the  Eastern  No. 
2),  which  had  hitherto  done  nothing  toward  our  defenses,  to  have  filled 
the  requisition.  Yet  the  result  more  than  justified  the  apprehension 
which  I entertained  and  which  Your  Excellency  anxiously  shared.  Out 
of  this  large  extent  of  country  only  about  380  slaves  were  forwarded  in 
direct  answer  to  the  call. 

To  attribute  this  result  to  the  want  of  patriotism  in  our  people  or  to 
the  existence  of  a parsimonious  and  niggardly  spirit  would  be  very 
unjust;  that  with  too  many  the  prevalent  spirit  of  patriotism  is  want- 
ing and  the  demon  of  selfish  and  grasping  avarice  ever  present,  their 
household  god,  with  shame  we  must  acknowledge  and  unfortunately 
have  too  many  proofs  beyond  this  instance  ; but  it  is  but  justice  to  the 
slaveholders  of  the  State  to  say  that  many  have  promptly  answered 
every  call,  and  would  cheerfully  have  responded  to  this  but  that  they 
were  excluded  by  the  terms  of  the  call  issued  in  obedience  to  the  statute; 
they  had  hitherto  done  their  duty.  Others  conceived  mistakenly,  though 
innocently,  that  they  did  their  duty  by  paying  their  fines.  Many  felt, 
and  justly  so,  that  the  Confederate  authorities  had  hitherto  trifled  with 
them  by  calling  for  slaves  for  thirty  days,  keeping  them  for  ninety;  by 
retaining  their  tools  and  implements,  which  they  could  not  resupply ; by 
sending  their  negroes  home  without  or  with  insufficient  rations,  and  by 
various  other  annoyances,  all  of  which  had  been  aggravated,  perhaps 
exaggerated,  by  the  political  discussions  and  excitement  on  the  subject 
during  the  last  autumn  and  fall.  For  those  who  withheld  their  negroes 
from  a mere  selfish  calculation  it  is  scarcely  proper  here  for  me  to  ex- 
press my  sentiments.  I could  with  difficulty  find  decorous  language  for 
that  purpose. 

The  labor,  though  not  adequate  to  the  requisition,  seems  to  have  been 
advantageously  employed,  and  I take  pleasure  in  stating  that  the  treat- 
ment and  care  of  the  negroes  is  far  superior  to  that  which  the  general 
opinion  of  the  State  supposed  to  exist  and  which  may  have  existed. 
Rations  are  as  regularly  and  as  fully  issued  to  them  as  to  our  noble 
soldiers;  they  are  as  well  housed  and  protected  as  (ay,  far  better  than 
most  of)  our  gallant  sons  and  brothers  who  are  in  the  field,  while  com- 
fortable hospitals  and  skillful  surgeons  await  them  in  case  of  sickness, 
and  after  thorough  inquiry  I have  not  heard  of  the  first  case  of  maltreat- 
ment. The  health  of  the  negroes  has  been  exceedingly  good;  not  a 
single  death  has  occurred  during  the  period  embraced  within  this  re- 


Chap.  XXVI.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


913 


port,  and  only  two  casualties,  one  a slave  of  Mrs.  Mouzou,  of  Williams- 
burg district,  bad  bis  leg  fractured  by  tbe  explosion  of  a shell  which 
was  improperly  lying  about  their  camp,  and  a slave  of  Mr.  Dinant,  of 
Sumter,  was  injured  by  the  falling  of  brick  in  Fort  Sumter.  The  first 
had  pretty  well  recovered  and  gone  home;  the  other  was  only  injured 
the  day  of  the  bombardment  and  could  not  be  removed,  though  he  was 
doing  well  and  there  was  no  fracture. 

I found  some  difficulty  in  having  the  negroes  discharged  at  the  expi- 
ration of  the  thirty  days".  The  exciting  rush  of  events  by  which  we  were 
all  surrounded  furnished  some  excuse  for  this,  but  I persisted  and  suc- 
ceeded; otherwise  I should  have  resigned  my  office  and  made  public  the 
jeasons,  as  I cannot  consent  to  be  connected  with  the  scheme  unless 
good  faith  is  preserved  toward  those  who  look  to  me  to  protect  their  in- 
terests. I have  further  to  add  that  the  commissary  department  has  been 
hitherto  careless  in  issuing  rations  to  discharged  laborers.  I hope  that 
this  difficulty  will  not  again  occur,  as  I have  pointedly  called  the  atten- 
tion of  the  authorities  to  that  subject  and  have  received  satisfactory 
assurances,  and  thus  far  since  then  a full  compliance. 

I feel  that  I would  not  have  discharged  my  whole  duty  unless  I called 
Your  Excellency’s  attention  to  the  fact  that  delays,  annoyandfes,  and  im- 
perfections must  ever  attend  this  scheme,  though  I hope  that  the  main 
results  will  be  accomplished;  the  working  of  the  details  requires  the 
co-operation  of  the  State  and  Confederate  authorities.  While  I am  in 
charge  it  is  my  specialty,  and  I am  expected  to  be  ready  at  all  points; 
but  it  is  not  the  specialty  of  those  with  whom  I must  co- operate.  For 
instance,  the  assessment  of  the  negroes  is  an  important  part  of  my  duty, 
yet  I have  only  to  certify  the  assessment  according  to  the  directions  of 
the  statute;  still  in  its  workings  I find  that  I have  to  select  an  assessor 
for  the  owners,  hunt  one  up  for  the  Confederacy,  and  fill  up  all  the  as- 
sessments myself.  So  with  the  transportation  department,  with  which 
under  the  law  I have  nothing  to  do ; and  as  to  agents  and  sub-agents, 
the  compensation  allowed  by  the  statute  is  so  meager  that  I am  forced 
to  rely  upon  Confederate  agents  and  am  subject  to  disappointment  at 
the  most  critical  moment. 

The  supply  from  Division  No.  3,  just  put  into  the  field,  was  very  mea- 
ger— only  about  370;  a few  more  will  be  added  by  hired  substitutes, 
with  which  I have  directly  nothing  to  do.  The  number  was  diminished 
to  some  extent  by  the  attack  on  Charleston,  and  further  by  the  fact  that 
the  Confederate  authorities  did  not  have  their  agents  on  the  Columbia 
Branch  Railroad  to  receive  the  negroes,  though  they  had  expressly  stipu- 
lated to  do  so. 

I have  made  every  arrangement  to  remove  the  negroes  in  case  of  there 
being  any  danger,  so  far  as  my  authority  extends.  I have  an  agent  on 
the  ground  all  the  time,  and" I am  to  be  telegraphed  the  moment  an 
attack  is  made,  and  will  hasten  to  the  spot.  The  negroes  on  James 
Island  and  on  the  main-land  can  be  very  easily  removed — may  be  said 
to  be  in  no  danger,  but  those  employed  on  Morris  Island,  Fort  Sumter, 
&c.,  must  necessarily  share  the  fate  of  those  noiuts;  for  an  attack  on 
either  of  those  points  cannot  be  anticipated  in  time  to  avoid  the  risks 
of  the  attack  without  dispensing  with  the  labor,  which  is  most  impor- 
tant; while  the  limited  facilities  for  transportation  renders  their  removal 
doubtful  and  difficult.  I mention  these  facts  only  to  record  in  advance 
my  judgment  in  this  matter,  not  that  I or  any  slave-owner  could  with 
propriety  object  to  this  or  any  other  necessary  expense.  The  labor  is 

58  r r — yoL  xiy 


914  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


wanted  at  these  joints,  and  any  risk  is  a necessary  incident  of  our  de- 
fense. 

Most  truly  and  respectfully,  Your  Excellency’s  obedient  servant, 

WM.  M.  SHANNON, 

Agent  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina , Ac. 

South  Santee,  April  21, 1863. 


His  Excellency  M.  L.  Bonham,  Governor , Ac.  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  While  I was  in  Charleston,  on  my  way  home  from 
Columbia,  I met  my  neighbor,  Dr.  A.  E.  Gadsden,  who  told  me  that 
some  7 or  8 negroes  that  he  had  had  there  for  some  months  in  the  public 
service  had  been  without  employment  for  a week  or  ten  days  because 
it  was  said  there  was  nothing  for  them  to  do,  and  were  at  length  dis- 
charged and  sent  home  to  him,  yet  notwithstanding  this  a notice  is  pub- 
lished that  negroes  will  be  called  for  from  this  district  early  in  May. 
The  fact  stated  by  Dr.  Gadsden  will  be  generally  known  in  this  part 
of  the  country,  and  cannot  fail  to  make  the  impression  that  the  labor 
is  not  re^ly  wanted,  aud  that  the  planters  are  harassed  and  their 
business  interrupted  for  nothing.  Most  of  the  negroes  on  this  river 
have  been  removed.  A few  of  us,  however,  have  kept  ours  at  home,  and 
are  endeavoring  to  plant  a crop,  which  we  cannot  do  if  our  negroes  are 
taken  away  in  May.  In  the  course  of  the  winter  a good  many  of  them 
were  employed  in  constructing  a battery  on  North  Santee,  which  has 
been  a long  time  finished,  but  not  a single  gun  has  yet  been  mounted 
on  it,  and  it  does  not  seem  that  any  will  be,  so  that  this,  like  all  the 
rest  of  our  work,  is  wasted.  Under  these  circumstances  I do  not  think 
it  likely  that  any  negroes  will  be  obtained  here.  The  facts  I have  stated 
show  that  there  must  be  some  gross  mismanagement  on  the  part  of  the 
military  authorities.  I do  not  know  that  you  can  do  anything  to  remedy 
the  evil,  but  I think  it  right  to  bring  it  to  your  notice,  as  you  may  not 
otherwise  be  aware  of  it. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours,  &c., 

A.  MAZYCK. 


Executive  Department, 
Milledgeville , Ga .,  April  24,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga. : 

Dear  Sir:  1 received  your  requisition  for  1,500  negroes  to  labor 
on  the  additional  works  “proJected  for  the  defenses  of  Savannah  for  a 
period  of  not  less  than  ninety  days”  only  a day  or  two  before  the  late 
meeting  of  the  General  Assembly,  and  submitted  the  question  for  the 
deliberation  of  the  representatives  of  the  people  of  this  State.  Soon 
after  the  commencement  of  the  session  the  act  of  Congress  entitled 
“ An  act  to  authorize  and  regulate  the  impressment  of  private  property 
for  the  use  of  the  Army  and  other  purposes”  was  published  in  the 
newspapers. 

The  ninth  section  of  this  act  declares : 

Where  slaves  are  impressed  by  the  Confederate  Government  to  labor  on  fortifica- 
tions or  other  public  works  the  impressment  shall  be  made  according  to  the  rules  and 
regulations  prescribed  in  the  laws  of  the  States  where  they  are  impressed ; and  m the 


915 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


absence  of  such  laws  in  accordance  with  such  rules  and  regulations  not  inconsistent 
with  the  provisions  of  this  act  as  the  Secretary  of  War  shall  from  time  to  time  pre- 
scribe : Provided,  That  no  impressment  of  slaves  shall  be  made  when  they  can  be  hired 
or  procured  by  the  consent  of  the  owner  or  agent 


Section  10  is  in  these  words : 

That  previous  to  the  first  day  of  December  next  no  slave  laboring  on  a farm  or 
plantation  exclusively  devoted  to  the  production  of  grain  and  provisions  shall  be 
taken  for  the  public  use  without  the  consent  of  the  owner,  except  in  case  of  urgent 
necessity. 

After  the  appearance  of  this  act  of  Congress  the  opinions  of  the 
members  of  the  General  Assembly,  so  far  as  I could  learn  them,  were 
that  Congress  had  conferred  upon  the  Confederate  officers  full  and 
ample  power  over  this  question,  and  that  it  was  their  duty  to  make 
their  own  impressments,  and  not  to  call  upon  the  State  officers  to  assume 
this  task,  which  properly  belongs  to  the  Confederate  officers.  It  was 
believed  that  the  Confederate  generals  in  command  had  no  more  right 
to  call  on  the  State  government  to  impress  negroes  for  them  than  they 
had  to  call  on  State  officers  to  impress  provisions,  forage,  or  any  other 
thing  necessary  for  the  Army,  as  the  act  of  Congress  makes  the  one  as 
much  the  duty  of  Confederate  officers  as  the  other.  It  was  also  believed 
that  the  negroes  now  called  for  could  not  be  collected  in  time  to  erect 
new  works  which  might  be  completed  and  ready  for  use  before  the  time 
when  the  enemy  will  be  forced  by  the  heat  of  the  climate  to  abandon 
further  offensive  operations  against  Savannah  this  spring  r and  if  it 
were  the  purpose  of  the  general  making  the  call  to  take  the  negroes 
out  of  the  plantations,  where  they  are  now  busy  in  cultivation  of  the 
grain  and  provision  crops,  to  erect  fortifications  for  use  next  winter,  it 
was  believed  that  such  an  act  would  be  in  direct  violation  of  the  10th 
section  of  the  act  of  Congress  above  referred  to,  which  forbids  such 
taking  without  the  consent  of  the  owner  except  in  case  of  urgent  neces- 
sity, which  in  that  case  could  not  be  justly  said  to  exist.  If  we  are  to 
continue  the  war  successfully  it  is  of  the  most  vital  importance  that 
our  fields  shall  be  cultivated  and  provisions  made  for  the  Army  and  the 
people  at  home,  including  the  families  of  our  brave  soldiers.  It  is  now 
the  time  of  greatest  necessity  for  labor  in  the  fields.  A hand  taken 
from  the  plantation  for  the  next  two  or  three  months  had  as  well 
be  taken  for  the  whole  year,  as  he  can  make  no  crop  unless  he  works 
now. 

In  addition  to  the  above  considerations,  it  was  the  opinion  of  mem- 
bers that  the  troops  now  at  Savannah  will  cheerfully  and  promptly  per- 
form the  work  if  the  Government  will  pay  them,  in  addition  to  then- 
present  wages,  the  hire,  clothing,  money,  and  rations  which  are  paid  to 
owners  for  the  use  of  their  slaves.  This  would  add  about  $.30  per  month 
to  the  pay  of  each  soldier  who  will  labor  on  the  fortifications  when 
not  otherwise  employed.  It  was  not  doubted  if  this  offer  were  made 
them  that  they  would  gladly  undertake  the  work  and  soon  complete  it. 
This,  if  satisfactory  to  the  troops,  would  certainly  be  better  for  the 
country,  as  it  would  leave  the  slaves  at  home  to  make  bread  for  the 
soldiers  and  their  families,  and  would  enable  the  troops  to  send  back  the 
additional  sum  of  $30  a month  to  each  of  their  families.  This  would 
also  be  a saving  to  the  Government  of  the  heavy  expense  of  impressing 
and  collecting  the  negroes,  including  transportation,  pay  of  agents,  and 
compensation  to  owners  for  the  loss  of  those  who  might  die  in  service 
or  escape  to  the  enemy,  which  taken  together  is  a large  item  of  ex- 
pense, Indeed,  it  is  believed  the  Government  could  afford  to  pay  $10 


916 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 


per  month  to  each  soldier  who  will  work  on  the  fortifications  in  addi- 
tion to  the  wages  he  now  gets,  and  the  work  would  not  then  cost  as  much 
as  it  costs  to  have  it  done  by  negro  labor,  including  all  the  incidental 
expenses. 

The  State  troops  last  year  built  the  line  of  fortifications  constructed 
by  order  of  General  Jackson,  including  Fort  Boggs,  with  the  exception 
probably  of  the  masonry,  without  any  additional  compensation  and 
without  complaint.  The  troops  in  Virginia  and  Tennessee  have  gener- 
ally built  the  fortifications  ordered  by  our  geuerals  in  the  same  way. 

For  these  and  other  considerations  the  General  Assembly,  after  mature 
consideration,  neglected  to  instruct  or  advise  me  to  impress  the  negroes 
which  you  desire,  believing,  if  you  should  decide  that  the  necessity  is  so 
urgent  as  to  justify  it  under  the  act  of  Congress,  you  then  have  ample 
power  to  impress  all  you  may  need.  It  this  should  be  your  decision, 
and  you  should  determine  to  take  the  hands  from  the  plantations  at  this 
season  of  the  year,  when  their  labor  there  is  so  important  in  the  pro- 
duction of  provisions,  you  will  meet  with  no  opposition  from  the  State 
authorities,  and  I trust  our  people  will  yield  a ready  acquiescence  in 
your  decision. 

The  further  consideration  doubtless  had  its  effect  upon  the  Legisla- 
ture, that  when  the  negroes  are  impressed  by  the  State  authorities  and 
turned  over  to  the  Confederate  officers  the  owners  look  to  the  State  for 
their  proper  treatment  and  support,  when  the  State  has  no  direct  con- 
trol over  them.  If  overseers  or  agents  are  sent  with  the  negroes  by 
State  authority  they  cannot  have  the  control  of  the  hands,  as  they  must 
be  worked  under  the  direction  of  Confederate  officers,  and  there  is  a lack 
of  system  and  a divided  responsibility,  which  cannot  result  beneficially 
to  the  slave  or  the  public  service.  If  the  impressment  is  made  by  the 
Confederate  officer,  who  is  the  judge  of  the  necessity  and  responsible 
to  an  enlightened  public  opinion  for  the  correctness  of  his  judgment, 
the  power  is  less  likely  to  be  abused,  and  there  will  be  more  system 
and  energy  in  the  prosecution  of  the  work  and  better  attention  given 
to  the  negroes. 

While  I trust  you  may  determine  to  hire  the  troops  to  do  the  work 
and  leave  the  present  productive  labor  of  the  State  to  make  provisions, 
without  which  our  success  is  impossible,  I shall  be  content  to  abide  your 
decision,  as  I have  the  fullest  confidence  in  your  ability  and  patriotism, 
and  hope  if  you  make  the  impressment  it  will  be  so  conducted  as  to  bear 
as  lightly  as  possible  upon  the  agricultural  interests  of  the  State. 

In  conclusion,  permit  me  to  add  that  the  resolutions  of  the  General 
Assembly  under  which  the  late  requisition  was  met  and  filled  were 
predicated  upon  the  fact  that  you  then  had  no  power  to  impress  or 
hold  the  slaves.  This  difficulty  having  been  removed,  and  the  power 
having  been  conferred  by  the  act  of  Congress,  I do  not  feel  authorized 
further  to  act  under  said  resolution. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  E.  BBQWN. 


91? 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — -CONFEDERATE. 


Approximate  statement  of  rifled  guns  in  South  Carolina , Georgia,  atid  Florida. 


Name  of  gun. 


42*poiiiider 

32-pounder 

24 -pounder 

24-pounder 

12-pounder 

12-pounder 

12-pounder  ... 
] 2-pounder. . . . 

12-pounder 

30-pounder 

20-ponnder 

20-po  under. 
10-pounder  ... 

6-pounder 

6-pounder 

6-pounder.  . . 

6-pounder 

6-pounder 


18-pounder. 


Character  of  gun. 


Brooke,  banded 

Brooke,  double  banded 

Bided,  banded 

Bided,  banded 

Bided  

Blakely 

Bided  - 

Bided,  banded 

Bided,  bronze 

Old  English  siege,  rided,  banded 

Old  English  siege,  rided,  not  banded 

Parrott 

Parrott  

Parrott  (Cameron) 

Parrott 

Bided,  bronze ---  • 

Ii  on,  banded 

Blakely 

Blakely 

Blakely 

W rough t-iron,  banded 

Whitworth 

Steel 

Wiard 

Bided 


Total 


p 

p 

fcc 

*© 

u 

(J 

% 

& 

l Caliber  of  guns. 

I 

Weight  of  pro- 

jectile. 

3 

7 

119  pounds. 

1 

6.40 

80  pounds. 

10 

Established. 

25 

Established. 

14 

Light. 

3 

24  pounds. 

4 

Light. 

3 

24  pounds. 

4 

4.  62 

18  pounds. 

1 

24  pounds. 

4 

Light. 

1 

30  "pounds. 

1 

3.  67 

20  pounds. 

3 

■i  9 

•’IB 

Light. 

5 

3 

10  pounds. 

11 

3.81 

Light, 

2 

3.67 

10  pounds. 

6 

3.  50 

12  pounds. 

4 

<2. 
h 4 

4 

3J 

1 

1 

3j9b 

14  pounds. 

1 

2 

3 

10  pounds. 

2 

2i6b 

8 pounds. 

1 

26  pounds. 

113 

Remarks  — Guns  per  T.  D.  Wagner  have  been  sent  back  to  arsenal ; those  per  General  Beauregard 
although  ordered,  are  not  assigned. 

Office  of  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  April  24,  1863. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , April  25,  18G3. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

I regret  to  be  unable  to  spare  the  guns  even  for  the  object  mentioned. 
The  claims  of  Wilmington  and  the  Mississippi  are  now  paramount. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  April  25, 1863. 

Col.  John  Forsyth,  Mobile , Ala.: 

Dear  Colonel  : Your  favor  of  the  21st  instant  has  just  been  re- 
ceived. I thank  you  for  your  congratulations  relative  to  the  battle  of 
the  7th  instant  with  the  Yankee  monitors.  Now  that  we  have  broken 
the  ice  I hope  others  will  follow  our  example.  1 place  great  reliance, 
however,  on  three  things — heavy  guns,  Bains  torpedoes,  and,  in  dee]) 
water,  rope  obstructions.  I have  also  introduced  here  Let  ’s  (one  of  my 
officers)  spar  torpedoes,  attached  to  row-boats,  which  ought  to  be  used 
in  flotillas  on  all  our  large  rivers.  I hope  in  a few  days  to  give  a prac- 
tical illustration  of  their  advantages  against  monitors,  gunboats,  &c. 
I have  also  a torpedo  ram  (a  steamer)  under  construction,  which  requires 


918 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


only  its  iron  plating  to  be  ready  to  spread  terror  in  the  enemy’s  blockading 
fleet.  Unfortunately  I cannot  get  the  War  and  Navy  Departments  to 
furnish  me  with  the  necessary  iron  plating.  I have  written  and  tele- 
graphed on  the  subject  until  my  hand  is  hoarse.  Why  will  not  those 
in  authority  do  promptly  what  should  be  done  ? This  reflection  I apply 
also  to  myself.  I can  well  understand  your  high  appreciation  of  your 
son’s  good  qualities.  I hope  ere  long  to  be  able  to  apply  for  his  services 
on  my  general  staff. 

I am  happy  to  hear  that  Mobile  is  now  so  well  protected,  but  I hope 
her  defenses  will  never  be  put  to  the  test. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  92.  f Charleston , S.  (7.,  April  26,  1863. 

******* 

YI.  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans,  with  his  brigade,  will  for  the  present 
report  to  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  who  will  station  the  same. 

******* 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  April  27,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Comdg.  First  Military  District  South  Carolina: 

General  : The  commanding  general  directs  that  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G. 
Evans,  with  his  brigade,  occupy  the  same  position  as  that  held  by  the 
command  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker,  Brigadier-General  Evans 
for  the  present  commanding  the  Sub-District  of  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish 
from  Wappoo  Cut.  His  brigade  will  act  as  a movable  column  for  the 
support  of  other  districts.  Brigadier-General  Gist’s  sub-district  will 
be  James  Island  to  Wappoo  Cut. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  First  Military  District, 

v Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  168.  ) Charleston , April  27,  1863. 

******* 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans  will,  upon  his  arrival  in  Saint  Andrew’s 
Parish  with  his  brigade,  assume  command  of  that  parish  north  and 
west  of  Wappoo  Cut,  reporting  directly  to  these  headquarters.  Briga- 
dier-General Gist  will  furnish  Brigadier  General  Evans  with  the  police 
and  guard  regulations  now  in  existence  in  that  parish,  which  will  still 
remain  in  force. 

******* 

By  command  of  Brigadier- General  Ripley  : 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


CHAV.  XXVI.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  !)19 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  28,  1863. 

JAMES  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , V a. : 

Reported  yesterday  afternoon  thirty  steamers  and  sailing  vessels  in 
Edisto,  with  six  having  troops  on  board,  supposed  about  3,000  men  , 
five  monitors  still  there  and  one  in  Port  Royal.  ^ beaURBGARD. 


(Same  to  Messrs.  Orr,  Barnwell,  and  Miles.) 


Signal  Office, 
Charleston , S.  0.,  April  28,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

GENERAL : In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  85  from  headquarters 
of  this  department,  I have  visited  the  Districts  of  East  and  Middle 
Florida,  examined  the  former  with  a view  to  establishing  signal  te- 
graphs  there,  and  inspected  the  lines  already  established  in  the  latter, 
and  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  my  proceed- 

1UMY<fl°rst  attention  being  directed  to  East  Florida  I had  1 

of  an  interview  with  General  Finegan,  commanding  there,  whose  liead- 

nnarters  are  at  Lake  City.  I learned  that  he  had  already  addressed  a 

letter  to  you,  dated  17th  April,  1863  requesting  you  to  send  taw 

nal  officer.  His  desire  is  to  have  a line  of  signals  fiom  the  moutn  ot 
Saint  John’s  River  to  Jacksonville,  where  he  is  about  establishing  a 
battery  to  contest  the  possession  of  the  river  with  the  enemy,  and 
which  he  thinks  will  be  very  serviceable  in  keeping  him  informed  of 
the  numbers  and  movements  of  the  blockaders  oft  that  bar.  He  expects 
soon  to  have  the  magnetic  telegraph  extended  as  far  east  as  Jackson- 
ville, and  thus,  with  the  aid  of  signals,  will  be  able  to  receive  immediate 
intelligence  from  the  bar.  The  distance  from  J acksonville  to  the  bar  is 
about  20  miles,  the  river  very  broad  all  the  way,  and  very  convenient 
therefore  Tor  signal  lines  along  the  banks  General  Fmegan  also  ^ 

sires  if  possible,  a signal  line  extending  from  mouth  of  bamt  J ohn  s 
to  mouth  of  Saint  Mary’s,  for  the  better  observation  of  the  enemy  there^ 
and  also  another  line  of  20  miles  on  the  Gulf  coast,  from  Cedar  Ke,^s 
upward  to  mouth  of  the  Suwannee  River.  This  latter  place  I did  not 
examine,  but  learned  enough  of  the  country  there  to 
practicable.  The  proposed  line  from  Saint  Johns  to  Saint  Mary  si 
do  not  think  practicable  on  account  of  the  low  marshy  nature  of  the 
coast  certainly  not  without  building  high  and  expensive  toweis.  The 
two  lines  on  Saint  John’s  River  and  on  the  Gulf  coast  could  y 

established  and  with  little  expense.  The  country  seems  very  healthy 
and  pleasant  about  the  coast.  In  the  interior,  away  from  the  coast  and 
water  courses,  signal  communication  would  be  impracticable  on  ac- 
count Till  dense  forests  and  the  level  country.  Yet  signal-men 
could  be  of  service  there  with  the  wire  telegraphs  if  such  are  put  up. 
respectfully  suggest  that  one  of  the  signal  officers  oi  this  department 
be  ordered  for  duty  to  General  Finegan’s  district.  , 

In  the  Middle  District  of  Florida  I find  Lieutenant  Steadman  m charge 
of  a small  but  well  organized  and  instructed  corps  of  signal  men,  and 
rendering  efficient  service.  His  lines  extend  only  from  baint  Marks 


920  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  tCHAP.  XXVI. 

light  house  to  Tallahassee,  where  it  connects  with  the  wires  of  Gen- 
eral Cobh’s  headquarters,  at  Quincy.  1 had  not  the  honor  of  seeing 
General  Cobb,  he  being  absent  in  Georgia  at  the  time  of  my  visit  to 
Quincy $ but  his  assistant  adjutant-general  spoke  in  complimentary 
terms  of  Lieutenant  Steadman’s  corps,  which  certainly  reflects  credit 
upon  him.  The  great  regard  he  pays  to  economy  and  the  little  expense 
his  lines  have  been  to  the  Government  are  especially  commendable. 
Respectfully  submitted. 

JAMES  ALEXANDER, 

Captain  and  Chief  Signal  Officer , Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla. 


Headquarters  District  of  Middle  Florida, 

Quincy , April  28,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

Dear  Sir  : I venture  to  address  you  this  unofficial  letter  because  I 
desire  to  present  for  your  consideration  in  a manner  more  earnest  than 
formal  certain  matters  connected  with  my  command. 

1st.  If  the  law  will  permit,  I am  extremely  anxious  to  get  the  com- 
missions for  the  field  officers  of  my  new  battalion  and  regiment.  It  will 
greatly  facilitate  the  filling  up  the  companies.  It  is  also  necessary  for 
the  discipline  and  drilling  of  the  companies.  At  present  I have  nine 
companies  in  camp  at  this  place  and  no  field  officer  with  them ; the  re- 
sult is  that  I have  to  act  as  colonel.  My  staff  have  to  superintend  the 
drilling  of  the  companies,  and  I am  now  drilling  the  regiment  in  bat- 
talion drill  myself,  besides  discharging  the  other  detail  duties  of  colonel. 
Under  these  circumstances  I hope  it  is  not  asking  too  much  to  have 
the  field  officers  appointed,  if  nothing  is  in  the  way  but  the  want  of  a 
precedent. 

2d.  In  reference  to  this  particular  regiment,  I hope  no  difficulty  will 
be  found  in  appointing  the  officers  I have  recommended.  I make  this 
remark  because  of  an  intimation  that  Colonel  Weems  would  not  be  ap- 
pointed. When  you  remember  that  I have  announced  that  the  officers 
recommended  by  me  would  be  appointed  you  will  readily  see  that  a re- 
fusal by  the  Department  to  do  so  puts  me  in  a false  position  with  my 
command  and  can  be  attended  with  none  but  bad  results ; besides  I have 
urgent  reasons  for  making  this  recommendation,  and  therefore  press  the 
matter  upon  your  attention.  In  all  these  matters  of  raising  troops  I 
have  had  to  encounter  serious  obstacles,  but  have  yet  been  eminently 
successful,  and  I hope  the  Department  will  strengthen  my  hands  by  en- 
abling me  to  carry  out  my  announcements  where  the  law  will  authorize 
and  justify  it. 

3d.  The  question  of  getting  arms  for  my  men  is  giving  me  great 
trouble.  I have  now  in  the  field  about  1,000  men  without  arms.  I was 
promised  800  guns  from  Columbus  and  Montgomery.  Of  that  number 
300  good  muskets  have  reached  me  from  Montgomery  and  200  carbines 
from  Columbus,  which  have  to  be  sent  back  as  worthless.  This  is  my 
condition,  and  I most  earnestly  beg  to  be  furnished  with  arms.  If  you 
will  permit  me,  1 can  suggest  where  the  arms  can  be  had : at  Macon, 
Ga.,  there  are  1,500  old  muskets  now  being  altered,  and  at  Cook’s  estab- 
lishment, Athens,  Ga.,  there  are  turned  out  for  the  Government  and  sent 
to  Augusta,  Ga.,  200  rifles  a week.  Doubtless  there  are  other  resources 
from  which  I might  be  supplied,  but  I mention  these  because  they  have 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


921 


been  brought  to  my  attention.  Let  me  then  be  supplied  for  the  men 
now  in  the  field  and  for  those  that  I will  soon  have  in  addition.  I will 
only  add  that  the  principal  object  I have  in  writing  this  letter  is  to  get 


arms. 


4th.  I applied  for  bounty  money  for  1,000  men ; it  was  allowed,  but 
only  $25,000  has  been  sent  to  me.  That  has  been  paid  out.  My  promise 
is  made  that  the  men  shall  be  paid  their  bounty  when  mustered  in, 
and  those  we  are  now  getting  are  of  a class  who  need  it,  and  I feel 
anxious  that  they  should  not  be  disappointed.  I would  therefore  ear- 
nestly request  that  the  remaining  $25,000  should  be  sent  forward;  and 
that  an  additional  estimate,  now  being  made,  should  be  allowed  and  for- 
warded to  me  as  soon  as  practicable. 

5th.  I will  get  into  the  service  every  man  in  my  district  if  you  will 
only  enable  me  to  comply  promptly  with  the  inducements  I hold  out  to 
them  and  arm  them  when  mustered  into  the  service.  In  this  connec- 
tion let  me  say  that  it  is  a useless  expense  to  keep  up  the  conscript 
camp  in  this  district  unless  it  is  placed  under  the  absolute  control  of 
the  commanding  officer  of  the  district;  it  is  both  unnecessary  and  em- 
barrassing. I do  hope  and  trust  that  Colonel  Moyers  will  either  be 
placed  under  my  command  or  removed  from  my  district.  An  independ- 
ent military  organization  in  another  command  won’t  do. 

In  writing  this  unofficial  letter  I have  been  governed  by  no  other  feel- 
ing than  an  earnest  desire  to  advance  the  public  service.  I am  fully 
aware  that  matters  of  far  greater  importance  occupy  your  attention; 
yet  I cannot  but  feel  that  the  comparatively  small  interest  confided  to 
my  care  should  receive  all  the  care  and  effort  that  I am  capable  of  mak- 
ing, and  I am  therefore  emboldened  by  your  past  kindness  to  again 
trespass  upon  your  time. 

With  sentiments  of  high  and  sincere  regard,  very  respectfully  and 
truly,  yours,  &c., 

HOWELL  COBB, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  District . 


Headquarters  Fourth  Military  District, 

Georgetown , April  29,  1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain:  I have  just  returned  from  Murray’s  Inlet,  and  find  Special 
Orders,  No.  89,  from  department  headquarters,  dated  April  23, 1863,  in 
which  Major  Emanuel  and  the  four  companies  under  his  command  are 
relieved  from  duty  in  this  district  and  ordered  to  report  to  their  regi- 
ment. I have  ordered  Major  Emanuel  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  to 
move,  but  have  taken  the  responsibility  of  delaying  him  a tew  days 
until  I hear  from  the  commanding  general  after  making  the  following- 
representations  : 

1st.  On  the  morning  of  the  27th,  the  enemy  having  discovered  that 
Murray’s  Inlet  was  a port  of  entry  and  that  there  were  then  in  the  port 
five  schooners  which  had  run  the  blockade,  together  with  a lot  of  cot- 
ton, they  sent  two  of  their  vessels  and  shelled  the  place  all  day,  and  did 
land  a number  of  men  on  a little  island  opposite  and  out  of  reach  of 
our  rifles,  and  burned  one  of  the  vessels.  I have  every  reason  to  sup- 
pose they  will  return  very  soon  to  destroy  the  others.  I therefore  have 
concentrated  all  the  force  (consisting  principally  of  the  Rutledge  Cav- 


922  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

airy)  I can  spare  from  other  points,  with  the  view  of  resisting  their 
landing.  | 

2d.  If  these  companies  are  taken  away,  and  their  places  not  supplied, 

1 shall  be  obliged  to  abandon  the  whole  coast  from  Georgetown  to  Little 
River,  as  I will  have  barely  enough  troops  to  man  Battery  White  and 
picket  the  country  in  its  rear 5 as  it  is,  with  the  present  force,  I have 
been  compelled  to*  dismount  one  of  the  two  light  artillery  companies  to 
man  the  guns  in  said  battery.  To  withdraw  the  pickets  from  Wacca- 
maw  Neck  would  be  to  invite  the  enemy  to  come  in  and  take  off  an  im- 
mense quantity  of  grain  now  there,  with  perhaps  all  the  negroes  (num- 
bering on  that  Neck  alone  4,431).  This  estimate  of  number  has  just 
been  made  out  and  is  correct.  Again,  if  we  cannot  protect  that  coast, 
Battery  White  will  be  of  little  use,  as  the  enemy  will  have  open  access 
to  the  whole  surrounding  country.  With  the  knowledge  of  the  above 
facts  I feel  it  due  to  myself,  as  well  as  the  people  of  this  section,  together 
with  the  loss  that  would  be  sustained  by  the  Government,  to  ask  that 
the  commanding  general  would  relieve  these  troops  by  others  before 
his  order  is  carried  into  effect.  Hoping  that  the  facts  stated  will  justify 
my  delay  until  further  orders,  I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Fourth  Military  District. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  May  1,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates’  detention  of  Major 
Emanuel’s  command  under  the  circumstances  is  recommended  for  ap- 
proval. Major  White  has  been  directed  to  expedite  the  movement  of 
his  battalion  as  much  as  possible.  The  32-pounder  guns,  rifled,  have 
been  sent  to  Colonel  Yates,  and  I intend  to  re-enforce  that  officer,  tem- 
porarily at  least,  with  artillery  and  infantry  for  special  service  so  soon 
as  there  has  been  time  for  the  guns  to  arrive  at  Georgetown. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  District  of  East  Florida,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph 

Finegan,  for  April , 1863. 


Troops. 


1st  Special  Battalion  (one  company)  . 
Six  companies  independent  intantry. 

Five  companies  cavalry 

Four  companies  Partisan  Bangers. . . 
Two  companies  artillery 


Grand  total . 


Present  for  duty. 

1 Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
ana  absent. 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

Officers.  | 

_ 1 

Men. 

Officers. 

.8 

s 

Officers. 

1 

n 

c 

3 

2 

51 

56 

88 

16 

244 

292 

430 

19 

413 

477 

550 

13 

1 212 

265 

372 

6 

137 

147 

175 

18 

295 

32 

625 

6 

131 

1,  237 

1,  615 

Chap.  XXVI. 1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


923 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  2,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  S.  B.  Buckner,  Mobile , Ala. : 

Have  just  sent  two  brigades  to  North  Carolina, 
at  present.  May  hereafter. 


Cannot  spare  more 
BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  May  2, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Giraffe  reported  to  have  Whitworth  guns.  Cannot  two  be  spared  me 
for  the  purpose  previously  indicated  » & rj?_  BEAUKEGAED. 

' 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , May  2,  1863. 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston,  S.  C.: 

Advices  show  the  enemy  abandoning  their  attacks  on  the  eastern 
coasts:  are  concentrating  great  forces  on  the  Mississippi.  Send  with 
the  utmost  dispatch  8,000  or  10,000  men,  including  those  ordered  here- 
tofore, to  Tullahoma  to  General  Pemberton’s  relief. 

J.  A.  SEDDUjN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  May  2,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates,  Commanding , &c.: 

Colonel  : Your  letter  of  the  29th  ultimo  * to  Captain  Nance,  assistant 
ad i ut ant- general , has  been  laid  before  the  commanding  general,  who 
approves  of  what  you  have  done  in  connection  with  EmanueFs  cavalry, 
but  desires  it  to  be  impressed  on  your  mind  that  the  preservation  ot 
Murray’s  Inlet  as  a port  of  entry  for  blockade  runners  is  not  regarded 
as  of  very  great  military  importance.  Of  course  you  will  afford  such  pro- 
tection as  your  limited  resources  will  permit,  and  will  be  on  the  alert 
to  punish  the  enemy  in  that  quarter  should  a favorable  opportunity  be 
* opened  to  you;  but  it  is  not  the  wish  of  the  commanding  general  that 
any  points  now  occupied  should  be  left  uncovered  in  order  to  maintain 

the  inlet  in  question  as  a port  of  entry. 

It  is  expected  that  General  Ripley  at  no  distant  day  may  be  able  to 
increase  your  force  and  enhance  the  efficiency  of  your  command. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^^ 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  2, 1863. 

Hon.  W.  Porcher  Miles, 

Member  of  Congress,  Richmond , Va. : 

Dear  Colonel:  Your  several  letters  to  the  29th  ultimo  relative  to 
heavy  guns  and  torpedo  rams  have  been  received.  I regret  the  dim- 


* See  p.  921, 


924 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.XXVL 

culties  about  procuring  the  first  for  the  defense  of  this  harbor,  but  can 
well  understand  the  pressing  wants  of  other  localities.  It  is  au  error, 
however,  to  suppose  that  the  enemy  will  not  make  another  effort  to  take 
Charleston.  I see  by  their  papers  that  they  will  have  at  least  six  moni- 
tors, even  more  formidable  than  their  present  ones,  ready  by  September 
or  October.  They  will  have  about  fifteen  monitors  or  iron -clads  with 
which  to  renew  their  attempt  for  the  destruction  of  this  city.  Once 
before  I could  not  convince  the  War  Department  that  the  late  prepara- 
tions were  intended  specially  for  this  place  and  not  for  Wilmington. 
Why  so  much  opposition  to  believing  what  was  evident  to  all  is  more 
than  1 can  understand.  If  we  cannot  get  the  heavy  guns  can  we  not 
get  torpedo  rams?  I again  repeat,  these,  with  proper  speed,  are  the 
only  true  and  effectual  way  of  fighting  successfully  the  enemy’s  iron- 
clads. Sooner  or  later  we  will  have  to  adopt  them.  Then  why  not  do 
it  at  once?  What  is  the  use  of  spending  so  much  money  and  losing  so 
much  time  in  constructing  iron-clad  gunboats,  which  cannot  go  to  sea 
and  yet  draw  too  much  water  to  navigate  our  shallow  waters?  More- 
over they  are  armed  with  long-range  guns,  and,  to  my  surprise  (as  I am 
informed  by  Captain  Tucker),  those  here  are  so  constructed  that  their 
guns  cannot  get  elevation  for  long  ranges.  In  other  words,  they  cannot 
be  elevated  more  than  5°  or  7Q,  iustead  of  20°,  or  more.  Then  why  not 
put  shorter-range  guns,  but  of  large  caliber,  on  board  of  them?  More- 
over they  ought  to  fight  only  at  close  quarters,  being  shot-proof.  Since 
we  cannot  get  the  iron  plating  to  finish  my  poor  unfortunate  torpedo  ram, 
now  ready  to  be  launched,  why  not  have  some  built  in  England  which 
could  cross  the  seas?  Half  a dozen  for  this  place  and  one  dozen  for  the 
Mississippi  Biver  would  be  worth  to  us  a whole  fleet  and  a large  army. 
New  Orleans  and  the  control  of  the  Mississippi  Valley  would  soon  be  ours 
again.  The  cost  of  these  boats  would  be  much  less  than  a common  iron- 
clad gunboat,  and  the  time  required  to  build  one  would  be  about  half  as 
long.  I will  send  Captain  Lee  iu  a few  days  to  Bichmond  to  lay  before  the 
War  and  Navy  Departments  his  plan  for  a sea  going  torpedo  ram,  which 
I think  ought  to  be  adopted  at  once.  I hope  all  lovers  of  our  cause  and 
country  will  give  him  a helping  hand.  I feel  with  regard  to  the  torpedo 
rams  iu  general  as  Columbus  must  have  felt  when  he  maintained  that 
there  was  a New  World  in  the  West  across  the  Atlantic,  but  could  find 
no  one  to  believe  him  or  assist  him  in  determining  the  fact.  With  two 
dozen  vessels  of  that  description,  possessing  speed  and  little  draught, 
we  could  laugh  our  enemies  to  scorn  and  probably  destroy  all  their 
blockading  fleets.  But  I have  not  time  to  say  more,  except  I remain, 
yours,  very  truly. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  3, 1863. 

[Secretary  of  War:J 

No  orders  sending  troops  to  Tullahoma  have  reached  here. 

Cooke’s  and  Clingman’s  brigades  have  been  returned  to  North  Caro- 
lina. Have  ordered  5,000  infantry  and  two  batteries  to  report  forthwith 
to  General  Pemberton,  leaving  only  10,000  infantry  available  for  whole 
South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  Cannot  send  more  without  abandoning 
Savannah  Bailroad.  Shall  await  further  orders. 

Enemy  still  occupies  in  force  Folly  and  Seabrook  Islands ; also  Port 
Boyal.  To  reduce  this  coinmaud  further  might  become  disastrous. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


925 


Charleston,  May  3,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Walker,  Pocotaligo: 

Send  Twenty-ninth  and  Thirtieth  Regiments  Georgia  Volunteers  back 
to  General  Mercer  as  soon  as  possible.  Make  best  disposition  of  balance 
of  your  command  you  can  for  defense  of  your  district. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  98.  1 Charleston , S.  C.,  May  3,  1863. 

I.  Brigadier- General  Gist  will  be  relieved  from  duty  in  this  depart- 
ment and  be  placed  in  command  of  a brigade  of  four  regiments  or  bat- 
talions of  infantry  and  a field  battery  of  four  guns,  to  be  selected  by 
the  brigadier-general  commanding  the  First  Military  District,  with  which 
he  will  move  with  the  least  delay  practicable  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  re- 
port to  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 

The  effective  total  of  the  brigade  will  not  be  less  than  2,700  bayonets. 
* * * * * * * 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard: 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  May  4,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Enemy’s  fleet  reported  at  Hilton  [Head]  and  Port  Royal  yesterday  is 
four  steam  frigates,  five  wooden  gunboats,  six  ships,  four  barks,  three 
brigs,  five  ocean  steamers,  six  iron  steamers,  five  tugs,  eighty-seven 
transports,  and  fifty-eight  schooners— one  hundred  and  eighty-three  in 
all.  A very  remarkable  increase  since  last  report. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , May  4,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

Have  you  sent  the  5,000  men  and  batteries  mentioned  by  you  ? If 
not,  hurry  them  as  soon  as  possible. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  First  Military  District, 

> Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  182.  ) Charleston , May  4,  1863. 

I.  The  three  comxianies  of  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
Capt.  J.  A.  Cowan  commanding,  now  on  detached  service  in  this  city, 
will  at  once  rejoin  their  regiments  at  Sullivan’s  Island.  The  quarter- 
master’s department  will  furnish  the  necessary  transportation. 

JL  The  two  companies  of  the  Eighth  Georgia  Battalion,  one  stationed 


926 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


at  Battery  [Haig  ?]  and  the  other  at  John’s  Island  Ferry,  will  he  at  once 
relieved  by  Brigadier-General  Evans  and  join  their  battalion. 

# # * # * # # 

Till.  Pursuant  to  Special  Orders,  No.  98,  current  series,  Department 
of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  dated  May  3, 1863,  the  following 
regiments,  battalions,  and  companies  are  relieved  from  duty  in  this 
military  district,  to  proceed,  under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General 
Gist,  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  to  report  to  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton : 
1st.  Forty-sixth  Georgia  Volunteers,  Col.  P.  H.  Colquitt. 

2d.  Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens. 

3d.  Eighth  Georgia  Battalion  Volunteers,  Captain  [Z.  L.]  Watters. 
4th.  Ferguson’s  Light  Battery,  Capt.  T.  B.  Ferguson. 

IX.  In  addition  to  these,  Brigadier- General  Hagood,  commanding 
Second  Military  District,  has  been  ordered  to  place  one  regiment  of 
infantry  at  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Gist,  which  now  awaits 
his  orders. 

# * * # # # * 

By  command  of  Brigadier- General  Biplev: 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  5, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

I send  Gist’s  and  Walker’s  brigades  (best  troops)  and  two  batteries. 
Keep  them  together,  if  practicable,  under  Gist ; they  will  go  by  Selma 
and  Mobile.  Give  all  assistance  possible. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGAED. 


• Charleston,  May  5, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Richmond  ; 

The  two  11-inch  guns  from  wreck  of  Keokuk  have  been  saved  by  Mr. 
LaCoste  and  parties  from  Fort  Sumter  under  Lieutenants  Boyleston, 
Bhett,  and  Kemper.  Too  much  praise  cannot  be  bestowed  on  their 
zeal  and  energy. 

Troops  for  Mississippi  Valley  will  be  moved  with  utmost  speed  of 
transportation. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGAED. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C .,  May  6,  1863. 

L.  Heyliger, 

Major  and  Adjutant , Confederate  States , Nassau  : 

Major:  The  commanding  general  instructs  me  to  inclose  a circular 
which  he  has  caused  to  be  addressed  to  all  owners  and  agents  of  ves- 
sels engaged  in  the  trade  between  this  city  and  Nassau.  He  desires 
that  you  will  formally  demand  of  each  vessel  freighting  for  this  coast 
to  receive  and  transport,  according  to  her  tonnage  capacity,  not  to  ex- 
ceed 25  tons  of  the.  iron  plating  now  at  Nassau,  and  in  case  of  refusal 
by  any  party  you  will  please  make  known  the  determination  of  these 
headquarters  to  deny  to  the  vessels  of  said  parties  the  privilege  of  a 
return  cargo  of  cotton  and  naval  stores,  as  duly  set  forth  in  the  inclosed 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


927 


Chap  XXVI.] 

circular,  aud  you  will  further  please  report  by  triplicate,  and  via .Wil- 
mington as  well  as  this  place,  the  name  of  any  vessel  upon  which  it  was 
refused  to  receive  said  iron  mailing  on  your  requisition. 

It  is  of  tlie  utmost  importance  that  at  least  300  tons  of  this  iron  should 
reach  here  as  soon  as  it  can  be  done,  and  you  can  render  no  more  valu- 
able service  than  by  securing  its  prompt  transportation  and  delivery 
and  by  impressing  the  agents  and  owners  of  vessels  engaged  m running 
the  blockade  with  a due  sense  of  the  service  they  will  be  doing  by  lend- 
ing us  their  utmost  assistance  in  this  matter. 

While  25  tons  at  a time- have  been  placed  as  the  maximum  to  be  re- 
quired, any  parties  bringing  more  may  find  it  to  their  decided  advan- 

It  is  thought  that  the  rate  of  freight  charged  should  not  exceed  £30 
per  ton  and  that  payable  here;  for  the  rate  of  £60  per  ton  at  present 
rates  of  exchange  it  would  be  $1,500  per  ton. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 

[Ir  closure.] 

Circular.]  Hpqrs.  Dkpx. 

There  are  now  in  Nassau  some  400  or  500  tons  of  iron  mailing  plates, 
which  are  required  for  the  completion  of  machines  of  war  essential  to 
the  defense  of  this  harbor.  All  engaged  in  the  commerce  of  this  city 
are  believed  to  be  peculiarly  interested  in  the  completion  of  one  of  these 
particularly,  and  should  cheerfully  contribute  what  they  can  to  that 
end.  They  will  be  expected  to  do  so,  and  the  object  of  this  circular  is 
to  acquaint  the  owners  and  agents  of  all  vessels  employed  in  running 
between  this  port  and  Nassau  that  the  agent  of  the  Confederate  States 
Government  at  the  latter  place  is  instructed  to  require  of  all  vessels 
to  carry  a fair  proportion  of  said  iron  plating  until  at  least  300  tons 
shall  have  been  delivered  in  the  city  of  Charleston,  and  to  report  to 
these  headquarters  any  vessel  whose  owners,  master,  or  agent  m»yre- 
fuse  on  due  requisition  to  take  the  same  on  board;  and  it  will  be  further 
reauired  that  said  iron  shall  not  be  received  as  such  an  excess  oi  proper 
cargo  for  the  trade  as  to  render  it  probable  that  it  must  be  thrown 
overboard  in  case  of  pursuit  or  except  in  extreme  stress  of  weather 
The  commanding  general  cannot  permit  himself  to  doubt  that  this 
requirement  will  be  promptly  and  loyally  complied  with,  but  at  the 
same  time,  in  view  of  the  exigency,  deems  it  meet  to  say  that  vessels 
upon  which  the  iron  plating  in  question  may  be  refused  as  freight  will 
not  be  allowed  the  privilege  of  receiving  cotton  by  rail  from  the  interior 
or  permitted  to  take  cotton  or  naval  stores  hence  abroad.  Ancl  tins 
notice  is  given  for  the  guidance  of  all  concerned. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : TH0MAg  JORDAN, 

Brigadier -General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Adams  Run , May  8,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : The  contemplated  naval  expedition  in  North  Edisto  may 


928 


COASTS  OF  S.  O.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


succeed  in  dispersing  Ihe  enemy’s  fleet  in  that  river,  and  their  land 
force  on  Seabrook  Island  will  in  that  event  be  for  some  hours  at  least 
without  the  protection  of  gunboats.  There  will  then  be  nothing  to 
prevent  our  storming  their  camp  and  capturing  the  whole  force. 

I would  like  to  take  over  to  the  neighborhood  a sufficient  force,  and 
have  them  ready  to  make  an  assault  in  the  event  of  the  fleet  being  dis- 
persed even  for  a short  time;  not  otherwise. 

I must  leave  some  troops  on  the  main,  and  will  have  disposable  for 
the  expedition  not  exceeding  1,100  infantry  and  two  batteries  of  artil- 
lery (eight  pieces).  The  enemy  probably  have  on  the  island  between 
2,000  and  2,500  infantry  and  a battery  of  field  pieces  and  are  intrenched. 
Pending  the  panic  which  will  necessarily  be  excited  among  them  by 
the  naval  success  it  appears  to  me  entirely  feasible  to  storm  their 
works  with  an  equal  number  of  troops. 

If  my  project  is  approved  by  the  commanding  general  I ask  that 
sufficient  infantry  be  sent  me  and  a Whitworth  gun  that  I am  informed 
is  in  Charleston.  This  last  would  be  placed  in  position  at  Rockville 
just  previous  to  my  advance,  and  could  play  effectively  upon  their  camp 
from  that  point  until  we  had  reached  their  works.  Artillerists  ac- 
customed to'its  use  should  be  sent  with  the  Whitworth  gun. 

I would  also  respectfully  suggest  that  as  far  as  he  may  deem  proper 
the  commanding  general  would  urge  dispatch  iu  the  naval  expedition. 
It  was  almost  impossible  to  keep  the  objects  of  the  reconnaissance  re- 
cently made  a secret  in  this  district,  and  the  enterprise  I have  reason 
to  know  was  talked  of  in  private  circles  in  Charleston  four  days  ago. 
Dispatch  is  important  for  this  reason,  as  well  as  that  the  iron-clads  may 
withdraw  from  this  fa  vorable  locality  at  any  moment. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dist.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , SS.  C .,  May  9,  1863. 

Approved.  Order  two  regiments  and  one  battalion  of  infantry  and 
one  light  battery  from  First  District,  also  one  battalion  sharpshooters 
(Abney’s)  from  Third  Military  District— in  all  about  1,800  men,  to  re- 
port to  Brigadier-General  Hagood  for  the  expedition  referred  to  by 

him’  G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

May  10,  1863. 

P.  S.— In  consequence  of  telegram  from  War  Department  ordering 
5,000  additional  men  to  General  Pemberton  the  above  order  of  9th 
instant  is  countermanded  and  those  troops  are  recalled,  except  Pres- 
ton’s battery.  Brigadier-General  Hagood  will,  however,  support  that 
naval  expedition  against  enemy’s  iron-clads  in  North  Edisto  as  origi- 
Daily  ordered.  G T 

Qeneralj  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  929 

Organization  of  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia, 
and  Florida , commanded  by  General  G . T.  Beauregard , May  8,  1863. 

FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley  commanding. 

JAMES  ISLAND  AND  SAINT  ANDREW’S. 

Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans  commanding. 

Brigadier- General  Evans?  Brigade. 


17th  South  Carolina,  Col.  F.  W.  McMaster. 

18th  South  Carolina,  Col.  W.  H.  Wallace. 

22d  South  Carolina,  Col.  S.  D.  Goodlett. 

23d  South  Carolina,  Col.  H.  L.  Benbow. 

Holcombe  Legion,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  J.  Crawley. 
Macbeth  Battery,  Lieut.  B.  A.  Jeter. 

Brigade. 


24th  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Col.  C.  H.  Stevens. 

25th  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Col.  C.  H.  Simonton. 

3d  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Company  K,  Capt.  T.  Cordes. 

5th  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Col.  R.  J.  Jeffords. 

2d  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Lieut.  Col.  A.  D. Frederick. 

German  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Company  B,  Capt.  F.  Melchers. 

Lucas’  battalion  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Maj.  J.  J.  Lucas. 

Palmetto  Battalion  South  Carolina  Light  Artillery,  Lieut.  Col.  E.  B.  White. 

SULLIVAN’S  ISLAND  AND  CHRIST  CHURCH  PARISH. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  commanding. 

1st  South  Carolina,  Col.  William  Butler. 

2lst  Regiment  S^th^arolina  Artillery,  Companies  I and  K,  Capt.  J.  A.  Sitgreaves. 
German  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Company  A,  Capt.  D.  Werner. 

Santee  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Capt.  Chris.  Gaillard. 

MORRIS  ISLAND. 


21st  South  Carolina,  Col.  Robert  F.  Graham. 

Gist  Guards,  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Capt.  C.  E.  Chichester. 

Mathewes  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Capt.  F.  N.  Bonneau. 

4 

CASTLE  PINCKNEY  AND  FORT  RIPLEY. 

1st  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Company  H,  Capt.  Henry  S.  Farley. 

FORT  SUMTER. 

1st  Artillery,  Companies  B,  <0,  D,  E,  F,  and  G,  Col.  Alfred  Rhett. 

CITY  OF  CHARLESTON. 


Charleston  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard. 

Siege  Train,  Maj.  Charles  Alston,  jr. 

GEORGETOWN  AND  VICINITY  (SUB-DISTRICT  TO  FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT). 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  A.  Yates  commanding. 


21st  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry,  Maj.  William  P.  White. 

Independent  company,  Capt.  J.  H.  Tucker.  , 

2d  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Company  D,  Lieut.  William  E.  Charles. 
Waccamaw  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Capt.  Joshua  Ward. 

59  R R— VOL  XIV 


930 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYL 
SECOND  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 


Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood  commanding. 


7th  South  Carolina  (battalion),  Lieut.  Col.  P.  H.  Nelson. 

26th  South  Carolina,  Col.  A.  D.  Smith. 

3d  South  Carolina  Cavalry  (one  company),  Capt.  A.  L.  Campbell. 
6th  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Col.  H.  K.  Aiken. 

Marion  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Capt.  Edward  L.  Parker. 
Washington  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Capt.  George  H.  Walter. 
Stono  Scouts,  Capt.  J.  B.  L.  Walpole. 


THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker  commanding. 


47th  Georgia  Volunteers,  Col.  G.  W.  M.  Williams. 

1st  South  Carolina  Sharpshooters  (battalion),  Maj.  Joseph  Abney. 

3d  South  Carolina  (nine  companies),  Col.  C.  J.  Colcock. 

11th  South  Carolina,  Lieut.  Col.  F.  H.  Gantt. 

4th  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Col.  B.  H.  Eutledge. 

Company  of  Rangers,  Capt.  M.  J.  Kirk. 

Chest atee  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Capt.  Thomas  H.  Bomar. 

Horse  Artillery,  Capt.  W.  L.  Trenholm. 

Beaufort  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Capt.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr. 

La  Fayette  (South  Carolina)  Artillery,  Capt.  J.  T.  Kanapaux. 

Palmetto  Battalion  South  Carolina  Light  Artillery,  Company  A,  Capt.  W.  E.  Earle. 
Nelson  (Virginia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  J.  N.  Lamkin. 


DISTRICT  OF  GEORGIA. 


Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer  commanding. 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  B.  Taliaferro’s  Brigade. 


1st  Georgia  (State),  Col.  E.  M.  Galt. 

32d  Georgia,  Col.  George  P.  Harrison,  jr. 

54th  Georgia,  Col.  C.  H.  Way. 

Joe  Thompson  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Capt.  C.  R.  Hanleiter. 
Chatham  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  John  F.  Wheaton. 
Columbus  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  Edward  Croft. 
Regular  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  J.  A.  Maxwell. 
Terrell  (Georgia)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  E.  G.  Dawson. 

South  Carolina  Siege  Train,  Maj.  George  L.  Buist. 


UNATTACHED. 


Savannah  River  Batteries  and  oilier  defenses. 


1st  Georgia,  Col.  C.  H.  Olmstead. 

2d  Georgia  (State),  Col.  R.  L.  Storey. 

18th  Georgia  Volunteers  (battalion),  Maj.  John  Screven. 
Phoenix  (Georgia)  Volunteers,  Col.  G.  A.  Gordon.* 

4th  Georgia  Cavalry,  Col.  D.  L.  Clinch. 

5th  Georgia  Cavalry,  Col.  Robert  H.  Anderson. 

Georgia  Cavalry  (battalion),  Maj.  E.  C.  Anderson,  jr. 
Georgia  Partisan  Rangers  (battalion),  Maj.  John  M.  Millen. 
12th  Georgia  Artillery  (battalion),  Lieut.  Col.  H.  D.  Capers. 
22d  Georgia  Artillery  (battalion),  Col.  E.  C.  Anderson. 


931 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

DISTRICT  OF  EAST  FLORIDA. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan  commanding. 

1st  Special  Battalion,  Capt.  E.  West. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  John  Bryan. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  J.  C.  Chambers. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  S.  M.  G.  Gary. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  S.  E.  Hope. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  John  McNeill. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  A.  P.  Mootey. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  A.  A.  Ocbus. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  J.  W.  Pearson. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  A.  A.  Stewart. 

Independent  Infantry,  Capt.  John  Underwood. 

2d  Florida  Cavalry,  Lieutenant- Colonel  McCormick. 

Partisan  RaDgers  (four  companies),  Maj.  T.  W.  Brevard. 

Milton  (Florida)  Artillery,  Company  A,  Capt.  Joseph  L.  Dunham. 
Milton  (Florida)  Artillery,  Company  B,  Capt.  Henry  1 . Abell. 

DISTRICT  OF  MIDDLE  FLORIDA. 


Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb  commanding. 


Company  Infantry,  Capt.  John  Ellis. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  B.  O.  Grenad. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  C.  J.  Jenkins. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  T.  M.  Miekler. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  J.  C.  Richard. 

Company  Infantry,  Capt.  W.  J.  Robinson. 

Company  Cavalry,  Capt.  H.  T.  Blocker. 

Company  Cavalry,  Capt.  J.  N.  Horn. 

Company  Cavalry,  Capt.  W.  H.  Milton. 

Company  Cavalry,  Capt.  G.  W.  Scott. 

Company  Cavalry,  Capt.  C.  Thigpin. 

Leon  (Florida)  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  R.  H.  Gamble. 

[Note  from  original  paper.] 

The  following  commands  have  been  ordered  from  this  department  to 
report  to  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton : 


From  South  Carolina: 

8th  Georgia  (battalion). 
46th  Georgia. 

16th  South  Carolina. 

24th  South  Carolina. 
Ferguson’s  light  battery. 


From  Department  of  Georgia : 

1st  Battalion  Georgia  Sharpshooters. 
25th  Georgia. 

29th  Georgia. 

30th  Georgia. 

4th  Louisiana  Battalion. 

Martin’s  light  battery. 


War  Department,  G.  S.  A., 

Richmond , May  9,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Charleston , 8.  C. : 


Poster,  with  his  own  and  part  of  Hunter’s  force,  is  believed 


to  have 

returned  to  North  Carolina.  More  re-enforcements  to  General  Pem- 
berton are  indispensable.  If  General  Evans’  brigade  has  returned  to 
you  send  5,000  men ; if  not,  send  a number  which  with  that  would 
make  5,000. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


932 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  9,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo , S.  C.  ; 

I]  old  Abney’s  battalion  ready  for  temporary  service  subject  to  Gen- 
eral Hagood’s  orders. 


THOMAS  JOED  AN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  First  Military  District., 

> Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

187.  ) Charleston , May  9,  1863. 

******* 

V.  Two  regiments  of  infantry,  to  be  designated  by  Brigadier-General 
Evans,  the  companies  of  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers'll ow 
on  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  Captain  Preston’s  light  battery  will  proceed 
without  delay  to  Eantowles,  where  their  commanding  officer  will  report 
to  Brigadier-General  Hagood. 

VI.  The  troops  will  move  in  light  marching  order,  with  three  days’  ! 
cooked  provisions  and  a full  supply  of  ammunition. 

******* 


By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley : 

B.  H.  READ, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  May  10,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

Order  sending  5,000  additional  troops  to  Pemberton  will  be  executed, 
Evans’  brigade  included,  leaving  but  1,000  infantry  to  support  exten- 
sive lines  and  batteries  at  Savannah,  but  750  infantry  to  hold  line  of 
railroad  to  Savannah,  virtually  yielding  it,  that  country,  and  large 
stores  of  rice  to  enemy,  as  well  as  opening  even  Charleston  and  Au- 
gusta and  Columbia  Railroads  to  attack  at  Branch ville,  leaving  here 
1,500  infantry  at  most,  all  of  which  will  be  known  to  enemy  in  few  days. 

Meantime  General  W . S.  Walker  reports  increased  strength  yesterday 
of  enemy’s  outposts  in  his  vicinity.  Hagood  reports  2,500  infantry 
on  Seabrook  Island,  fortifying.  Five  monitors  still  there. 

Enemy  in  force  on  Folly  Island,  actively  erecting  batteries  yesterday. 
Season  favorable  for  enemy’s  operations  for  quite  one  month. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  O.,  May  10,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood, 

Commanding  Second  Military  District,  Adams  Run  : 

General:  In  consequence  of  a telegram  from  the  War  Department, 
ordering  5,000  additional  men  to  General  Pemberton,  the  commanding 
general  has  found  it  necessary  to  countermand  his  order  of  the  9th  in- 
stant and  to  recall  the  troops  that  were  ordered  to  report  to  you,  with 
a view  to  carry  out  the  suggestions  contained  in  your  communication  of 
the  8th  instant. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


933 


The  commanding  general  directs,  however,  that  you  will  retain  Pres- 
ton’s battery,  and  support  the  naval  expedition  against  the  enemy’s 
iron  clads  in  North  Edisto,  as  originally  ordered. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Secessionville,  May  10,  1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

I sent  a party  to  Cole’s  Island ; they  report  that  no  enemy  are  on 
Cole’s  or  Goat’s  Island.  In  Stono  Bay  are  one  steamer,  one  brig,  and 
nine  schooners.  In  Folly  River,  one  gunboat,  one  transport,  steamer, 
and  two  schooners.  All  quiet. 

CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  11,  1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

Don’t  strip  us  of  troops — really  of  means  of  efficient  defense.  There 
are  evidences  of  impending  attack;  don’t  invite  it.  I beg  you  to  recon- 
sider last  order,  and  leave  here  what  few  troops  left— much  short  of 
force  here  this  time  last  year.  Great  excitement  in  community;  is  re 


garded  as  leading  to  surrender,  of  place 
approach  by  land. 


to  enemy  when  he  chooses  to 
WM.  PORCHER  MILES. 


Richmond,  May  11,  1863. 

General  Beauregard  : 

Retain  5,000  infantry  and  send  the  rest.  I infer  from  your  last  re- 
port that  you  have  of  all  arms  upward  of  15,000  effectives.  Is  not 
this  so*? 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  May  11,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond : 

Sir:  This  morning,  as  clearly  as  it  could  be  done  in  the  space  of  a 
telegram,  I sought  to  lay  before  you  the  military  condition  in  which  this 
department  would  be  left  after  the  execution  of  your  orders  of  yester- 
day, directing  me  to  send  another  division  of  5,000  men  out  of  it  to 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton.  In  view,  however,  of  the  grave  conse- 
quences that  may  follow,  I deem  it  not  only  in  place,  but  my  duty,  to  lay 
before  the  Department,  in  precise  terms,  my  views  touching  the  removal 
at  this  juncture  of  so  large  a force. 

As  soon  as  the  enemy  had  withdrawn  his  iron -clad  ships  from  before 


934  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chaf.XXVL 

this  harbor  and  materially  reduced  his  land  forces  in  this  immediate 
vicinity,  on  the  requisition  of  the  commanding  general  in  North  Caro- 
lina I returned  Cooke’s  brigade  of  North  Carolina  troops  to  Wilmington 
and  sent  Clingman’s  brigade  there  in  exchange  for  Evans’. 

A week  ago,  under  your  orders,  I put  in  motion  for  Jackson,  Miss., 
two  brigades,  under  Brigadier-Generals  Gist  and  W.  H.  T.  Walker  (the 
former  commanding  South  Carolina  and  the  latter  Georgia  regiments), 
somewhat  over  5,000  infantry  in  all  and  two  light  batteries  of  the  best 
class  in  the  department.  • 

Your  orders  have  been  based  apparently  on  the  conviction  that  the 
troops  of  the  enemy  assembled  in  this  department  for  operations  against 
Charleston  have  been  mainly  withdrawn  and  diverted  to  other  expedi- 
tions— in  North  Carolina  and  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi.  This  con- 
viction I regret  I cannot  share,  as  I am  satisfied  from  the  reports  of 
district  commanders  and  from  other  reasons  that  there  has  been  really 
but  little  reduction  of  the  command  of  Major-General  Hunter. 

General  Walker,  commanding  at  Pocotaligo,  reports  that  on  yesterday 
the  outposts  of  the  enemy  in  his  front  had  been  much  increased  in 
strength.  General  Hagood  reports  them  to  be  occupying  Seabrook 
Island  with  at  least  2,500  infantry.  They  are  erecting  fortifications  at 
that  point,  as  also  on  Folly  Island,  which  is  likewise  still  occupied  in 
force. 

Five  of  the  monitors  remain  in  the  North  Edisto,  with  some  twenty 
gunboats  and  transports.  With  these  and  the  transports  still  in  the 
waters  of  Port  Boyal  and  the  forces  which  I am  unable  to  doubt  are  j 
still  at  the  disposition  of  the  enemy  he  may  renew  the  attack  by  land 
and  water  on  Charleston  at  any  moment.  Acting  on  the  offensive  and 
commanding  the  time  of  attack,  he  could  simultaneously  call  troops 
here  from  North  Carolina  and  sooner  than  my  command  could  possibly 
be  re-enforced  from  any  quarter  out  of  the  department. 

To  meet  or  resist  any  land  attack  there  would  be  available — 

In  the  First  Military  District : 


Infantry 1>  547 

Heavy  and  light  artillery 2, 905 

Cavalry 903 


Total  effective  force 5, 415 


Line  of  Savannah  Railroad  (Second  and  Third  Military  Districts) : 


Infantry - '51 

Heavy  and  light  artillery 772 

Cavalry 2,094 

Total 3, 617 

In  District  of  Georgia: 

Infantry 1,631 

Heavy  and  light  artillery 2, 539 

Cavalry 1,821  ■ 

Total 5,991 

That  is  total  of— 

Infantry 3,929 

Artillery.. 6,216 

Cavalry 4,878  . 

Total  effective 15, 023 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


935 


This  force,  if  concentrated  at  either  Charleston  or  Savannah  for  a 
certain  period,  could  doubtless  make  a stout  defense  ; but  which,  kept 
distributed  in  occupation  of  the  important  points,  districts,  and  posi- 
tions now  held  from  Georgetown,  S.  C.,  to  Florida,  would  ofter  but 
feeble  resistance  to  any  ^erious  attack  of  the  enemy.  If  it  is  the  irrev- 
ocable determination  of  the  War  Department  that  this  command  shall 
be  thus  reduced  I can  but  make  such  disposition  of  the  remnant  ot  my 
forces  as  may  appear  best  calculated  to  conceal  my  weakness.  With 
my  cavalry  I shall  make  a show  of  occupation  of  the  Second  and  Third 
Military  Districts  and  the  line  of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Kail- 
road  ; but  it  must  not  be  lost  sight  of  that  my  communications  with 
Savannah  can  be  cut  by  the  enemy  without  the  use  ot  a large  force 
whensoever  he  may  choose  to  attempt  it ; and  when  that  is  done  e 
will  get  possession  of  a large  extent  ot  rich  rice  lands,  and  large  stores 
of  rice  not  yet  brought  to  market,  which  would  be  a heavy  loss.  T ui- 
thermore,  it  were  then  but  a simple  and  easy  military  operation  tor  a 
column,  not  a large  one,  to  penetrate  to  Branchville,  not  more  than  <35 
miles  distant  from  Pocotaligo,  and  thus  entirely  interrupt  m^  communi- 
cations with  the  interior,  as  a glance  at  the  map  will  show. 

The  sickly  season  on  this  coast  will  begin  in  about  six  weeks ; then  a 
small  reduction  of  the  infantry  force  might  take  place.  It  was  as  late 
as  the  16th  of  June  last  year  that  the  enemy  made  his  attack  at  beces- 
sionville,  on  James  Island,  so  nearly  successful,  and  which  with  success 
would  have  placed  Charleston  at  his  mercy  despite  the  harbor  defenses. 

It  is  proper  to  add  here  that  the  day  before  your  order  to  detach  the 
last  division  was  received  I had  organized  and  put  in  motion  an  expe- 
dition against  the  enemy  on  Seabrook  Island  in  support  of  a naval 
operation,  the  object  of  which  is  to  destroy  the  iron-clads  with  the  boat- 
torpedo  contrivance  of  Captain  Lee.  The  naval  expedition  under 
Lieutenant  Parker,  supported  by  some  troops,  will  nevertheless  be 
attempted,  but  I was  reluctantly  obliged  to  recall  the  infantry  with 
which  I hoped  to  effect  the  surprise  and  capture  of  the  enemy  on  land 
in  the  confusion  which  it  was  hoped  would  result  from  the  attack  with 

/must  respectfully  ask  your  attention  to  the  paper  herewith,  marked 
A,  exhibiting  the  force  of  all  arms  that  will  be  left  me  after  the  execu- 
tion of  your  orders  and  that  in  the  department  this  time  last  jear. 

You  will  perceive  that  I shall  be  left  with  12,664  men  of  all  arms  less 
than  at  the  same  period  last  year,  and  when  the  force  pf  the  enemy 
wTas  less  threatening  in  its  positions  than  now ; that  my  infantiy  force 
for  the  support  of  the  lines  around  Charleston  will  be  but  1,547 ; w hereas 
last  year  the  infantry  force  for  the  same  duty  was  6,462,  leaving  the 
lines  on  James  Island  virtually  without  infantry  support,  and  open  to 
seizure  and  the  inevitable  fall  of  Charleston.  * , 

In  conclusion  I must  observe  that  the  troops  in  the  works  cannot  be 
withdrawn  from  their  guns  and  concentrated  for  defense  of  any  threat- 
ened point ; they  are  already  at  a minimum  force  for  the  proper  service 
of  the  batteries,  and  to  withdraw  them  here  or  at  Savannah  involves 
a surrender  of  the  work  so  abandoned,  and  in  ultimate  effect  the  failure 
of  the  whole  defense. 

Finally,  it  may  as  well  be  considered  that  the  enemy  will  be  speedily 
acquainted  with  the  extent  of  these  reductions  and  that  he  will  act 
accordingly. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, ^ BEAUREGARD> 

General,  Commanding . 


936 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


[Indorsement.] 


May  22,  1863. 

There  is  a discrepancy  between  the  within  and  the  last  return  of 
troops  made  at  near  the  same  dare.  The  Secretary’s  attention  is  directed 
to  the  discrepancy. 

J.  D. 


[Inclosnre  A.] 


Effective  forces  in  the  First , Second , and  Third  Military  Districts  of  South 
Carolina  and  the  District  of  Georgia , 11th  day  of  May , 1862  and  1863, 
after  executing  Special  Orders , No.  105,  from  these  headquarters  : 

FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 


1862.  1863. 


Infantry 

6, 462 

Infantry 

1, 547 

Cavalry 

532 

Cavalry 

963 

Artillery 

2, 756 

Artillery 

2, 905 

Total 

9, 750 

Total 

5, 415 

SECOND  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 


1862. 


1863. 


Infantry 4,  015 

Cavalry 601 

Artillery 267 

Total 4,883 


Infantry 504 

Cavalry 867 

Artillery 295 


Total 1,666 


THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 


1862. 


Infantry 

Cavalry 3,881 

Artillery 


Total 3,  881 


1863. 


Infantry 247 

Cavalry 1,227 

Artillery 477 


Total 1,  951 


DISTRICT  OF  GEORGIA. 


1862. 


Infantry 7,519 

Cavalry 1,020 

Artillery 634 


Total 9, 173 


1863. 


Infantry 1,  631 

Cavalry 1,821 

Artillery 2, 539 

Total 5, 991 


Total  effective,  1862 27,687 

Total  effective,  1863  15,  023 


[Inclosure  B.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  O.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  105.  j Charleston , S.  O.,  May  10,  1863. 

Pursuant  to  orders  from  the  War  Department,  the  following  move- 
ment of  troops  and  ordnance  and  disposition  of  ordnance  will  take  place 
without  delay : 

I.  The  Forty-seventh  Georgia,  and  Eleventh,  Twentieth  and  Twen- 
ty-sixth South  Carolina  Volunteers,  formed  into  a brigade,  under  Brig- 
adier-General Hagood,  with  a light  battery,  to  be  selected  by  Brigadier- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  93? 

General  Ripley,  and  Evans’  brigade,  as  now  organized,  will  repair  to 
Jackson,  Miss.,  and  report  to  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 

Tbe  quartermaster’s  and  subsistence  departments  will  respectively 
make  all  proper  provisions  for  the  most  efficient  execution  of  this  order. 

II.  Brigadier-General  Trapier  will  be  relieved  from  duty  in  the  First 
Military  District,  and  assume  command  of  the  Second  Military  District 
as  soon  as  General  Hagood  shall  be  ready  to  relinquish  the  command. 

III.  To  provide  for  their  security,  all  heavy  ordnance,  with  their  am- 
munition, &c.,  in  the  Second  and  Third  Military  Districts  of  South  Caro- 
lina, except  such  as  can  be  properly  supported  at  strong  works  and  the 
most  important  points,  will  be  drawn  in  and  stored  at  Charleston. 

IV.  District  commanders  must  re-arrange  and  dispose  their  respect- 
ive commands  in  accordance  with  the  foregoing  reductions  and  so  as  to 
insure  the  health  of  the  troops  as  far  as  practicable. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish, 

May  11,  1863. 

Capt.  B.  H.  Read, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Military  Fist.,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

Captain  : From  observations  of  recon noitering  parties  to  Folly  Island 
I beg  leave  to  report  the  movements  of  enemy,  and  also  to  make  the 
following  suggestions  as  to  the  further  defense  of  James  Island: 

The  enemy  now  occupy  the  whole  of  Big  Folly  Island,  and  are  engaged 
in  erecting  batteries  both  against  Morris  Island  and  James  Island.  From 
his  works  on  the  west  of  Folly  Island  I am  convinced  they  are  intended 
to  cover  his  landing  on  James  Island,  as  well  as  to  protect  his  rear  on 
his  advance  toward  Morris  Island  and  Secessionville.  He  has  now, 
from  what  has  been  observed,  about  two  brigades  on  Folly  Island  and 
five  gunboats  in  Folly  River  and  oft  the  southern  point  of  Folly  Island. 
With  this  force  he  is  engaged  in  intrenching  the  troops  to  prevent  sur- 
prises or  attacks  on  his  rear.  To  prevent  his  further  advance  I would 
respectfully  recommend  that  Black  Island  be  at  once  fortified  and  oc- 
cupied by  at  least  two  companies.  Also  a full  regiment  held  as  a re- 
serve to  support  Morris  Island,  to  be  stationed  at  some  healthy  location 
on  Sullivan’s  Island  or  Mount  Pleasant.  If  the  enemy  should  advance 
(as  he  did  last  year — his  most  accessible  point)  from  Battery  Island  he 
would  engage  simultaneously  James  and  Morris  Islands,  and  the  small 
number  of  troops  on  either  island  will  not  be  able  to  support  each  other 
directly ; hence  the  utmost  necessity  of  having  a strong  reserve  to  be 
thrown  where  the  most  needed.  I am  now  of  the  opinion  that  the  force 
now  on  James  Island  is  barely  adequate  to  its  defense,  especially  if 
John’s  Island  be  not  strongly  picketed.  As  the  brigadier-general  com- 
manding is  fully  aware,  the  enemy  could  easily  engage  Fort  Pemberton 
and  what  is  known  as  the  West  Lines,  at  the  same  time  makinghis  attack 
from  Battery  Island  on  Secessionville  and  from  Folly  Island  on  Morris 
Island.  These  attacks  could  be  made  with  15,000  men  in  conjunction 
with  his  gunboats.  The  latter  he  has  already  in  position.  I would 
further  state  that  I am  daily  expecting  his  attack. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FT.  G.  EVANS,  . 

Brigadier- General  Comm  anding. 


938 


COASTS  OB'  S.  C.,  GA„  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXTI. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Military  Dist.  of  South  Carolina, 

Charleston , May  11,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded. 

In  view  of  the  possibility  of  an  attack,  with  the  present  force  m po- 
sition, and  the  probability  of  it  in  case  it  is  weakened,  I would  respect- 
fully recommend  that  the  order  for  the  movement  of  troops  from  this 
command  should  be  suspended. 

From  my  own  observations  I am  satisfied  that  the  enemy  is  in  force 
on  Folly  Island  and  intrenching.  Thus  far  I have  seen  no  indications 
of  mortar  batteries  against  Morris  Island,  but  from  his  command  of 
Stono  Inlet,  owing  to  the  abandonment  of  Cole’s  Island  last  year  by  Gen- 
eral Pemberton,  the  enemy  can,  with  his  superior  transportation,  attack 
either  Morris  or  James  Island  before  we  could  possibly  concentrate  a 

reduced  force.  R g 1UPLEY, 

Brigadier- General  Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  12,  1863. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Have  ordered  to  General  Pemberton,  contrary  to  my  opinion,  Evans’ 
brigade  and  one  regiment,  amounting  to  2,700  men,  leaving  only  6,000 
infantry  available  in  whole  South  Carolina  and  Georgia j the  other 
1,000  will  await  further  orders  of  Department. 

General  Evans  reports  two  brigades  of  enemy  on  Folly  Island  yes- 


terday. Please  answer. 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond , May  12,  1863. 

Hon.  W.  Porcher  Miles,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

The  official  returns  show  that  a force  of  15,000  to  17,000  effectives  will 
be  left  in  General  Beauregard’s  command.  I do  not  believe  the  enemy 
have  that  number ; indeed  not  10,000.  The  Mississippi  is  vital.  I send 
from  every  point  that  can  spare  any  troops. 

J.  A.  SEDDOin, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  13, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon  : 

Other  1,000  men  referred  to  in  dispatch  of  yesterday  form  part  ot 
total  given  for  this  State  and  Georgia.  The  troops  going  will  be  hur- 

ried  off  as  soon  as  practicable.  & T BEAUREGARD. 


CHAP. XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


939 


General  Beauregard: 


Richmond,  May  13,  1863.* 


You  can  retain  1,000  infantry  and  send  instead  1,000  cavalry. 

J.  A.  SEDDOH, 

Secretary  of  War . 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  O.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  107.  ) Charleston , S.  O.,  May  13,  1863. 

******* 

III.  Paragraph  II,  Special  Orders,  Ho.  105,  Confederate  States,  from 
these  headquarters,  is  revoked,  and  paragraph  I is  so  far  modified  as 
to  direct  only  the  movement  of  Evans’  brigade,  as  soon  as  the  Twenty- 
sixth  South  Carolina  Volunteers  and  Abney’s  South  Carolina  battalion 
shall  have  reported  for  duty  in  First  Military  District,  which  will  be 
directed  by  their  respective  district  commanders  with  the  least  delay 
practicable,  and  the  six  companies  of  the  Forty-seventh  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers in  Third  District  and  the  two  companies  of  Forty-seventh 
Georgia  in  District  of  Georgia  will  be  relieved  from  duty  in  these  dis- 
tricts and  ordered  to  report  to  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker,  at  Jackson, 
Miss.,  to  form  part  of  his  brigade. 

*****  * * 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

* JNO.  M.  OTEY, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General . 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  13,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldshorough , W.  C. : 

Evans  reports  two  brigades  of  enemy  on  Folly  Island  j but  I don’t 
think  they  will  attack  unless  we  weaken  ourselves  too  much.  It  would 
be  well,  however,  to  prepare  for  the  event. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

(Duplicate  to  Maj.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  H.  C. ) 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

j Richmond,  May  13,  1863. 

Hon.  W.  Porcher  Miles,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

Your  several  telegrams  have  been  anxiously  considered.  Controlling 
necessity  compels  me  to  persist.  1 believe  you  safe.  You  will  have  a 
larger  force  than  the  enemy.  Still  I urge  the  organization  of  all  citi- 
zens capable  of  bearing  arms  in  Charleston  and  its  vicinity.  I make 
arrangements  to  re-enforce,  if  necessary,  from  Wilmington. 

b J.  A.  SEDDOH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Repeated  May  14. 


940  COASTS  01 T S.  C , GA.,  Attt>  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  tCHAP.  XXVI. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A.,  Richmond , Ph.,  May  13,  1863. 
Hon.  W.  Porcher  Miles  and  others,  Charleston , & C.  : 

Gentlemen:  Your  telegrams  remonstrating  against  the  orders  of 
the  Department  withdrawing  troops  from  Charleston  for  the  defense  of 
Vicksburg  and  the  Mississippi  have  been  received  with  much  concern 
and  have  caused  anxious  inquiry  and  reflection.  You  cannot  doubt  that 
the  utmost  solicitude  is  felt  for  the  adequate  defense  and  protection  of 
your  city,  both  for  its  intrinsic  importance  and  the  political  significance 
that  attaches  to  it,  and  that  without  the  gravest  consideration  neither 
the  apprehensions  of  its  citizens  would  be  awakened  nor  any  portion 
of  its  gallant  defenders  be  withdrawn.  We  are  not,  however,  unfortu- 
nately, so  supplied  with  forces  that  we  can  retain  them  at  all  points 
we  would  wish  to  preserve  without  the  sense  of  insecurity,  but  are 
obliged  to  employ  them  where  great  and  pressing  danger  imperatively  * 
demands  their  presence  and  succor. 

Now,  while  we  can  understand  and  appreciate  the  anxieties  felt  by 
yourselves  and  your  fellow-citizens,  yet  we  cannot, think  they  rest  on 
such  foundations  as  ought  to  deter  from  the  use  of  the  force  in  your 
department  on  a field  of  more  imminent  danger  and  not  less  impor- 
tance. 

The  prestige  of  your  late  brilliant  victory  will  itself  avail  much  to 
deter  the  enemy.  Besides,  we  have  satisfactory  assurance  that  a large 
portion  of  the  enemy’s  forces  has  been  withdrawn  from  the  vicinity  of 
Charleston — first  to  North  Carolina,  and,  since  the  late  battle  of  Clian- 
cellorsville,  to  re-enforce  Hooker.  The  near  approach,  too,  of  your  sickly 
season  and  the  present  sultry  weather  give  added  confidence  of  no  seri- 
ous danger  of  attack  on  Charleston. 

The  enemy  cannot  have  more  than  10,000  or  15,000  troops  at  the  ut- 
most near  you.  Now,  on  inspection  of  the  last  returns  (near  the  close 
of  April)  from  your  military  department,  it  appears  that  after  all  de- 
ductions from  the  number  of  effectives  then  returned  for  the  troops  sent 
back  to  North  Carolina  and  ordered  to  Mississippi,  there  will  be  left  for 
the  defense  of  Charleston  and  Savannah  more  than  15,000  troops  of  all 
arms;  of  these  I have  directed  5,000  should  be  tried  infantry.  Surely, 
with  this  force  you  can  be  in  no  serious  danger,  considering  the  supe- 
riority of  spirit  and  valor  in  your  soldiers  and  the  advantages  of  iu- 
trenchments,  from  a force  probably  not  equal,  certainly  not  superior, 
of  the  Yankee  enemy. 

This  being  the  real  condition,  I beg  you  to  reflect  on  the  vital  im- 
portance of  the  Mississippi  to  our  cause,  to  South  Carolina,  and  to 
Charleston  itself.  Scarce  any  point  in  the  Confederacy  can  be  deemed 
more  essential,  for  the  “cause  of  each  is  the  cause  of  all,”  and  the  sun- 
dering of  the  Confederacy  would  be  felt  as  almost  a mortal  blow  to  the 
most  remote  parts.  Surely,  if  even  some  risk  were  incurred  the  end 
would  justify  it.  You  do  not  know,  and  I could  be  scarcely  justified  in 
stating,  the  causes  that  preclude  succor  from  General  Lee’s  army  and 
other  points  to  General  Pemberton,  but  you  may  rely  upon  it  that  only 
on  the  fullest  consideration  and  under  the  gravest  necessity  is  the  draft 
made  on  Charleston  and  persisted  in,  despite  the  earnest  remonstrance 
of  gentlemen  so  highly  esteemed  as  yourselves. 

I can  only  add,  in  conclusion,  that  I would  advise  the  organization, 
at  least  by  mustering  and  arming,  of  all  citizens  among  you  capable  of 
bearing  arms.  A force  very  effective  behind  intrench ments  might  thus 
be  added  to  your  military  defenders. 

With  high  esteem,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON,  Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


941 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  May  14,  1863. 

Charles  Macbeth,  Esq., 

Mayor  of  Charleston , S.  C. : 

Sir:  A i uller  explanation  than  I can  well  afford  by  telegraph  seems 
requisite  from  me  in  relation  to  the  withdrawal  of  troops  from  General 
Beauregard’s  command,  which  has  not  unnaturally  awakened  the  solic- 
itude of  yourself  and  other  citizens  for  the  safety  of  your  city.  You 
will  of  course  understand  that  I should  have  preferred  leaving  the  full 
force  of  the  department  to  repel  any  possible  attacks  of  the  enemy,  and 
that  only  the  exigencies  of  the  service  have  constrained,  in  the  exercise 
of  the  best  judgment  I can  form  of  the  relative  needs  of  most  important 
points,  the  employment  of  a portion  of  the  troops  in  your  department 
elsewhere.  Our  resources  are  not  ample  enough  to  enable  us  to  afford 
absolute  security  anywhere,  and  we  are  obliged  to  have  regard  to  the 
imminency  of  danger  and  the  most  pressing  needs.  Now,  at  this  time 
there  is  no  point  so  vital  to  the  whole  Confederacy  in  such  imminent 
peril  as  Vicksburg,  and  I cannot  doubt  that  it  demands  all  the  succor 
that  can  possibly  be  spared  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  late  brilliant 
repulse  at  your  city  has  deterred  the  enemy,  as  is  believed,  from  all 
thoughts  of  present  attack.  He  is  known  to  have  sent  back  large  num- 
bers of  his  troops  from  your  coast  to  North  Carolina  and  the  Rappa- 
hannock. I do  not  think  his  force  there  can  be  more  than  10,000 — 
certainly  not  above  15,000 — men.  Now,  from  very  late  returns  from 
your  department  there  were  in  it  32,000  effectives,  with  some  7,000 
absent  or  on  leave  in  addition.  Deducting  the  force  in  Lower  Georgia 
and  Florida,  and  making  a liberal  deduction  for  the  forces  returned  to 
North  Carolina,  there  would  still  be  upward  of  25,000  effectives  for  the 
defense  of  Charleston  and  Savannah  and  the  intermediate  line.  The 
withdrawal  of  the  10,000  ordered  to  Mississippi  still  leaves  upward  of 

15.000  effectives,  with  a considerable  reserve  of  the  absentees  and  sick, 
the  latter  of  whom,  being  from  the  whole  command,  were  of  course 
above  the  average  to  be  expected  from  the  remaining  force,  and  as  they 
recover  must  swell  the  number  of  effectives.  It  is  true,  of  these  some 

5.000  or  6,000  were  cavalry,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  mounted  gun- 
men, for  they  are  armed  with  guus  and  pistols  and  usually  dismount  to 
fight;  but  this  is  the  very  kind  of  force  which  has  been  represented  to 
me  as  most  desirable  and  effective  for  defense  along  the  lines  of  rail- 
road. They  can  move  and  concentrate  with  such  rapidity  that  for  such 
defense  they  amount  to  nearly  a double  force  of  infantry. 

In  this  situation,  with  a force  equal  at  least  to  that  of  the  enemy, 
with  the  advantage,  in  case  of  approach  toward  either  Charleston  or 
Savannah,  of  complete  intrenchments  and  numerous  batteries,  do  you 
not  have  as  reasonable  assurance  of  adequate  defense  and  safety  as  can 
be  expected  with  the  limited  resources  at  our  command f I can  assure 
you  that  very  frequently  this  city  has  been  with  less  than  5,000  men  of 
all  arms  for  its  defense  and  the  enemy  below  on  the  Peninsula,  within 
30  miles  and  without  any  intervening  force,  in  numbers  varying  from 

20.000  to  30,000  men,  and  with  command  of  our  river  to  within  10  or  12 
miles  of  the  city. 

I mention  this  in  no  invidious  or  reproachful  spirit,  but  simply  to 
show  how  similar  necessities  to  those  now  constraining  the  diminution 
of  your  defenders  have  compelled  us  to  act  in  relation  to  the  capital  of 
the  Confederacy. 

I have  no  doubt  there  has  been  some  exaggeration  of  the  forces  re- 


942 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

moved  from  you,  as  well  as  those  which  have  been  heretofore  at  similar 
seasons  retained  for  your  defense. 

It  has  been  alleged,  as  I learn,  that  three  brigades  had  been  returned 
to  North  Carolina.  This  is  not  substantially  correct,  for  one  of  those 
sent  away  at  first  (General  Evans’)  has  since  been  returned  after  Gen- 
eral Cooke’s  brigade  was  sent  to  North  Carolina  in  its  stead.  So  it  has 
been  represented  that  the  force  in  your  department  at  the  same  season 
last  year  was  much  larger  than  now.  This  again  I find,  on  reference 
to  the  military  returns,  a misapprehension.  At  the  last  of  April  last 
year  the  returns  showed  the  force  of  the  department  to  be  26,471  and 
at  the  close  of  May  reduced  to  18,134,  which  is  about  the  number  (in- 
cluding the  force  in  Florida  and  South  Georgia)  now  left  in  the  depart- 
ment. Altogether,  I think  you  will,  on  examination  and  consideration, 
conclude  that,  considering  the  necessities  of  the  service,  the  Depart- 
ment has  not  been  unmindful  of  your  claims  to  protection,  while  it  has 
been  obliged  to  give  all  practicable  succor  to  a more  imminent  danger 
and  pressing  need  in  another  not  less  important  field  of  operation. 

It  would  certainly  give  increased  assurance  of  safety  to  your  cities 
if  all  the  resident  population  capable  of  bearing  arms  could  be  organ- 
ized, mustered,  and  armed,  so  that  on  a sudden  emergency  they  could 
be  readily  summoned  and  thrown  behind  your  intrenchinents.  Well  offi- 
cered and  with  tried  soldiers  interspersed  they  would  be  scarcely  less 
effective  for  defense  than  regular  soldiers.  Such  organization  is  being 
attempted  here,  and  it  is  hoped  it  will  be  adopted  in  every  city  in  the 
Confederacy. 

In  conclusion  I may  add  that  I have  directed  General  Whiting  to  hold 
whatever  force  he  can  possibly  spare  in  such  preparation  that  on  the  ap- 
proach of  real  danger  to  your  city  it  may  be  thrown  at  once  to  your  aid. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A.,  Richmond , May  14,  1863. 
Gov.  M.  L.  Bonham,  Columbia , S.  C.: 

The  exigencies  of  the  service  constrain  me  reluctantly  to  withdraw 
troops  from  Charleston,  despite  the  telegram  from  yourself  and  others 
of  like  character  both  through  you  and  from  that  city.  For  the  cause 
of  all  the  Mississippi  must  be  defended.  We  leave  at  Charleston  and 
Savannah  more  than  15,000  effectives.  We  do  not  believe  the  enemy 
have  that  number  on  your  coast.  I urge,  however,  the  organization  and 
arming,  for  local  defense,  of  all  citizens  capable  of  bearing  arms  in  both 
cities."  That  will  assure  safety  if  otherwise,  as  I doubt,  endangered. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  May  14,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer, 

Commanding  District  of  Georgia , Savannah : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  13th  instant  has  been  received.  The 
subject-matter  had  been  previously  disposed  ot  by  telegraph,  yeti  am 
instructed  to  say  that  the  commanding  general  profoundly  regrets  that 
he  is  unable  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  affairs  which  you  have  pre- 
sented. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


943 


Under  reiterated  orders  from  the  War  Department  the  forces  in  this 
department  have  been  depleted  to  the  degree  in  question,  and  it  only 
remains  now  to  make  such  disposition  of  the  troops  left  as  may  best 
conceal  our  weakness  and  enable  us  to  make  the  stoutest  defense  prac- 
ticable, if  untowardly  assailed,  that  we  can. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  May  15,  1863. 

Question  1.  As  to  the  propriety  of  concentrating  artillery,  &c. 

Answer.  The  true  plan  for  the  defense  of  a river  from  the  passage  of 
steamers,  &c.,  is,  when  practicable,  to  obstruct  its  navigation  with  rafts, 
piles,  torpedoes,  &c.,  at  the  most  favorable  point  for  such  obstructions, 
then  to  defend  the  latter  by  a concentration  of  the  greatest  number  of 
and  heaviest  guns  at  one’s  command,  separating  them,  however,  from 
each  other  by  traverses  when  necessary  to  protect  them  from  enfilade 
fires.  Such  was  the  system  proposed  by  Generals  Barnard  and  Totten, 
Major  Delafield,  &c.,  when  they  planned  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip 
and  the  batteries  contiguous  to  those  works. 

Detached  batteries  are  very  good  when  properly  located  and  sup- 
ported; otherwise  they  are  apt  to  be  overpowered  successively  by  a 
naval  attack  or  to  be  taken  in  rear  by  a land  force.  It  is  evident  that 
since  the  enemy’s  steamers  and  gunboats  passed  the  concentrated  fires  of 
Forts  Jackson^  Saint  Philip,  &c.,  without  much  injury,  they  would  have 
done  so  even  more  easily  if  our  guns  had  been  scattered  over  75  miles 
from  those  works  to  New  Orleans.  Moreover,  the  river  being  very  high 
and  the  country  between  those  two  points  being  low,  it  could  easily  have 
been  submerged  by  cutting  the  levees  at  night  near  any  batteries  which 
might  have  been  constructed  along  the  river,  thereby  cutting  off  their 
garrisons  from  succor  or  retreat.  I will  remark  that  Forts  Jackson  and 
Saint  Philip  were  placed  that  low  down  the  river  to  protect  from  the 
enemy’s  depredations  as  much  of  the  country  liable  to  cultivation  as 
practicable,  and  also  to  increase  the  obstacles  to  a regular  siege,  re- 
sulting from  the  lowness  of  their  sites,  which  does  not  admit  of  the 
construction  of  hoyaus  and  parallels,  especially  when  the  river  is  high. 

Question  No.  2.  The  battle  having  been  fought  at  the  forts,  the  fleet 
having  passed,  &c. 

Answer.  The  forts  commanding  the  river  having  been  passed,  New 
Orleans  necessarily  laid  at-fhe  mercy  of  the  enemy’s  heavy  guns  afloat, 
which,  owing  to  the  high  stage  of  the  river,  commanded  the  banks  on 
both  sides  to  the  swamps  skirting  the  river  at  a distance  varying  from  a 
half  to  one  mile,  an  army  of  50,000  men  or  more  could  not  then  have 
saved  the  city  from  destruction.  Whether  the  latter  was  desirable  at 
the  time,  before  New  Orleans  had  experienced  Butler’s  iron  rule,  could 
only  have  been  determined  by  the  State  or  Confederate  authorities,  who 
should  have  considered  whether  the  destruction  of  so  large  a city  would 
have  done  more  injury  to  the  enemy  than  to  ourselves.  It  is  evident 
that  to  him  Baton  Rouge  is  a better  strategic  point  than  New  Orleans, 
and  the  destruction  of  the  latter  w ould  have  relieved  him  of  the  neces- 
sity of  keeping  a garrison  of  5,000  or  6,000  men  there  to  guard  it.  This 
act  would  have  been  a mere  empty  bravado,  a wanton  destruction  of 
an  immense  amount  of  private  and  public  property,  which  would  have 
shaken  at  that  time  the  Confederacy  to  its  very  foundation  and  thrown 
upon  its  Government  a helpless  population  of  about  150,000  non-com- 
batants (men,  women,  and  children)  to  feed  and  provide  for,  when  al- 


944 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.j  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


ready  overburdened  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  armies  in  the  field- 
When  the  Russians  burnt  Moscow  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  annihilat. 
ing  Napoleon’s  army  of  300,000  or  400,000  men,  which  had  invaded 
their  country.  When  they  again  consented  to  the  slow  but  certain  de- 
struction of  Sebastopol  it  was  to  prevent  the  allies  from  taking  posses- 
sion of  its  immense  docks,  arsenals,  military  stores,  and  the  fleet  which 
had  sought  refuge  under  the  guns  of  its  forts.  The  possession  of  the 
harbor  of  Sebastopol  would  also  have  afforded  them  a magnificent  base 
for  their  future  operations  in  the  Crimea.  As  I have  already  remarked, 
the  river  being  extremely  high,  the  streets  of  New  Orleans  could  have 
been  swept  from  one  extremity  to  the  other  by  the  heavy  guns  of  the 
enemy’s  fleet;  or  had  Commodore  Farragut  preferred  reducing  the  place 
to  submission  without  using  his  guns  it  would  have  been  only  neces- 
sary to  have  cut  the  levee  above  and  below  the  city  and  the  whole  popu- 
lation would  have  been  utterly  defenseless  and  in  a starving  condition 
in  a few  days.  Without  the  command  of  the  Mississippi  River  New 
Orleans  is  not  worth  holding  as  a military  or  strategic  point. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Charleston,  May  15, 1863. 

No.  194.  ] 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  N.  G.  Evans’  brigade  will  proceed  immediately  to  Jack- 
son,  Miss.,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Special  Orders,  Nos. 
105  and  107,  current  series,  from  department  headquarters. 

# # * * # * * 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley: 

B.  H.  READ, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General . 


[May  15,  1863. — For  Beauregard  to  Johnston,  in  reference  to  sum- 
mer campaign,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  XXIII,  Part  II.] 


Abstract  from  Return  of  Troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  May  15,  1863. 


Present  for  duty. 

03 

+3 

<© 

CO 

Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Total  effective 
infantry. 

Total  effective 
cavalry. 

Total  effective 
artillery. 

Aggregate  pre 

Aggregate  pr< 
and  absent 

Brig.  Gen.  It.  S.  Ripley 

First  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

3,  667 

963 

4, 113 

10,  031 

12, 148 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Hagood 

Second  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

1,  841 

867 

295 

3,  316 

3,672 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker 

Third  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

1, 273 

1,  227 

477 

3, 329 

4,  028 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer 

District  of  Georgia 

1,919 

1,  879 

2,  466 

7,  281 

8,  448 

Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb  

District  of  Middle  Florida  .. 

788 

452 

280 

1,701 

2. 128 

Brig.  Gen.  J oseph  Finegan. . . 

District  of  East  Florida 

222 

441 

140 

916 

1,  249 

Grand  total 

9,  710 

5,829 

7,  771 

26,  574 

81,  673 

Note.— Heavy  artillery  included  with,  light  artillery  in  the  First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 
and  the  District  of  Georgia. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


945 


RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 


First  Military  District 

Second  Military  District.  - 
Third  Military  District 

District  of  Georgia  

District  of  Middle  Florida 
District  of  East  Florida . . . 


8, 743 
3, 003 
2,977 
6,264 
1,520 
803 


Total  elfectives 23,310 

Note. — Since  this  return  came  in,  Evans’  brigado,  16th  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
47th  Georgia,  and  Walker’s  brigade  ordered  West. 


Headquarters  District  of  East  Florida, 

Lake  City , May  16,  1863. 


Commanding  Officer  XJ.  S.  Navy, 

Saint  John’s  River : 


Sir  : Hereafter  no  communication  under  flag  of  truce  will  be  received 
or  sent  on  the  Saint  John’s  River.  Should  the  interests  of  either  Gov- 
ernment require  the  interchange  of  any  communications,  it  will  be  made 
at  a point  near  Fernandina. 

Private  letters  for  residents  in  the  Confederate  States  will  not  be 


received. 

I am,  very  respectfully, 


JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  District  of  East  Florida, 

Lake  City , May  16, 1863. 

I have  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  on  the  Saint  John’s  River 
have  been  using  flags  of  truce  for  improper  purposes  since  my  letter  on 
the  subject  to  the  commanding  officer  IT.  S.  Navy. 

Respectfully  submitted  for  the  approval  of  the  commanding  general. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Third  District  of  South  Carolina, 
McPhersonville , May  18,  [1863], 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : , 

General  : In  view  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  heavy  batteries  from 
the  rivers  in  this  district,  both  on  account  of  their  want  of  support  and 
the  extreme  unhealthiness  of  the  localities  in  which  they  are  placed,  I 
would  respectfully  recommend  that  field  rifled  guns  be  supplied  for 
| that  purpose.  They  could  be  manned  by  companies  of  light  artillery 
l or  by  instructed  infantry  encamped  in  the  vicinity.  I would  recommend 
j the  guns  to  be  sent  for  the  defense  of  the  following  points : Combahee 
and  Ashepoo  Rivers  (the  same  guns  would  serve  both  points),  Coosa w- 
hatchie  and  Red  Bluff. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


60  R R — VOL  XIV 


946  COASTS  OF  S.  e.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

[Indorsements.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C .,  May  20,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  chief  of  artillery  to  know  if  there  are 
batteries  of  field  rifle  pieces  disposable  for  the  positions  referred  to  by 
General  Walker. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

Hdqrs.  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance, 

Charleston , May  21,  1863. 

Respectfully  returned. 

There  are  no  batteries  available  for  the  purposes  herewithin  men- 
tioned but  those  of  Captain  Gaillard  in  the  First  Military  District  and 
Captain  Schulz  in  the  Second  District;  neither  are  there  any  rifle 
guns  in  depot  unassigned  or  provided  with  ammunition. 

The  defense  of  the  Combahee  and  Ashepoo  is  so  important  that  I 
would  suggest  the  removal  of  Skulz’s  battery  to  Combahee  Neck  and 
the  transfer  of  Culpeper’s  battery  to  the  Second  Military  District. 

As  soon  as  Napoleon  guns  are  procured,  of  which  four  will  soon  be 
cast  at  the  Charleston  Arsenal,  I will  have  the  honor  earnestly  to  ad- 
vocate, for  the  purpose  of  meeting  the  very  want  of  our  seaboard  in  the 
summer  months,  referred  to  by  General  Walker,  the  formation  of  bat- 
teries of  horse  artillery,  with  four  Napoleon  guns  each  and  eight  horses 
to  the  piece,  and  the  Beaufort  Artillery  would  answer  admirably  for 
such  a purpose  in  the  Third  Military  District.  Such  a battery  would 
be  far  preferable  to  one  of  rifle  guns  for  every  purpose  of  attack  or  de- 
fense above  the  mouths  of  our  principal  rivers. 

A.  J.  GONZALES, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery  and  Ordnance. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  (7.,  May  20,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : I have  observed  a newspaper  reference  to  important 
changes  on  foot  in  the  North  in  the  armament  of  the  monitors,  which 
I apprehend  deserve  some  consideration  on  our  side. 

It  is  said  that  the  Dahlgren  11  and  15  inch  guns,  with  which  the  at- 
tack on  Fort  Sumter  was  made,  are  to  be  discarded  for  a new  13-inch 
piece,  adapted  to  very  heavy  charges,  and  which  may  be  effectively 
used  at  a much  greater  distance  than  in  the  attack  of  the  7th  of  April. 

Of  course  I do  not  credit  the  statement  that  this  new  ordnance 
will  stand  a charge  of  75  pounds  of  powder,  but  I am  prepared  to 
believe  that  with  his  vast  mechanical  resources  the  enemy  can  readily 
make  pieces  of  1L  and  13  inches  caliber,  rifled  and  re-enforced  as  our 
Brooke  guns,  with  which  he  can  do  Fort  Sumter  vital  damage  at 
ranges  beyond  any  effective  return  on  our  side  as  we  are  now  armed. 
It  was  indeed  my  fear  previous  to  the  recent  attack  that  his  tactics 
would  be  to  anchor  at  long  range  and  attempt  to  batter  Fort  Sumter 
with  his  8-inch  rifle  pieces,  and  I cannot  doubt  that  he  will  resort  to 
that  plan  of  attack  hereafter. 


3HAF.  XXTL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 


947 


In  view  of  this  apprehension  I must  quote  the  concluding  passage  of 
uy  report  of  the  conflict  of  the  7th  of  April : 


The  best,  the  easiest  way  to  render  Fort  Sumter  impregnable  would  be  to  arm, 
conformably  to  its  original  plan,  both  tiers  of  casemates  and  the  barbette  with  the 
leaviest  guns,  rifled  or  smooth-bore,  that  can  be  made. 


To  the  utmost  practicable  extent  I would  recommend  that  as  many 
leavy  rifled  guns  of  the  Brooke  model  should  be  provided  as  soon  as 
;hey  can  be  made  in  Richmond  or  elsewhere. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , May  21,  1863. 

3rov.  Francis  W.  Pickens, 

Edgewood,  near  Edgefield,  8.  C. : 

Dear  Governor  : Yonr  letter  of  the  19tli  instant  has  been  received.* 
[ regret  to  inform  jou  that  your  informant  is  greatly  mistaken.  He  no 
loubt  reports  what  he  believes  to  be  true,  but  this  shows  the  necessity 
we  are  under  of  always  exaggerating  our  numbers  in  order  that  the 
same  reports  should  reach  the  enemy.  We  are  as  deficient  of  troops 
n Florida  and  Georgia  as  in  South  Carolina.  Should  we  be  able  to 
keep  that  fact  concealed  from  the  enemy  we  will  have  nothing  to  fear 
from  him,  for  I believe  he  is  not  prepared  just  now  to  take  the  offensive 
igainst  any  reasonable  force  on  our  side. 

With  my  kindest  regards  to  Mrs.  Pickens,  I remain,  respectfully,  your 
Dbedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  May  22,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  Savannah , Ga . : 

General:  General  J.  E.  Johnston  has  just  telegraphed  for  three 
good  light  batteries.  I have  ordered  two  from  Charleston  to  report  to 
Eim  forthwith  at  Canton,  Miss.  You  will  please  order  one  to  do  like- 
wise from  your  district. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  May  22,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  tbo  20th  instant,  desiring  me  to  report  what  batteries  under  my  com- 
mand are  not  specially  anil  necessarily  attached  to  some  command  of 
troops  or  to  some  defensive  position  in  the  lines.  I inclose  a memoran- 


* Not  found, 


948  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXYI. 

dum  of  the  light  artillery  in  the  district.  White’s  battalion  should  be 
on  the  lines  on  James  Island,  but  is  brought  into  the  city  for  health, 
and  is  subject  to  direct  orders  from  the  commander  of  the  First  Sub- 
Division  of  this  district.  I consider  it  necessary  that  it  remain  so. 

The  light  battery  of  the  First  South  Carolina  Artillery  I intend  soon 
to  place  on  Morris  Island. 

Gaillard’s  battery  and  the  detachment  of  Ferguson’s  are  preparing 
for  service  in  the  field.  The  remainder  are  at  necessary  stations. 

The  locality  near  Charleston,  I beg  respectfully  to  suggest,  is  unfa- 
vorable for  parking  a large  number  of  batteries,  as  wherever  sufficient 
space  is  found  the  country  is  unhealthy,  and  I fear  that  Summerville 
is  too  far  for  the  troops  of  this  class  to  be  transported  speedily  in  case 
of  a sudden  attack,  which  from  the  paucity  of  our  force  may  be  at- 
tempted on  the  part  of  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Memorandum  of  light  batteries  in  the  First  Military  District. 

Captain  Waties’  battery,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery, 
Charleston;  gone. 

Captain  De  Pass’  battery,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery, 
Charleston. 

Captain  Culpeper7s  battery,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery, 
Charleston;  gone. 

Captain  Kauapaux’s  battery,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery, 
one  section  Charleston,  one  section  Morris  Island. 

Preston’s  light  battery  at  Fort  Johnson. 

Company  A,  German  Artillery,  light  battery,  McClellanville,  D. 
Werner. 

Captain  Gaillard’s  light  battery,  Mount  Pleasant. 

One  section  Ferguson’s  light  battery,  Mount  Pleasant;  gone. 

Waccamaw  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Ward,  Georgetown. 

Inglis  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Charles,  Georgetown. 


Morris  Island,  May  23,  1863 — 10.25  a.  m. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

All  quiet  on  Folly  Island  this  morning.  The  8 and  10  inch  guns  re- 
cently sent  over  are  mounted,  one  at  south  end  of  the  island,  the  other 
at  Battery  Wagner,  but  the  8-inch  gun  has  no  elevating  screw  attached 
and  no  ammunition. 

R.  F.  GRAHAM, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  25, 1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  8.  (7.,  Ga.,  and  Fla .,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 
General:  According  to  your  desire  I hereby  submit  to  you  a state- 
ment of  operations  of  the  electrical  department  (M.  J.  Waldron,  super- 


Chap.  XXVI. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


949 


intendent)  from  February  9, 1863,  to  the  1st  of  May,  time  of  the  removal 
of  Mr.  Waldron  from  his  office,  Lieutenant  Young  ha  ving  been  appointed 
by  General  Ripley  to  take  his  place. 

On  the  9th  of  February  last  I reported  to  Major  Harris  for  duty,  and 
was  assigned  to  Mr.  Waldron  as  assistant  engineer,  recommended  by 
Dr.  Cheves.  Mr.  Waldron  was  left  in  charge  of  a line  of  electric  torpe- 
does intended  to  obstruct  the  channel  between  Forts  Moultrie  and 
Sumter.  The  main  portion  of  said  cable  was  composed  of  a copper 
wire,  insulated  by  a wrapper  of  cloth  immersed  in  a solution  of  melted 
India  rubber  and  protected  by  a double  twist  of  cotton.  To  said  line, 
3,500  feet  long,  was  attached  twenty-five  double  branches,  90  feet  in 
length  and  100  feet  apart,  to  be  connected  with  fifty  torpedoes,  intended 
to  be  kept  in  a steady  position  through  the  means  of  a proper  anchor- 
age and  at  a certain  depth  (2  feet)  below  the  surface  of  low  water.  Dur- 
ing the  contemplated  attack  upon  the  forts  an  electric  current  was  to 
be  kept  permanent  on  the  whole  system,  giving  a sensitive  property 
to  each  torpedo,  the  armatures  spreading  from  the  cartridge  box 
having  to  be  touched  by  the  enemy’s  vessels  in  order  to  close  the  pro- 
tecting distance  between  the  poles,  create  the  spark,  and  explode  the 
fuse.  Each  branch  (fifty  in  number)  had  to  receive  a special  contrivance 
to  secure  the  current  within  the  line  after  the  shooting  of  one  or  several 
torpedoes ; but  this  arrangement  was  postponed  by  Dr.  Cheves,  for  an 
elastic  India-rubber  tube  was  necessary  for  it,  and  could  not  be  obtained 
in  the  limits  of  the  Confederacy. 

After  a close  examination  of  said  line  I concluded  that  the  cable  was 
not  fit  for  use,  for  the  main  portion,  which  had  to  rest  on  the  bottom 
(said  bottom  being,  according  to  the  map,  a mixture  of  sand,  broken 
stones,  and  shell),  would  have  been  worn  and  cut  in  a short  time  under 
the  action  of  the  tide.  The  accompanying  specimen,  A,  is  a portion  of 
the  same.  The  branches  constructed  in  a similar  way,  but  protected 
only  by  single  wrapper,  would  be  partly  exposed  to  the  same  danger, 
and  destroyed  in  a still  shorter  time.  Specimen  B is  a piece  of  the  same. 

I accordingly  reported  the  facts  to  Mr.  Waldron,  urging  a complete 
change  of  the  cable.  In  the  mean  time  we  received  from  Nassau  5 miles 
of  submarine  cable.  A portion  of  it  was  substituted  to  the  main  line 
and  the  former  used  tor  the  branches,  converting  therefor  the  whole 
cable  in  a much  stronger  and  substantial  work,  affording  better  chance 
to  resist  destruction.  At  the  same  time  the  torpedoes  were  tested  and 
found  incapable  to  resist  the  hydraulic  pressure,  for  they  all  collapsed 
in  8 feet  of  water.  They  were  made  of  tin-iron,  without  any  frame  in- 
side, and  altogether  too  light.  I took  as  a substitute  some  small  lager- 
beer  barrels  of  thirteen  gallons’  capacity.  One  of  them  was  sunk  in  24 
feet  water,  and  when  taken  ux>,  twenty-four  hours  after,  the  inside  was  per- 
fectly dry.  Satisfied  with  their  resistance,  we  had  them  coopered  prop- 
erly, securing  at  each  end  a small  wooden  cone,  in  order  to  diminish  the 
effect  of  the  current.  Inside  and  outside  they  were  coated  with  a mix- 
ture of  coal-tar  and  resin,  of  a suitable  consistency.  In  these  new  tor- 
pedoes the  same  cartridge  cones  were  used,  the  change  being  only  in 
the  difference  of  shape  andanaterial,  the  principle  remaining  exactly  the 
same  as  previously  established  by  Dr.  Cheves.  An  elastic  India-rubber 
tube  of  a certain  diameter  was  absolutely  necessary  to  complete  the  line. 
This  article  existing  not  in  the  limits  of  the  Confederacy,  Mr.  Waldron 
applied  to  General  Ripley  for  a lieutenant  who  had  some  experience  in 
the  India-rubber  manufacture.  After  fifteen  days  of  trials  and  experi- 
ments, resulting  in  very  imperfect  samples,  the  lieutenant  abandoned 
the  work.  I then  undertook  the  same,  and  succeeded  at  last  in  making 


950  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVt 

the  needed  article.  I had  also  to  manufacture  some  brass  wire  to  make 
the  necessary  springs  for  the  circuit-closer  of  the  branches.  Finally, 
after  a great  deal  of  pains  and  labor,  by  the  latter  part  of  March  the  line 
was  completed  and  entirely  ready  for  immersion.  I had  made  from  Mr. 
Waldron  several  inquiries  about  the  location  of  the  line,  the  nature  of 
the  bottom,  the  strength  of  the  current,  the  depth  of  the  water,  &c.| 
His  opinion  was  that  the  operation,  although  a delicate  one,  was  perfectly 
practicable,  for  lie  knew  the  place  and  was  confident  of  the  result.! 
Much  to  my  regret  we  made  three  unsuccessful  attempts  to  lay  the  cable. 
Its  multiple  elements,  in  addition  to  the  necessary  lines  to  buoy  and 
anchor  the  torpedoes,  were  impossible  to  be  managed  in  the  midst  of 
such  a current  so  as  to  keep  the  proper  distance  between  the  different 
parts.  During  our  last  trial  500  feet  which  we  had  cast  off  were  in  two 
hours7  time  carried  away  by  the  tide  miles  from  its  original  position 
(the  whole  of  it  being  in  a confused  mass).  ’ I accordingly,  in  several  re- 
ports to  Major  Harris,  related  the  facts  connected  with  our  operations,: 
concluding  against  any  further  attempts  in  that  locality.  I profess  a 
great  respect  for  Dr.  Cheves7  plan ; it  is  well  combined,  and  will  cer- 
tainly work  to  satisfaction  in  a smoother  place  than  our  bay,  where  the 
different  branches  and  lines  will  retain  their  position  and  avoid  the 
friction  and  its  destructive  effects. 

Telegraph  lines. — While  Dr.  Cheves7  cable  was  in  progress  we  received 
an  order  from  General  Ripley  to  run  a submarine  cable  for  telegraph 
purposes  between  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  which  operation  was  sue* I 
cessfully  performed  on  the  10th  of  March  last.  Shortly  after  a portion 
of  submarine  cable  was  also  laid  in  the  Steamboat  Channel  between 
Sumter  and  Johnson  in  place  of  the  old  one  made  by  Dr.  Cheves,  and! 
connecting  the  air  line  through  the  Middle  Ground,  the  injuries  fre- 
quently sustained  by  the  old  cable  interrupting  most  the  time  the  trans- 
mission of  messages  to  and  from  Fort  Sumter.  Since  the  air  line  was 
completely  removed  and  a submarine  cable  laid  to  Fort  Johnson. 

Big  torpedoes. — Few  days  before  the  attack  on  the  forts  a boiler,  18  feet 
long,  3 feet  in  diameter,  containing  3,000  pounds  of  powder,  was  laid  by 
General  fdoley’s  order  in  the  main  Ship  Channel  about  1 mile  off  Fort 
Sumter  and  half  a mile  opposite  Fort  Wagner.  The  following  sketch 
will  .<how  the  mode  of  fastening  and  anchorage  selected  for  the  same. 


The  boiler  was  secured  by  two  iron  straps  on  two  longitudinal  pieces; 
10  by  10  and  20  feet  long,  united  by  six  transversal  pieces  10  by  10 
and  10  feet  long.  Four  anchors  of  a hemispherical  shape,  weighing 
3,000  pounds  apiece,  were  set  and  secured  at  each  corner  of  the  frame. 


6hap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  951 


The  total  weight  of  the  torpedo  on  dry  land  was  20,500  pounds, 
divided  as  follows: 

Pounds. 


Boiler  .. 
Powder 
Frame  .. 
Anchors 


2, 000 
3,000 
3,500 
12, 000 


In  the  water  the  dead  weight  in  favor  of  anchorage  was  6,960  pounds, 
the  balance  being  lost  by  displacement  of  water. 

The  electric  cable  was  connected  with  the  boiler  through  a brass  stutt- 
ing-box  14  inches  high,  bolted  and  soldered  to  the  same  in  order  to 
make  the  joint  perfectly  water-proof.  The  manhole  was  provided  with 
a leather  gasket  impregnated  with  melted  India  rubber.  The  boiler 
was  tested  to  50  pounds  and  made  to  resist  the  pressure. 

The  torpedo  was  to  be  exploded  through  a submarine  electric  cable 
entering  the  boiler  as  stated  above,  and  connected  with  a fuse  made  by 
Messrs.  Waldron  and  Kate,  and  of  the  following  description: 


A glass  tube  10  inches  long  and  1 inch  in  diameter,  received  inside 
a small  stick  of  wood,  A B,  on  which  was  fastened  and  sealed  two 
carbon  pencils,  C,  with  a sharp  point,  leaving  between  a distance  about 
three  thirty-seconds  of  an  inch.  The  pencils  were  closely  wrapped  with 
two  copper  wires,  connecting  one  the  cable,  the  other  the  ground,  con- 

^ Both  ends  of  the  tube  were  corked  and  sealed,  the  empty  room  of  the 
tube  having  been  previously  filled  with  fulminating  powder.  In  order 
to  increase  the  ground  attraction  a sheet  ot  zinc  was  soldered  to  the 
ground  wire  and  nailed  around  one  side  of  the  frame.  The  torpedo 
was  successfully  sunk  on  the  spot  located  by  General  Ripley,  but  while 
running  the  cable  the  steamer  (Chesterfield)  ran  out  of  steam,  and,  un- 
able to  hold  against  the  tide  and  wind,  went  aground  near  Fort  bumter. 
On  the  increase  of  the  flood  we  had  to  run  back  a long  circuit  to  reach 
Cummings  Point  and  land  the  cable.  It  resulted  from  this  accident 
that  we  played  out  2 miles  of  cable,  instead  of  1,  as  expeeted. 


952 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


There  could  be  three  causes  for  the  non-explosion  of  the  boiler:  1st, 
a leak  in  the  boiler ; 2d,  a rupture  of  the  cable  ; 3d,  a defect  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  fuse. 

In  a few  days  I expect  to  overhaul  the  boiler  and  decide  on  the  sub- 
ject. The  cable  has  been  already  overrun  and  tested  and  found. per- 
fectly sound.  The  only  remark  I made  at  the  time  was,  that  in  order 
to  produce  the  spark  at  the  end  of  the  line  (within  a few  feet  from  the 
torpedo)  I had  to  reduce  to  about  one  thirty-second  of  an  inch  the  dis- 
tance between  the  poles,  which  remark  induced  me  to  believe  that  the 
distance  of  the  poles  in  the  fuse  was  too  great  for  the  length  of  the 
cable. 

The  cable  has  since  been  taken  off  and  laid  for  telegraph  purposes 
between  Forts  Sumter  and  Johnson,  in  lieu  and  place  of  the  air  line 
running  over  the  Middle  Ground.  The  5th  of  April  last  General  Eipley 
ordered  Mr.  Waldron  to  prepare  and  have  ready  the  other  boiler,  to  be 
laid  in  the  channel  between  Sumter  and  Moultrie,  with  special  instruc- 
tions to  have  it  ready  to  leave  the  wharf  on  the  7th,  in  the  morning. 
The  work  was  pushed  ahead,  as  directed,  under  the  supervision  of  Cap- 
tain Ferguson,  appointed  there  by  General  Eipley  5 but  having  no 
frame  ready  to  receive  the  boiler,  a portion  of  an  old  raft  found  near 
the  wharf  was  planked  and  turned  into  a sort  of  flat,  on  which  the 
torpedo  was  secured  and  chained,  and  the  sinking  weight  attached. 
During  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  Mr.  Waldron  was  directed  to  sink  the 
same  in  the  Poor  Man  Hole  opposite  White  Point  Battery,  which  was 
done  accordingly.  When  the  fight  was  over  Mr.  Waldron  sent  Mr. 
Kate  with  the  light- ship  to  haul  up  the  boiler  and  take  it  back  to  the 
dock.  During  the  operation  the  frame  broke,  and  the  boiler,  cast  loose, 
was  carried  away  by  the  tide;  being  about  dark  at  the  time  they  soon 
lost  sight  of  it.  Several  times  since  attempts  have  been  made  to  find 
the  stray  boiler,  but  we  always  failed  in  our  search. 

Allow  me,  general,  before  ending  the  above  statement,  to  suggest  the 
sinking  of  a certain  number  of  submarine  batteries  in  the  channel  be- 
tween Sumter  and  Moultrie,  and  located  in  certain  positions,  as  may  be 
determined  by  the  engineer  department ; each  one  having  its  own  in- 
dependent cable,  and  containing  from  1,000  to  1,500  pounds  of  powder. 
Old  boilers  10  feet  long  can  be  used  for  that  purpose.  The  different 
cables  will  run  to  the  same  battery  on  Sullivan’s  Island.  An  arrange- 
ment of  sights  and  buoys  can  be  easily  combined  so  as  to  signal  to  the 
operator  the  passage  of  any  Yankee  gunboat  on  or  near  by,  and  afford 
him  time  to  explode  the  one  nearest  to  it.  Such  plan  is  very  simple, 
and  avoids  the  complications  and  difficulties  of  Dr.  Cheves’  cable.  Be- 
sides the  set  between  Sumter  and  Moultrie  a similar  one  could  be  ar- 
ranged in  the  Ship  Channel  opposite  Fort  Wagner,  or  near  by  the  next 
possible  field  of  operation  likely  to  be  adopted  by  the  enemy  in  any 
subsequent  attack  on  the  harbor. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  most  devoted  and  obedient  servant, 

CH.  G.  DE  LISLE, 

Assistant  Engineer. ' 

P.  S. — We  have  here  all  the  necessary  material  and  submarine  cable 
to  complete  ten  big  torpedoes.  . 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


953 


Hdqrs.  First  Sub-Division  First  Military  Dist., 

Secessionville , May  25,  1863. 

Oapt.  W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Captain  : I have  had  the  enemy  observed  from  a point  supposed  to 
be  about  900  yards  from  the  extremity  of  Big  Folly  Island,  nearest 
South  Folly,  by  a lieutenant  of  Twenty-fifth  Regiment.  He  saw  five 
earthworks,  apparently  redans.  They  extended  from  that  end  of  Big 
Folly  up  the  island  for  the  distance  of  about  a half  mile.  The  work 
on  their  right  flank  and  that  on  their  left  run  out  on  the  beach  opposite 
James  Island ; the  other  works  were  more  toward  the  interior  of  the 
island,  within  the  wood.  They  may  or  may  not  be  connected  by  a line 
of  infantry  intrenchments.  He  saw  no  guns.  Lieut.  Samuel  Dibble — 
the  officer  alluded  to — is  an  officer  of  just  intelligence  and  of  good  judg- 
ment. He  thinks  that  these  are  the  works  of  an  intrenched  camp,  the 
tents  of  which  he  saw  within  the  limits  of  these  woods.  The  enemy 
shelled  the  pickets  at  Legare’s  for  about  a half  hour  to-day  at  10-11 
o’clock  from  a gunboat  and  battery  in  Folly  River. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Abstract  from,  Return  of  Troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  May  25,  1863. 


Commanding  officer. 


Brig.  Gen.  It.  S.  Ripley  . . 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Hagood 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker 


Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer 

Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan. . 
Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales 


Grand  total. 


Troops. 


First  Military  District  of 
South  Car  olina. 

Second  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

Third  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

District  of  Geor  gia 

District  of  Middle  Florida. . . 

District  of  East  Florida 

Siege  train  


Present  for  dnty. 


> 

"S  >J 


2, 562 

493 

527 

1,  868 
788 
222 


© 

® > 
© 


1, 145 

818 

1, 463 

1,812 

452 

441 


© >» 
<£>  J-t 

*§§ 

31 

o 

H 


3,  593 
278 


2,  296 
280 
140 
271 


6, 131  7, 454 


8,  350 
1,  736 
2, 924 


1,701 

916 

287 


tf. : 


<3 

S3 

fee 

be 


10, 253 

2,  056 

3,  478 

8,  440 
2, 128 
1,  249 
342 


22,902  27,946 


Note. — Heavy  artillery  included  with  light  artillery  in  the  First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 
and  the  District  of  Georgia. 

RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 


First  Military  District L 300 

Second  Military  District 1?  589 

Third  Military  District 2, 586 

District  of  Georgia 5,976 

District  of  Middle  Florida b 520 

District  of  East  Florida 803 

Siege  train 271 


Total  effectives . 20, 045 


Note  from  original  return. — Since  the  returns  were  consolidated  Waties’  and 
Culpeper’s  light  batteries  and  a detachment  of  Ferguson’s  light  battery  have  been 
ordered  to  report  to  General  Johnston  at  Canton,  Miss. 


954  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXtr 

Eichmond,  May  26, 1863.  ;; 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston , 8.  C.  : 

The  Secretary  of  War  desires  to  know  whether  his  direction  to  sen' 
10,000  men  from  your  command  to  Mississippi  has  been  carried  int 
‘effect.  General  Johnston  reports  arrival  of  only  6,500. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  > 


Camp  Anderson,  May  26,  1863.  , 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer,  Charleston , 8.  C. : 

Major  : While  in  Tallahassee  yesterday  I received  from  the  Stall 
of  Florida  137  negroes,  who  had  been  called  out  by  the  Governoi 
They  arrived  at  the  camp  to-day,  and  I think  we  shall  now  be  able  t 
complete  the  works  rapidly. 

Yery  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

THEODOEE  MOEENO, 

Captain  of  Engineers . | 

Mat  28.  i 

P.  S. — Not  having  had  an  opportunity  to  send  my  report  befor 
to-day  I add  a few  lines,  which  may  be  of  interest.  Upon  a repor 
having  reached  Chattahoochee  on  Monday  last  that  the  Yankees  ii 
sixteen  launches  were  coming  up  the  river  to  capture  a small  vesse 
laden  with  50  bales  of  sea-island  cotton,  the  gunboat  Chattahooche 
proceeded  down  the  river,  but  she  found  the  water  too  low  at  Bloun 
Town  Bar,  7 miles  below  Alum  Bluff,  there  being  but  7 \ feet  of  water  oi’ 
it.  Her  captain  descended  the  river  in  an  open  boat  as  far  as  Bicco*  [ 
Bluff,  where  he  learned  that  the  Yankees  had  come  up  to  Fort  Gads 
den,  24  miles  above  Apalachicola,  and  took  possession  of  the  vessel  an« 
the  cotton,  burning  the  barge  in  which  it  had  been  transported  arouni 
the  obstructions  through  the  Chipola  Cut-off  and  Gum  Swamp.  Oj 
bis  return  to  the  gunboat,  while  raising  steam  to  ascend  the  river  again)! 
her  boiler  exploded,  killing  10  men  almost  instantly,  wounding  severely 
8 more,  and  losing  by  drowning  4 more,  who  had  jumped  overboart 
immediately  after  the  explosion.  This  occurred  yesterday  at  noon 
Before  sunset  a courier  reached  me  from  Alum  Bluff,  calling  for  assist! 
ance.  I at  once  ran  down  in  the  steamer  Young,  and  reached  her  ii 
the  midst  of  a violent  storm  of  rain  and  wind.  She  was  near  the  show 
on  the  right  bank,  where  she  had  been  hauled  in,  and  her  stern  it  wa 
supposed  was  touching  the  bottom  where  she  lay  in  12  feet  water,  bu 
her  bow  seemed  to  be  free.  The  amount  of  damage  which  her  machin 
ery  received  could  not  be  ascertained,  but  her  deck  amidship  had  bee> 
forced  up,  tearing  loose  several  of  her  plank. 

Captain  Guthrie,  her  commander,  was  unhurt,  but  3 engineers  an< 
the  pilot  were  killed.  After  taking  off  all  the  lighter  articles  of  greatesi 
value  we  have  returned  at  Captain  Guthrie’s  request,  but  can  proceed 
no  farther  on  account  of  the  violence  of  the  storm  now  raging. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THEODOEE  MOEENO, 

Captain  of  Engineers.  || 


Chap.  XXVI  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


955 


Savannah,  Ga.,  May  26,  1863. 

Hon.  Charles  J.  Yillere,  Mobile , Ala.  : 

My  Hear  Charles:  Your  favor  of  the  17th instant  came  to  hand 
here  where  I am  on  a tour  of  inspection  to  pass  away  the  time  and  get 
rid  for  a while  of  the  routine  troubles  at  my  headquarters.  I may  con- 
tinue mv  visit  to  Florida,  si  bon  Dieu  veut.  I am  happy  to  hear  of  the 
confidence  in  me  expressed  everywhere,  but  I am  always  fearful  not  to 
iustifv  it,  for,  besides  my  limited  capacity,  therg  are  so  many  causes  ot 
failure  in  our  want  of  sufficient  means,  &c.,  and  that  cordial  support  ot 
and  good-will  toward  the  commanding  officer  on  the  part  of  the  Gov- 
ernment. Notwithstanding  my  additional  experience  in  the  command  ot 
armies  and  departments,  I feel  less  confidence  in  myself  now  than  I did 
two  years  ago,  for  I know  that  if  I succeed  I only  increase  the  irritation 
of  certain  persons  against  me,  and  if  I fail,  their  satisfaction  and  ire. 
Without  intending  to  flatter  myself,  I feel  like  u Samson  shorn  ot  his 
lock  s ^ 

Yoii  ask  what  should  be  done  to  end  this  exhausting  war.  We  must 
take  the  offensive,  as  you  suggest,  not  by  abandoning  all  other  points, 
however,  but  by  a proper  selection  of  the  point  of  attack— the  Yankees 
themselves  tell  us  where.  I see  by  the  papers  of  this  morning  that 
Yallandigham  is  being  sent  into  Bragg’s  lines.  Hooker  is  disposed  ot 
for  the  next  six  months  at  least.  Well,  let  Lee  acton  the  defensive,, 
and  send  to  Bragg  30,000  men  for  him  to  take  the  offensive  with  at 
once;  let  him  (or  whoever  is  put  in  his  place)  destroy  or  capture  (as  it 
is  done  in  Europe)  Rosecrans’  army;  then  march  into  Kentucky,  raise 
30  000  men  more  there  and  in  Tennessee ; then  get  into  Ohio,  and  call 
upon  the  friends  of  Yallandigham  to  rise  for  his  defense  and  support; 
then  call  upon  Indiana,  Illinois,  and  Missouri  to  throw  ofl  the  yoke  of 
the  accursed  Yankee  nation ; then  upon  the  whole  Northwest  to  join  in 
the  movement,  form  a confederacy  ot  their  own,  and  join  us  by  a treaty 
of  alliance,  defensive  and  offensive.  What  would  then  become  of  the 
Northeast  % How  long  would  it  take  us  to  bring  it  back  to  its  senses  ? 

As  I have  once  written  to  you,  “ Battles  without  diplomacy  will  never 
end  this  war.,?  Historv  is  there  to  support  my  assertion. 

I send  you  a pamphlet  (military)  I have  just  gotten  up  for  my  gen- 
eral officers.  I telegraphed  you  about  raising  a regiment.  Do  so  by 
all  means. 

Y0UrS’  ^ G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  May  26, 1863.. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  <&c.1  Charleston , S.  C.: 

Dear  General  : I send  you  herewith  a request  of  Dr.  Palmer,  which 
is  approved,  to  be  carried  into  effect  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  guns 
in  position  in  the  Third  Military  District,  which  have  been  removed  in 
consequence  of  the  sickly  season  and  which  I had  ordered  to  Savannah 
until  required  again,  have  not  yet  been  received.  The  chief  of  artillery 
here  will  have  to  furnish  his  detailed  receipt  for  them.  If  those  in  the 
Second  Military  District  are  not  required  in  the  First  they  might  also 
be  sent  hero.  . . , 

See  Colonel  Gonzales  about  organizing  new  light  batteries  m the  de- 
partment from  the  surplus  artillerists  in  the  now  existing  companies 


956  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

or  in  any  other  way  practicable.  I think  one  in  Georgia  and  two  in 
South  Carolina  could  thus  be  organized.  I do  hot  suppose  we  will  ever 
see  here  again  those  we  have  sent  off  to  Mississippi. 

I am  informed  that  the  President  said  not  long  ago  that  he  intended 
to  organize  a new  department  for  me  as  soon  as  I could  be  spared  from 
my  present  one,  to  consist  of  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and  Louisiana. 
u Always  a little  toojate”  will  be  the  history  of  this  war. 

All  quiescent  and  somnolent  here. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

<jr.  T.  B. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  27, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

Total  present  Gist’s,  Walker’s,  and  Evans’  brigades,  as  organized 
when  sent  from  department,  above  9,700. 

Could  not  detach  exactly  10,000  without  sending  a regiment,  which 
would  have  exceeded^  number.  Since  then  have  sent  two  best  light 
batteries.  Deficiency  due  to  disgraceful  straggling;  reported  as  many 
as  500  from  one  regiment. 

General  Beauregard  at  Savannah. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Office  of  Chief  Engineer, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  May  27,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  hand  you  herewith  Major  Echols’, 
Captain  Howard’s,  Mr.  Cheves’,  Mr.  White’s,*  and  Mr.  Mathewes’  com- 
mucations  in  explanation  of  the  character  and  condition  of  the  works 
therein  referred  to  and  of  the  tardiness  in  their  construction  complained 
of  by  General  Ripley  in  his  letter  of  the  24th  instant.  From  these  com- 
munications it  is  manifest  that  this  delay  is  not  chargeable  to  the  engi- 
neer department,  but  is  chiefly  owing  to  the  want  of  labor  and  trans- 
portation, which  has  been  and  is  still  a serious  drawback  to  the  prosecu- 
tion of  the  defensive  works  not  only  in  this  military  district  bat  in  the 
whole  department.  The  number  of  slaves  furnished  by  this  State  for 
the  defensive  works  in  the  First  Military  District  was  400  for  March, 
350  for  April,  and  but  80  for  this  month,  in  the  face  of  a requisition  for 
the  two  former  months  of  3,000  and  for  this  month  of  2,500  hands.  The 
northern  communication  for  the  passage  of  troops  from  James  to  Morris 
Islands  by  ferries  and  across  the  naked  marsh  has  been  available  for 
some  time,  the  only  interruption  being  occasioned  by  the  breaking  of 
the  ropes  by  boats.  The  southern  and  more  direct  route  is  now  being 
constructed  and  will  be  probably  finished  next  week.  It  will  lead  as 
direct  as  the  nature  of  the  marsh  will  admit  from  James  to  Morris  Island, 
and  when  completed  will  answer  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  designed,  of 
passing  infantry  troops  from  one  island  to  the  other.  The  materials  of 
which  it  is  composed  are  subject  to  decay  ; a portion  of  these  may  not 
last  two  years.  To  make  a permanent  roadway  across  the  marsh  would 
involve  an  amount  of  labor  not  uow  available  and  a length  of  time  that 
might  defea  t the  purpose  for  which  this  communication  is  desired.  I am 
pleased  to  be  informed  of  General  Ripley’s  intention  to  increase  the  ar- 


Not  found. 


957 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

mament  of  Morris  Island  with  the  30-pounder  Parrott  gun,  as  was  urged 
and  recommended  by  Captain  Cheves,  of  the  engineer  department,  to 
whose  application  and  exertion  we  are  indebted  for  the  transfer  of  this 
gun  from  the  FTavy  Department.  It  has  been  before  proposed,  and  I 
think  the  proposition  a good  one,  to  place  long-range  guns,  if  they  can 
be  provided,  in  suitable  positions  on  Morris  Island,  not  only  to  com- 
mand the  anchorage  from  the  bar  to  Fort  Sumter,  but  also  to  command 
Little  Folly  Island  and  the  approaches  from  Big  Folly  to  it.  The  addi- 
tion of  a 10-inch  mortar  to  the  armament  of  the  southern  point  of  Morris 
Island  for  the  purpose  named  is  desirable.  If  Captain  Cheves  can  be 
supplied  with  the  necessary  labor,  and  if  the  material  referred  to  in  his 
communication  be  transported  to  Morris  Island,  the  works  on  that  isl- 
and, all  of  which  are  under  his  charge,  will,  I feel  assured,  be  carried  on 
with  his  accustomed  zeal  and  good  judgment  without  his  withdrawal 
from  the  control  of  the  engineer  department,  for  which  I see  no  neces- 
sity and  do  not  approve.  Believing  no  good  can  result  to  the  service 
by  meeting  the  reflections  upon  the  engineer  department  in  General 
Ripley’s  communication  in  the  spirit  in  which  they  are  made,  especially 
in  its  closing  paragraph  or  postscript,  I content  myself  with  the  mere 
statement  of -facts  embraced  in  my  own  and  the  accompanying  commu- 
nications, all  of  which  are  respectfully  submitted  in  response  to  your 
indorsement  on  the  general’s  communication,  which  I return  herewith. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Engineers. 

[Inclosures.] 

Confederate  States,  Engineer’s  Office, 

Charleston , May  26,  1863. 

Maj.  D.  B.  Harris,  Chief  of  Engineer  Department: 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  return  inclosed  the  letter  of  Brigadier- 
General  Ripley,  commanding  First  District,  relative  to  the  slow  progress 
of  the  works  on  the  fort  and  islands,  with  the  statements  of  the  engineers 
in  charge,  which  are  briefly  as  follows : 

That  the  works  are  not  progressing  as  rapidly  as  we  all  desire ; that 
labor  of  the  proper  kind  cannot  be  secured.  When  soldiers  are  em- 
ployed not  a great  deal  appears  to  be  done;  that  transportation  in  some 
instances  has  been  the  cause  of  delay;  that  several  instances  have  been 
reported  of  the  careless  injury  to  works,  requiring  repairs  to  be  made,  by 
steamboats ; that  all  necessary  material  has  been  readily  furnished  by 
this  department,  not  only  to  engineers,  but  to  other  departments.  I 
believe  the  officers  and  superintendents  have  been  industrious.  There- 
fore the  cause  of  complaint  is  not  the  fault  of  this  department.  At  Bat- 
tery Bee  all  that  portion  of  the  work  in  use  is  complete.  The  material 
already  thrown  up  at  the  Marsh  Battery — shells,  sand,  and  mud — will 
make  a good  parapet,  and  only  regret  that  a sufficiency  of  it  cannot  be 
obtained,  the  under  surface  being  soft  mud.  Under  the  direction  of 
General  Ripley  the  laborers  (soldiers)  could  probably  be  induced  to  per- 
form more  work  under  the  immediate  direction  of  their  commissioned 
officers,  as  they  have  not  heretofore  been  put.  The  transportation  would 
also  be  at  his  momentary  command  and  appliances  of  every  department 
at  his  control. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  H.  ECHOLS, 

Major  of  Engineers, 


958  COASTS  OF  S.  C.J  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVX 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  26,  1863. 
Maj.  W.  H.  Echols,  Chief  Engineer,  South  Carolina: 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  cause  of  the  slow  progress 
of  the  road  or  footway  from  James  Island  across  the  marsh  to  Morris 
Island : 

1st.  Want  of  hands.  I have  not  been  able  to  keep  a force  of  white 
hands  on  the  work  on  account  of  the  mud,  and  have  not  been  able  to 
hire  negroes  enough  to  keep  all  parts  going  on  at  once. 

2d.  Want  of  material.  Notwithstanding  the  limited  number  of  hands 
I have  been  out  of  material  until  yesterday  for  most  of  last  week,  although 
the  boat  (Hibben)  was  loaded  with  it  last  Tuesday,  the  19th. 

I have  now  quite  a lot  of  material  on  hand,  and  hope  to  make  better 
progress  this  week.  I have  a force  of  soldiers  on  the  Morris  Island  end. 
The  road  is  intended  for  infantry  only,  and  is  made  6 feet  wide  and  4 
feet  above  the  highest  part  of  marsh  (except  the  bridges  over  the  creeks, 
which  are  12  feet  wide  and  sufficient  to  bear  up  artillery),  and  will  be, 
when  finished,  quite  sufficient  for  the  passage  of  infantry,  and  will  be 
permanent  as  long  as  the  material  of  which  it  is  made  lasts.  In  regard 
to  the  rope  ferries  between  Fort  Johnson  and  Battery  Wagner,  I have 
the  honor  to  report  that  they  were  all  finished  and  furnished  with  boats 
capable  of  taking  over  50  men  at  a time.  Over  Light-House  Creek, 
where  it  is  necessary  for  steamboats  to  pass  going  to  Secessionville,  the 
rope  was  provided  with  a weight  to  sink  it  and  allow  the  passage  of  a 
boat  and  with  a couple  of  blocks  to  raise  it  out  of  the  water  after  the  boat 
had  passed,  but  the  boats,  neglecting  to  lower  it,  ran  against  and  broke 
it;  it  was  repaired  and  broken  a second  time,  and  has  not  since  been 
repaired.  The  one  over  the  creek  nearest  Fort  Johnson  has  been  broken 
several  times  by  the  steam  pile-driver  used  as  a transport  to  carry  hands 
to  and  from  the  work  on  Marsh  Battery,  and  has  not  been  repaired  since 
last  broken. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  HOWARD, 
Captain  and  Engineer  in  Charge . 

Charleston,  June  5,  1863. 
Maj.  D.  B.  Harris,  Engineer -in- Chief  &c.: 

Major:  I beg  leave  respectfully  to  report  that  the  various  works  on 
Morris  Island  were  progressing  in  accordance  with  your  instructions  as 
rapidly  as  the  labor  at  command  and  the  insufficient  supply  of  material 
would  allow  till  about  the  28th  May.  About  that  date  I was  verbally 
informed  by  Colonel  Graham,  commanding  Morris  Island,  that  the 
fatigue  detail  from  his  regiment  was  ordered  to  report  for  duty  to  Cap- 
tain Mitchel,  commanding  company  First  Regiment  South  Carolina 
Artillery.  As  this  detail  constituted  the  only  force  at  my  disposal  for 
the  prosecution  of  the  works  at  the  south  point  their  execution  under 
my  direction  was  necessarily  suspended.  Captain  Mitchel  in  the  mean 
time  is  carrying  on,  with  that  force  and  a detail  from  his  owu  command, 
and  I am  informed  under  direct  instructions  from  Brigadier-General 
Ripley,  works  nearly  identical  with  those  ordered  by  the  engineer  de- 
partment. My  carpenters,  thus  thrown  out  of  employ,  have  been  turned 
over  to  Captain  Howard,  mi  James  Island.  Ten  hired  laborers  (all 
now  at  my  disposal)  are  engaged  in  completing  a small  but  important 
unfinished  portion  of  Battery  Wagner. 

Respectfully, 


LANGDON  CHEVES, 
Engineer , in  charge  Morris  Island. 


IAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


359 


Charleston,  May  26, 1863. 

[aj.  W.  H.  Echols, 

Chief  Engineer , South  Carolina : 

Major  : Iu  reply  to  so  mucli  of  Brig.  Gen.  B.  S.  Bipley’s  communi- 
ition,  dated  24th  instant,  to  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  relative  to 
ie  battery  erecting  on  the  marsh  of  Vincent’s  Creek,  I have  the  honor 
) report  that  the  work  complained  of  is  necessarily  slow  and  tedious 
•om  the  following  causes,  viz : During  the  first  five  weeks  alter  1 
3mmenced  the  work  the  health  of  the  hands  employed  was  so  bad 
hev  being  from  the  upper  districts  and  not  accustomed  to  working  m 
md  and  water  and  the  change  of  climate  and  diet)  that  the  working 
irce  did  not  average  daily  more  than  20  out  of  100  ll^ds  then  uJlde^ 
iv  charge.  The  negroes  can  only  work  from  half  ebb  tide  to  hall  ol 
be  next  flood  tide,  making  an  average  of  about  seven  hours’  work  each 
av  The  tide  overflows  the  marsh  during  the  rest  ol  the  time,  making 
; impossible  to  proceed.  The  material  piled  up  and  complained  of  as 
ot  efficient  for  an  epaulement  is  the  only  material  except  mud  afiorded 
t that  place  or  any  other  around  short  of  Morris  Island,  and  though 
itended  to  be  used  for  the  battery  with  some  modifications,  was  not 
specially  collected  for  that  purpose,  it  being  simply  the  natural  soil 
brown  up  in  the  necessary  process  of  digging  the  bed  to  float  m the 
ulk  intended  to  be  used  as  a foundation  for  the  battery  erecting.  I 
muld  also  state  that  in  consequence  of  the  limited  supply  of  negro  labor 
urnished  by  the  State  I have  only  62  hands  at  work  on  the  battery, 
ffiich  for  the  speedy  completion  of  the  work  is  altogether  insufficient. 

sour  otali.nt  TAss&  MATBBWBSi 

In  Charge, 


Savannah,  Ga.,  May  29, 1863. 

rig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff, , Charleston , S.  C, : 

Dear  General  : I send  you  herewith  two  slips  of  newspaper  refer- 
ng  to  “passports,”  one  alluding  to  the  charge  of  25  cents  for  passes  to 
ersons  going  out  of  Charleston  and  the  other  recommending  that  a 
pstem  of  passports  be  established  at  Nassau  for  all  persons  coming 
ito  the  Confederacv.  I suppose  the  first  refers  to  a city  charge  ; it  sor 
■ would  be  well  for  the  Mercury  and  Courier  to  say  so  ; otherwise  the 
ublic  might  misunderstand  the  position  of  the  military  authorities  in 
be  matter.  With  regard  to  the  Nassau  passports,  I highly  approve  ol 
be  suggestion,  and  wish  you  would  write  accordingly  to  Major  Heyli- 
er,  inclosing  him  that  slip  of  newspaper  referring  to  the  subject.  It 
rould  be  well  also  to  publish  an  order  to  the  same  effect  in  the  city 
iapers.  It  has  been  raining  here  for  several  days,  preventing  me  irorn 
ompleting  my  tour  of  inspection;  hence  I will  leave  for  Tallahassee 
o-morrow  morning,  expecting  to  be  back  in  a few  days.  1 hope  to  be 
.gain  iu  Charleston  about  the  5th  proximo.  Keep  everything  ready 
or  “a  change  of  base”  at  a moment’s  notice.  I do  not  like  the  ap- 
>earance  of  things  in  Mississippi.  I send  you  another  newspaper  slip, 
bowing  I had  divined  Grant’s  plan  of  operations,  i.  to  march  on  the 
fazoo  to  reopen  his  communications  with  the  Mississippi  Biver,  and  l 
ear  he  has  succeeded;  he  has  outgeneraled  Pemberton.  I believe 
Johnston  unfortunately  got  there  too  late,  as  I had  also  predicted  would 


960  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XX Yl. 

happen,  on  account  of  his  too  extensive  dominions.  The  blame  will  be 
attempted  now  to  be  thrown  on  his  shoulders  ; but  should  he  -succeed 
in  defeating  Grant  they  will  not  be  disposed  to  give  him  credit  for  the 
result.  Order  a sufficient  number  of  that  pamphlet  on  the  Art  of  War 
to  be  sent  to  each  commander  of  districts  for  the  colonels  or  acting 
colonels  of  regiments  in  their  commands.  Should  there  be  enough  of 
these  pamphlets,  reserving  fifty  for  my  use,  one  might  be  sent  for  every 
field  officer  of  said  regiments.  It  may  be  of  service  to  some  of  them  if 
the  war  should  continue  long  enough. 

Yours,  very  truly. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGARD. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , 8.  (7.,  May  31,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff*  &c. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  herewith  telegrams  and  re- 
port from  Colonel  Simonton,  commanding  first  sub  division  of  this  dis- 
trict. 

In  addition  I have  to  report  that  the  enemy  appears  to  have  estab- 
lished three  guns  in  battery  on  his  works  to  the  north  of  Folly  Island. 
As  yet  he  has  not  opened  fire.  From  these  appearances  and  the  tenac- 
ity with  which  he  holds  Folly  Island  I have  no  doubt  that  he  intends 
to  annoy  us  more  or  less,  according  to  his  strength. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

[Inclosures.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 
Charleston , 8.  (7.,  May  31,  1863 — 7.10  p.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staffs  &e. : 

General  : Since  my  note  of  this  evening,  relative  to  the  enemy’s 
operations,  I have  received  a dispatch  from  Colonel Ehett,  commanding 
at  Fort  Sumter,  stating  that  the  enemy,  from  his  battery  on  Folly  Island, 
had  just  fired  three  shots  at  the  steamer  Hibben,  in  rear  of  Morris 
Island.  If  this  be  correct  the  range  must  be  fully  4 miles,  and  I doubt 
not  that  the  fire  is  exceedingly  inaccurate.  It  however  proves  the  in- 
tention to  annoy  as  much  as  possible,  if  not  to  attack. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  EIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Secessionville,  May  31,  1863. 
Captain  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

I have  reoccupied  my  positions  as  far  as  Battery  Island.  The  enemy 
retired  before  us  under  cover  of  guns  from  gunboats  and  from  battery 
on  Folly  Island. 

Gunboats  have  retired  to  Folly  Creek.  Four  vessels  were  at  Battery 
Island : one  has  left, 

CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding , 


961 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Secessionville,  May  31, 1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

The  enemy’s  vessels  have  left  Stono  Creek  and  reoccupied  their 
former  positions  in  Stono  Bay.  The  picket  lines  have  been  re-estab- 

llShed'  CHARLES  H.  SIMONTOR, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Secessionville,  S.  C.,  May  31, 1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

A strong  party  of  the  enemy,  say  150  strong,  landed  at  Legare’s  this 
morning  from  Folly  Biver  in  small  boats,  and  I fear  have  cut  oft  the 
cavalry  pickets.  My  dispositions  have  been  made  to  drive  them  oft  or 

capture  them.  CHARLES  H.  SIMORTOR, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Secessionville,  May  31, 1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

The  enemy  did  not  capture  any  of  the  pickets.  He  landed  at  Le- 
gare’s:  but  now,  to  all  appearances,  is  leaving;  some  by  boats  down 
Folly  Biver  and  some  by  Battery  Island.  We  are  trying  to  come  up 
with  them.  One  gunboat  came  up  Folly  Biver  to  Legare’s  place,  and 
the  large  three-masted  one  is  up  Stono  at  Battery  Island. 

CHABLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Statement  of  the  commerce  of  the  port  of  Charleston  for  the  months  of  April  and  May,  1863. 


Vessels  entered 

Vessels  cleared 

Bales  of  cotton 

Pounds  of  sea  island 
Pounds  of  upland . . . 
Value 


15 

21 

10,  003 
171,  234 
4,  224,  198 
$1,  971,  000 


Receipts  from  customs  for  April,  1863 
Receipts  from  customs  for  May,  1863. 


$28,  509  78 
110, 010  62 


Total 


138,  520  40 


Collector’s  Office, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  June  3, 1863. 


W.  F.  COLCOCK, 

Collector. 


Confidential.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  (7.,  June  1,  1863. 

H.  C.  Guerin, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence  : 

Major  : In  reply  to  your  communication  of  May  30  I am  instructed 
by  the  commanding  general  to  say  that  the  number  of  troops  in  the 

61  R R— VOL  XIV 


962 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


State  of  South  Carolina  for  which  estimate  of  provisions  should  be 
made  will  be  10,000. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

CLIFTON  H.  SMITH, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville , June  1,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  a communication  received 
from  the  enemy  by  flag  of  truce,  and  would  submit  to  the  decision  of 
department  headquarters  the  question  whether  under  present  circum- 
stances any  communication  by  flag  of  truce  should  be  received. 

When  we  wish  to  communicate  we  are  deprived  of  the  opportunity 
by  the  action  of  the  enemy  in  sending  over  negroes  and  their  officers 
to  receive  us.  When  they  wish  to  communicate  with  us  they  send  offi- 
cers representing  white  commands  in  order  to  secure  a hearing. 

If  this  is  permitted  the  advantages  of  such  intercourse  will  be  entirely 
with  the  Abolition  forces  and  we  will  be  debarred  from  them.  An 
opportunity  is  now  presented  of  bringing  the  question  to  an  issue  and 
ascertaining  definitely  the  ground  they  propose  to  take. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Charleston,  June  2, 1863—8.30  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Green  Pond , S.  C. : 

General  : Hagood  will  confer  with  you  as  soon  as  possible  as  to 
ultimate  extent  he  can  aid  you  in  emergency.  Eight  companies  of  in- 
fantry will  be  sent  off  to-night  to  Green  Pond,  as  well  as  artillery  called 
for.  All  assistance  that  can  be  sent  will  be.  Advise  me  of  your  needs 
and  movements. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.}  June  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Comdg.  First  Military  District , Charleston , S.  C. : 

General  : Please  instruct  the  commanding  officer  of  the  infantry 
force  to  halt  it  and  all  other  troops  sent  from  yours  and  the  Second 
Military  District  at  Green  Pond,  to  assume  command  there  if  the  senior, 
and  to  operate  according  to  the  state  of  affairs  developed  at  the  time 
until  he  can  receive  orders  direct  from  General  Walker. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Coat.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


963 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 
Charleston , S.  C\,  June  2,  18G3 — 8 p.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District : 

General  : In  reply  to  your  note  of  6.10  p.  m.  of  this  date  I have  to 
say  that  the  substance  of  General  Walker’s  information  is  merely  that 
the  enemy  had  come  up  to  Combaliee  Ferry,  had  burnt  the  pontoon 
bridge  there,  the  houses  on  the  river  side,  and  had  landed  a party  of 
several  hundred  at  Field’s  Point,  which  had  made  a demonstration  as  if 
destined  to  advance  into  the  interior. 

As  yet  I have  not  felt  called  upon  to  make  any  suggestions  to  Gen- 
eral Hagood.  He  has  been  directed  to  send  Schulz’s  Battery  to  Green 
Pond,  where  General  Walker  has  gone  in  person. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

P.  s. — Colonel  Gonzales  has  been  directed  to  inform  you  of  the  par- 
ticular section  and  character  of  guns  sent  from  the  train  under  his 
command. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  June  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District : 

General:  General  Walker  reports  enemy  advancing  from  Field’s 
Point,  and  suggests  that  an  infantry  force  and  section  of  artillery  should 
be  sent  as  soon  as  possible  to  Ashepoo  Bridge.  Of  course  there  are  not 
troops  enough  available  in  the  department  to  hold  the  line  of  the  rail- 
road if  the  enemy  aim  seriously  at  its  possession,  but  as  this  may  be 
a mere  raid,  which  may  be  foiled,  it  will  be  best  to  send  all  disposable 
infantry  from  Sullivan’s  Island  and  a section  of  Preston’s  or  some  other 
battery  without  delay,  say  with  ten  days’  rations. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

p.  s. — Colonel  Gonzales  can  furnish  a section  of  guns  from  his  field 
train. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Green  Pond,  June  3,  1863. 

General  Ripley  arrived  here  and  found  an  order  from  General 
Walker  to  return,  as  enemy  had  retired.  Damage  done  yesterday  very 
great.  Messrs.  Lowndes,  W.  C.  Heyward,  W.  H.  Heyward,  Kirkland, 
and  Paul  have  lost  nearly  all  their  negroes,  about  700 ; houses  mostly 
destroyed.  Mr.  Nichols  and  overseer  supposed  to  be  taken.  Yankees 
had  negro  troojis  chiefly. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT,  Colonel , 


964  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 


Abstract  from  Return  of  Troops  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia , an  d Florida, 
commanded  by  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  June  3,  1863. 


Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

© 

> 

'o  h 

*3 

J.S 

o 

H 

© 

> 

if 

3 § 

o 

H 

© 

> 

*8® 

5? 

t 18 

H 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Higood 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer 

Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Finegan. . . 
Col.  A.  J.  Gonzales 

First  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

Second  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

Third  Military  District  of 
South  Carolina. 

District  of  Georgia 

District  of  Middle  Florida. . . 

District  of  East  Florida 

Siege  train 

2, 552 

484 

529 

1,830 

788 

222 

1, 162 

713 

1,494 

1, 768 
452 
441 

3,  279 

284 

579 

2, 189 
280 
140 
' 271 

7,  978 

1,  595 

2, 916 

6,647 
1, 701 
916 
287 

9,  889 

2,  064 

3,  528 

8, 238 
2, 128 
1,244 
342 

Grand  total 

6,  405 

6,  030 

7,  022 

22,  040 

27,  433 

Note. — Heavy  artillery  included  with  light  artillery  in  the  Hirst  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 
and  the  District  of  Georgia,  and  much  of  the  infantry  force  in  these  two  districts  used  in  batteries  as 
heavy  artillery. 


RECAPITULATION  OF  EFFECTIVES. 


First  Military  District 6,993 

Second  Military  District 1, 481 

Third  Military  District 2, 602 

District  of  Georgia 5,  787 

District  of  Middle  Florida 1, 520 

District  of  East  Florida 803 

Siege  train 271 


Total  effectives 19,457 


Note  from  original  return. — Eight  companies  of  infantry,  General  Ripley’s 
command,  Schulz’s  battery  light  artillery,  Second  Military  District,  and  section  siege 
train,  Charleston,  sent  to  Third  Military  District  to  repel  Federal  raid  on  Combahee, 
June  2,  186$. 


Secessionville,  June  4,  1863. 
Captain  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

From  an  observation  of  Cole’s  Island  I learn  that  there  are  about 
200  men  on  that  island.  No  change  to  report. 

CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Sub-Division  First  Military  District, 

Secessionville , June  5,  1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  G ener al : 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  visited  the  bridge 
now  being  built  between  James  and  Morris  Islands.  The  work  is  going 
on  very  well.  The  greater  portion  of  the  bridge  on  this  side  is  finished 


Chap.  NXVt.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


965 


over  the  marshes.  A little  delay  is  occasioned  by  that  portion  of  the 
bridge  which  passes  over  the  creek.  This  is  now  being  piled,  and  will 
soon  be  ready.  I fear,  however,  that  the  bridge  will  not  be  of  any  use 
when  it  is  finished.  It  is  made  of  slight  materials,  and  owing  to  the 
scarcity  of  nails  is  fastened  with  wooden  pegs.  The  span  is  20  feet,  a.nd 
the  whole  thing  so  weak  that  two  men  walking  abreast  and  keeping 
step  caused  it  to  vibrate  unpleasantly ; twenty  men  would  throw  it  down. 
I think  the  bridge  unsafe. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAELES  H.  SIMONTCm, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Secessionyille,  June  6,  1863. 

Captain  Hance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

An  unusual  movement  is  observed  in  the  fleet  off  Charleston ; nearly 
all  the  blockaders  are  collected  in  a bunch  off  Little  Folly  Inlet.  I re- 
port it  for  what  it  is  worth. 

CHAELES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Charleston,  June  6,  1863. 


Capt.  Francis  D.  Lee, 

Confederate  States  Engineers  : 

Captain  : The  undersigned,  in  connection  with  other  merchants  in 
this  city,  propose  the  construction  of  a marine  torpedo  steamer  abroad, 
and  desire  your  services  for  carrying  the  work  into  effect.  Arrange- 
ments have  been  made  for  placing  the  necessary  funds  at  your  disposal 


in  Europe. 

Yery  respectfully,  yours, 


JM).  EEASEE  & CO. 


[Indorsements.] 

Charleston,  June  8,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : Would  the  commanding  general  be  pleased  to  approve 
of  my  detachment  for  the  purpose  above  named  $ As  time  is  a matter  of 
vital  importance,  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  all  my  arrangements 
should  be  made  to  enable  me  to  leave  during  the  present  dark  nights 5 
otherwise  I shall  be  necessarily  detained  one  month. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain,  Engineers. 

N.  B. — In  the  above  communication  I have  omitted  to  state  that  the 
only  work  directly  under  my  charge  at  present  is  the  torpedo  ram.  I 
have  made  all  necessary  arrangements  for  the  completion  of  this  vessel, 
and  would  in  the  event  of  my  going  abroad  respectfully  request  that  it 
be  placed  under  the  charge  of  Mr.  C.  A.  Chisolm,  who  is  not  only 
thoroughly  informed  as  to  my  plans,  but  is  by  education  and  employ- 
ment admirably  adapted  to  the  position. 


966 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , June  13,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Col.  J.  F.  Gilmer,  requesting  that  he  should 
have  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee  detached  for  the  purpose  of  having  the  marine 
torpedo  ram  of  Messrs.  Fraser  & Co.  constructed  in  Europe,  as  desired 
by  these  gentlemen  ; meanwhile  Major  Echols,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr. 
Chisolm,  will  attend  to  the  completion  of  the  State  marine  torpedo 
ram  now  under  the  charge  of  Captain  Lee. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Engineer  Bureau,  June  19,  1863. 
Respectfully  returned  to  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee,  favorable  action  having  been 
taken  upon  his  application. 

ALFRED  L.  RIYES, 


Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Chief  Engineer. 


Lake  City,  Fla.,  June  7,  1863. 


Col.  Hugh  Archer, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Tallahassee , Fla. : 


Colonel  : I am  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  acknowl- 
edge the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  5th  instant,  inclosing  one  from 
His  Excellency  Governor  Milton,  whose  expression  of  confidence  in  the 
general  commanding  is  most  highly  appreciated  by  the  latter.  He  re- 
grets not  having  had  His  Excellency’s  company  on  the  pleasant  trip  to 
Jacksonville,  a position  which  he  considers  should  be  held  and  fortified. 
He  will  make  an  application  to  the  War  Department  for  two  or  three 
rifled  32-pounders  so  soon  as  he  shall  have  arrived  at  Charleston.  He 
recommends  meanwhile  that  Governor  Milton  and  the  Florida  delega- 
tion should  make  another  application  to  Mr.  Mallory  for  a like  number 
of  Brooke  32-pounder  guns.  About  six  pieces  of  that  caliber  are  re- 
quired at  that  important  point  to  command  the  navigation  of  the  Saint 
John’s  and  guard  the  lower  portion  of  East  Florida. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  NT.  TOUT  ANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Headquarters  Second  Sub-Division 
First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina, 

Sullivan’s  Island , June  8,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff , &c.,  Charleston , S.  C. : 

General  : In  pursuance  of  Special  Orders,  No.  213,  paragraph  II,  head- 
quarters First  Military  District,  1 am  about  to  relinquish  the  command 
of  this  sub-division.  Before  doing  so,  however,  it  is  a duty  which  I owe 
myself  to  protest  against  that  order.  I do  so  upon  the  ground  that  it 
removes  me  for  no  sufficient  cause,  for  I have  not  yet  heard  that  I had 
been  charged  with  a neglect  of  my  duties  in  any  particular  or  done 
ought  else  to  merit  such  a degradation.  I say,  then,  that  it  removes  me 
for  no  sufficient  cause  from  a superior  and  transfers  me  to  an  inferior 


Chap.  XXVL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  967 

command,  in  flagrant  violation,  as  I conceive,  of  every  consideration  of 
military  courtesy,  military  etiquette,  and  military  propriety,  and  in  con- 
tempt of  every  principle  of  common  right  and  common  justice. 

Although,  therefore,  1 propose  a speedy  compliance  with  the  order,  I 
hereby  formally  enter  my  protest  against  it,  as  both  unjust  and  injurious. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J F ’ J.  H.  TRAPIER, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

(Through  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  commanding  First  Military  Dis- 
trict of  South  Carolina.) 

[Indorsements.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , June  8,  18G3. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  The  order  against  which  Brigadier-General 
Trapier  protests  was  reported  in  my  letter  of  June  4 to  department 
headquarters.  General  Trapier  had  an  interview  with  me  immediately 
after  it  had  been  sent  to  him,  and  without  being  asked  stated  that  the 
order  was  very  agreeable,  but  that  he  would  not  have  a sufficiency  of 
troops.  He  was  informed  of  the  recommendations  made  in  my  letter, 
and  in  view  of  the  strong  probability  of  the  enemy  attempting  a raid, 
such  as  was  lately  made  at  Combahee,  on  the  plantations  in  the  vicinity 
of  Georgetown,  as  well  as  to  give  a proper  command  to  Brigadier  Gen- 
eral Trapier,  Major  Abney’s  battalion  was  ordered  to  proceed  thither, 
being  replaced  on  James  Island  by  three  companies  of  the  Twentieth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers.  The  sub-division  was  also  increased  to  in- 
clude the  parish  of  Saint  James  Santee,  as  the  posts  in  that  region  are 
much  nearer  Georgetown  than  Charleston.  General  Trapier  was  directed 
to  take  such  measures  as  would  insure  the  prompt  transmission  of  intelli- 
gence to  these  headquarters  in  case  of  any  movement  of  the  enemy.  It 
was  stated  as  my  intention  to  send  Captain  Gaillard’s  company  to  the 
command  as  soon  as  ready  for  service,  if  not  otherwise  required.  Gen- 
eral Trapier  requested  a few  days’  delay,  which  was  reluctantly  granted, 
as  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates  was  wanted  at  once.  A day  or  so  after- 
wards, in  a conversation  with  General  Trapier,  he  objected  to  the  order, 
but  seeing  no  reason  for  changing  or  modifying  it,  recent  transfers  of 
troops  and  the  extension  of  the  limits  of  the  fifth  sub  division  of  this 
district,  having  made  the  command  nearly  as  large,  if  not  larger,  than 
that  which  he  at  present  commands,  and  having  knowledge  of  the 
locality,  country,  and  its  resources,  and  especially  as  he  had  expressed 
his  satisfaction,  I told  him  that  it  would  stand.  After  four  days’ 
delay  General  Trapier  applies  for  five  days’  leave  of  absence,  which  I 
have  declined  to  grant,  and  also  forwards  the  inclosed  protest,  which 
under  the  circumstances  I should  not  forward  except  accompanied  by 
charges. 

In  view  of  General  Trapier’s  rank  and  position  I refer  the  paper  to 
department  headquarters,  butf  with  the  remark  that  in  my  opinion  Gen- 
eral Trapier  would  consult  the  good  of  the  service  and  his  own  duties 
better  by  obeying  his  orders,  and  with  the  forces  which  have  been  given 
him  guarding  a locality  with  which  he  is  oFought  to  be  familiar,  rather 
than  caviling  and  criticising  those  orders  in  language  which  appears 
to  me  to  be  unmilitary  and  disrespectful. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


968 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XxVI. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  June  17,  1863. 

The  chief  of  staff  will  inform  Brigadier-Generals  Ripley  and  Trapier 
that  Special  Orders,  No.  213,  paragraph  II,  headquarters  First  Military 
District,  is  approved,  but  that  I regret  it  was  not  delayed  until  my 
return  from  the  tour  of  inspection  to  Georgia  and  Florida,  when  I might 
have  ordered  a different  arrangement.  Meanwhile  another  officer  than 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates  might  have  been  sent  temporarily  to  Morris 
Island. 

Several  expressions  in  Brigadier- General  Trapier’s  protest  are  dis- 
approved by  me.  They  add  nothing  to  its  force,  are  contrary  to  mili- 
tary usage  and  discipline,  and  if  admitted  could  but  result  in  injury  to 
the  public  service.  I feel  sure  that  General  Trapier  would  strongly  con- 
demn any  similar  protest  against  one  of  his  orders  coming  from  one  of 
his  subordinate  officers. 

Brigadier-General  Trapier’s  present  command,  i.  e .,  former  Fourth 
District,  increased  by  the  parishes  ot  Saint  James  and  Saint  Stephen, 
will  constitute  a separate  district,  to  be  known  as  the  Fourth  District. 
He  will  report  directly  to  these  headquarters,  and  he  will  retain  until 
further  orders  all  the  troops  at  present  under  his  command,  to  be  in- 
creased in  number  as  soon  as  circumstances  will  permit. 

G.  T.  BEAUKEGABD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Sub-Division  First  Military  District, 

„ _ Secessionville , June  8,  1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Captain  : In  order  to  ascertain  the  movements  of  the  enemy  on  Long 
Island  in  front  of  Secession ville  I detailed  Lieut.  Samuel  Dibble,  Twenty- 
fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  to  go  over  with  two  men  and  to  scout 
the  island.  He  went  last  night,  landed,  and  went  over  the  island, 
lhis  morning  whilst  they  were  waiting  on  the  tide,  Lieutenant  Dibble 
being  at  a point  whence  he  was  watching  the  enemy,  the  two  men  with 
him  heard  the  approach  of  a large  party  of  the  enemy  and  heard  them 
capture  Lieutenant  Dibble.  Immediately  afterward  a sergeant  of  the 
Fifth  Connecticut  came  to  them  to  capture  their  boat.  They  at  "once 
took  him  prisoner,  and  whilst  one  of  them  used  him  as  a protection  from 
Ins  party,  the  other  pushed  the  boat  down  to  the  water.  They  then 
came  off  safely  with  their  prisoner.  This  took  place  from  just  before 
daylight  to  a little  after.  It  appears  that  the  enemy  have  a regular 
picket  on  Long  Island,  consisting  of  some  30  men.  They  have  an  ex- 
cellent point  of  observation,  giving  a full  view  of  Secessionville,  and 
out  ot  the  range  of  our  guns,  being  at  the  same  time  under  the  com- 
mand of  their  battery  and  gunboats. 

Lieutenant  Dibble  is  an  excellent  scout,  cool,  sagacious,  and  daring, 
lhe  temporary  loss  of  his  services  will  be  verv  great.  I would  call  the 
attention  of  the  brigadier-general  commanding  to  the  skill  and  courage 
exhibited  by  the  two  men  with  him,  who  in  the  presence  of  an  over- 
whelming number  captured  their  prisoner  and  brought  him  off  safely 
in  their  sight. 

Their  names  are  Sergt.  F.  L.  McClary  and  Corpl.  R.  A.  McLeod,  both 
of  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonelj  Commanding . 


969 


■ Chap.  XXVI.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , June  8,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  The  prisoner  has  been  sent  to  the  provost- 
marshal,  who  has  been  instructed  to  examine  him.  The  prisoner  states 
that  he  belongs  to  the  Sixth  instead  of  the  Fifth  Connecticut  Regiment. 
Copy  of  the  diary  inclosed.* 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Richmond,  June  10,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston , S.  C.: 

General  : Northern  papers  report  the  reduction  of  Hunter’s  forces 
by  sending  troops  to  the  Gulf. 

If  this  be  true,  you  will,  with  such  force  as  you  can  properly  with- 
draw from  your  defensive  line,  proceed  to  Mobile  to  resist  an  attack,  if 
one  should  be  designed  at  that  place ; but  if  the  purpose  of  the  enemy 
be  to  send  his  re-enforcements  to  the  Mississippi,  you  will  go  on  and 
co-operate  with  General  Johnston  in  that  quarter. 

By  direction  of  the  President. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


(Copies  sent  to  Generals  J.  E.  Johnston  and  D.  H.  Maury.) 


Secessionville,  June  11,  [1863]— 8 p.  m. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Our  pickets  report  the  enemy  still  advancing  from  Legar6’s  to  Grim- 
ball’s.  Our  advance  pickets  are  falling  back  on  our  reserves. 

% CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


8.5  p.  m. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

The  Signal  Corps  read  the  enemy’s  signals  to-day  ordering  an  attack 
by  barges  through  the  creek  and  ordering  the  Pawnee  up  this  after- 
noon. The  Pawnee  did  come  up.  The  enemy  in  front  advanced  with 
a show  of  force  and  are  still  advancing  toward  Grimball’s,  and  a fleet 
of  barges  is  seen  in  the  creek  filled  with  men.  The  creek  is  the  one 
from  Light-House  Inlet. 

CHARLES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Received  at  about  9 p.  m. 

G.  T.  B. 

* Omitted  as  ud  important. 


970  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Cim-.  XXVt 

[Indorsement.  ] 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  June  LI,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Three  companies,  and  if  possible  the  whole 
of  the  Charleston  Battalion,  with  75  men  from  Savannah,  will  be  sent 
over  to  re-enforce  James  Island. 

In  absence  of  and  by  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley : 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Office  of  Chief  Engineer, 
Charleston , S.  C .,  June  11,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  J ord  an,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  hand  you  herewith  Major  Echols’, 
Captain  Howard’s,  Mr.  Cheves’,  and  Mr.  McLean’s  communications,* 
all  bearing  upon  the  subject-matter  of  General  Ripley’s  letter  of  the 
6th  instant  f and  Colonel  Simonton’s  report  of  the  5th  instant,}:  inclosed 
therewith. 

No  order  has  ever  been  given  the  engineer  department  to  have  the 
southern  end  of  Morris  Island  fortified  and  armed.  The  general  com- 
manding, about  the  10th  of  March,  visited  the  island  in  company  with 
Major  Echols,  and  gave  him  verbal  instructions  to  prepare  chambers  in 
specific  positions  for  a given  number  of  guns,  which  instructions  were  ex- 
tended to  me  on  my  return  from  Savannah  on  the  14th  of  March.  Soon 
thereafter  I visited  the  island,  and  gave  instructions  to  the  engineer  su- 
perintendent in  charge  of  the  works,  Mr.  McLean  being  absent  at  the 
time  on  a survey  of  the  marsh  with  the  view  of  locating  a marsh  battery. 
In  about  two  weeks’  time  Mr.  McLean  was  taken  sick  and  the  works  put 
in  charge  of  Captain  Cheves,  whose  letter  sets  forth  very  clearly  his 
connection  with  them,  absolves  him  from  all  censure  contained  in  the 
general’s  reflections  upon  the  progress  of  these  works,  and  establishes 
the  fact  that  the  mounting  of  no  gun  at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Isl- 
and waited  one  day  on  the  proper  engineer  work.  Captain  Cheves  not 
only  erected  all  of  the  engineer  works  faster  than  they  could  be  armed, 
but  exercised  his  mechanical  ingenuity  (which  is  very  considerable)  on 
ordnance  work,  in  order  to  prevent  the  delay  so  much  complained  of 
and  so  unjustly  charged  upon  the  engineer  department.  If  Captain 
Cheves  committed  an  error  in  depending  upon  O’Don nel’s  arrangements 
for  the  necessary  timber  for  the  magazines  he  was  directed  by  the  en- 
gineer department  to  construct  it  was  a very  excusable  one  under  the 
circumstances  set  forth  in  his  communication,  and  so  far  from  meriting 
censure  deserves  commendation  and  encouragement  for  the  prompt 
and  efficient  manner  in  which  he  discharged  not  only  his  own  duties 
but  those  properly  belonging  to  the  ordnance  department,  and  I re- 
spectfully submit  it  was  an  act  of  injustice  to  displace  him  by  any  one, 
but  particularly  by  a young  artillery  officer,  who  cannot  be  presumed 
to  be  as  familiar  with  engineer  work.  Furthermore,  I am  sure  the  in- 
terests of  the  service  would  have  been  far  better  promoted  by  aiding 
Captain  Cheves  with  transportation  and  labor  than  by  displacing  him 
in  the  manner  referred  to.  With  the  exception  of  the  marsh  battery, 


•Echols’  and  Cheves’  communications  only  found, 
tfejee  p.  1024.  $See  p.  964. 


Chap.  XAVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  EtC. CONFEDERATE. 


971 


which  has  been  and  is  a heavy  drag,  for  reasons  it  is  not  necessary  here 
to  repeat,  all  other  works  in  and  around  the  harbor  have  always  been 
ready,  notwithstanding  the  disadvantageous  circumstances  under  which 
the  engineer  department  labored  in  advance  of  the  armament  designed 
for  them.  Witness  Battery  Bee,  Castle  Pinckney,  Port  Ripley,  White 
Point  Battery,  Fort  Wagner,  and  last,  though  not  least  in  point  of 
I>resent  prominence,  the  batteries  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island. 

While  I do  not  claim  that  the  engineer  department  has  made  the 
most  judicious  and  efficient  use  practicable  of  its  slave  labor,  or  com- 
mitted no  error  in  the  management  thereof,  I am  not  willing  to  admit 
that  the  disinclination  of  planters  to  send  the  negroes  to  work  on  the 
fortifications  is  ascribable  to  the  cause  insinuated.  So  far  as  concerns 
detailed  labor  from  the  ranks  I may  be  permitted  to  assume,  if  it  has 
not  been  properly  used,  the  fault  was  not  with  the  engineers,  whose  duty 
it  is  to  indicate  the  work  to  be  done,  but  not  to  direct  or  control  the 
soldiers  detailed  for  its  execution.  This  duty  properly  belongs  to  their 
own  officers.  In  reference  to  the  specific  statement  relative  to  Colonel 
Graham’s  detail  I beg  leave  to  refer  to  Captain  Howard’s  letter  No.  2. 

As  the  calling  of  my  attention  to  Colonel  Simonton’s  report  on  the 
question  of  the  strength  of  the  Morris  Island  Bridgeindicates  that  impor- 
tance is  attached  thereto,  I have,  in  reply,  to  refer  you  to  Captain  How- 
ard’s report,  with  Major  Echols’  indorsement,  on  the  same  subject,  which, 
in  my  opinion,  satisfactorily  answers  the  objections  urged  against  that 
structure  by  the  colonel.  I had  thought  this  matter  of  the  strength  of 
the  bridge  disposed  of  in  my  letter  of  the  28th  ultimo,  but  as  I was  mis- 
taken in  that  opinion,  I respectfully  submit  that,  if  engineer  works  are 
to  be  thus  examined  and  reported  upon,  in  justice  to  the  engineer 
department  the  inspector  should  be  by  professional  attainments  com- 
petent to  pass  judgment  upon  them.  In  relation  to  the  matter  of  trans- 
portation I respectfully  refer  you  to  Major  Echols’  communication  of  this 
date,  from  which  it  will  appear  that  such  boats  as  have  been  temporarily 
assigned  to  service  for  the  engineer  department  have  been  taken  from 
it  by  the  quartermaster  whenever  he  thought  proper  to  do  it. 

I should  have  had  no  objection,  but,  on  the  contrary,  would  have  ac- 
cepted with  pleasure  the  aid  of  the  general,  bestowed  in  a proper  spirit, 
in  the  prosecution  of  the  works  in  his  district ; but  when  he  takes  the 
responsibility  of  displacing  a valuable  engineer  and  of  dispensing  with 
the  department,  except  in  the  use  of  its  materials  and  its  views,  I feel  it 
due  to  myself,  to  the  department  I represent,  and  to  the  public  service 
to  respectfully  request  to  be  informed  whether,  under  the  circumstances 
of  which  this  and  previous  communications  are  sufficiently  explanatory, 
such  an  exercise  of  authority  on  the  part  of  General  Ripley  meets  with 
the  approbation  of  the  general  commanding. 

I beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  my  letter  of  the  28th  [27  ?]  ultimo,  and  its  in- 
closures,  in  connection  with  the  subject  embraced  in  this  and  accom- 
panying communications. 

I return  herewith  General  Ripley’s  letter  of  the  6th  instant  and  Colonel 
Simonton’s  report  of  the  5th  instant,  and  have  the  honor  to  be,  general, 
yours,  very  respectfully, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Chief  Engineer. 


972  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVl.‘ 

[Inclosures.] 

Confederate  States  Engineer’s  Office, 

Charleston , June  11,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  Chief  Engineer  Department : 

Colonel:  In  reply  to  the  letter  of  Brigadier-General  Bipley  on  the 
causes  of  slow  progress,  &c.,  of  the  work  in  this  department,  I would 
state  that,  in  company  with  General  Beauregard  and  Brigadier-General 
Bipley,  on  Morris  Island,  about  the  18th  March  last,  General  Beauregard 
directed^  specific  works  to  be  constructed  on  the  lower  end  of  the  island, 
(two  2-gun  batteries  and  one  1-gun  battery),  which  were  located  by  him 
in  general  position  at  intervals.  These  works  were  put  in  charge  of  Mr. 
McLean,  whose  statement  as  to  his  absence,  inattention,  and  careless-  j 
ness  is  inclosed.  The  absence  of  a few  days  referred  to  by  him  was  on 
duty  (leaving  a competent  superintendent  in  charge),  examining  the 
marsh  for  a site  of  the  battery  now  constructing  in  rear  of  Morris  Island. 
Mr.  McLean  was  taken  sick,  and  was  absent  a few  days,  when  Mr.  Lang- 
don  Cheves  was  put  in  charge  of  the  works,  whose  statement  accom- 
panies. 

The  apparent  “ partial  employment”  of  the  troops  is  from  their  man- 
ner of  working  by  reliefs. 

A reply  to  Colonel  Simon  ton’s  report  on  the  progress  and  incapacity 
of  the  bridge  by  Captain  Howard,  indorsed  by  me,  is  also  inclosed. 

The  information  given  by  the  quartermaster  that  this  department  has 
had  from  four  to  six  of  the  nine  or  ten  boats  in  the  service,  I would 
state  that  no  boat  has  ever  been  transferred  subject  to  the  orders  of  this 
office,  to  my  knowledge,  for  general  transportation,  but  they  have  been 
in  the  employment  of  an  assistant  for  a specific  purpose  for  days  at  a 
time,  as  when  at  work  on  harbor  obstructions  or  carrying  constant  sup- 
plies of  material  to  Fort  Sumter.  On  application  for  transportation  re- 
quiring days  or  weeks  to  perform  these  boats  were  any  day  ordered 
and  taken  by  the  quartermaster  whenever  he  saw  proper  for  other 
duties  without  reference  to  this  department  whatever.  Bo  transpor- 
tat  ion  has  been  furnished  the  department  by  the  quartermaster  for  ma-  , 
terial  to  Morris  Island  after  repeated  requisitions,  as  will  be  seen  by  Mr. 
Langdon  Cheves’  letter.  I am  satisfied  that  some  labor  furnished  the 
department  was  lost,  and  generally  for  want  of  transportation,  which  no 
doubt  could  not  be  had ; nor  do  I think  that  the  difficulty  in  obtaining 
laborers  has  arisen  from  mismanagement,  as  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe  that  there  has  been  no  willful  neglect  of  the  negroes,  but  more 
from  a dissatisfaction  of  their  owners  and  themselves  at  their  being 
away  from  home  a longer  time  than  was  anticipated,  and  subject  to 
such  hardships  as  necessarily  attend  soldiers  in  the  service  from  sick- 
ness, &c. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  H.  ECHOLS, 

Major  and  Chief  Engineer , South  Carolina. 

Charleston,  June  9, 1863. 
Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  Chief  Engineer,  &c.: 

Colonel:  Beferring  to  the  communication  of  Brigadier-General 
Bipley  of  June  6,  I beg  leave  respectfully  to  observe  that  my  first  con- 
nection with  the  works  at  the  south  point  of  Morris  Island,  consequent 
on  the  illness  of  Mr.  McLean,  previously  in  charge,  occurred  a few  days 
previous  to  the  attack  upon  Fort  Sumter. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETQ> CONFEDERATE. 


973 


The  only  order  at  that  time  was  to  prepare  chambers  for  three  guns 
at  designated  points.  The  engineer  work  for  these  was  inconsiderable 
and  caused  no  delay.  The  platforms  were  very  defective,  and  could  not 
be  adjusted  until  a forge  had  been  procured  by  Major  Huger  and  a black- 
smith detailed.  After  tedious  labor  had  fitted  these,  sometimes  the 
chassis  and  sometimes  the  carriage  required  alteration  or  repair,  often 
difficult  and  tedious.  Orders  subsequently  given  to  prepare  for  another 
and  then  another  gun  (till  the  whole  number  amounted  to  seven)  were 
diligently  executed  as  received,  but  were  retarded  continually  by  defi- 
ciencies of  the  sort  above-mentioned.  Two  platforms  had  to  be  entirely 
remodeled  (with  the  sanction  of  Colonel  Harris)  before  they  could  be 
used  at  all.  The  proper  work  of  the  engineer  department  was  thus 
continually  arrested,  while  its  time,  its  labor,  and  its  patience  were  ex- 
hausted in  imperfectly  repairing  the  deficiencies  of  another  branch  of 
the  service.  I am  justified  in  asserting  broadly  that  not  only  did  the 
mounting  of  no  gun  at  the  south  point  wait  one  day  on  the  proper  engi- 
neer work,  but  in  no  case,  except  that  of  the  Whitworth,  was  a single 
gun  mounted  without  serious  delay  from  deficiencies  in  platform,  chassis, 
or  carriage. 

During  the  greater  part  of  this  time  I had  received  no  intimation  of 
an  intention  to  fortify  this  point  extensively,  nor  did  the  orders  from 
the  engineer  department  indicate  that  it  had  been  communicated  to 
them.  It  was  understood,  as  1 conceived,  that  the  ammunition  for 
three  or  four  isolated  guns  could  be  sufficiently  sheltered  behind  the 
hills  by  temporary  contrivances.  Only  as  the  number  increased  did 
the  necessity  for  a magazine  become  apparent  and  the  construction  of 
one  was  then  ordered. 

At  the  time  when  General  Ripley’s  order  superseded  the  engineer 
department  at  the  south  point  the  only  work  not  executed  (except 
orders  of  the  day  before)  was  this  magazine.  Its  construction  had  been 
delayed  by  the  want  of  material.  I enter  minutely  into  the  details  of 
this  matter  because  here  a shadow  of  reproach  may  rest  on  the  engi- 
neer department,  and  because  a misapprehension  exists  which  it  is  my 
special  duty  to  correct.  If  there  was  a fault  committed  the  only  person 
fairly  responsible  for  it  is  myself;  yet  the  only  person  pointedly  ex- 
cepted (in  General  Ripley’s  letter  of  24th  ultimo)  from  the  general  rep- 
robation is  myself. 

Along  with  the  orders  for  construction  I received  orders  to  make  im- 
mediate requisition  for  materials.  Before  I had  made  my  estimates  I 
learned  that  Mr.  O’Donnel,  being  ordered  to  put  up  commissary  and 
other  buildings  on  the  island,  had  a quantity  of  lumber  assigned  to  him 
by  the  quartermaster,  which  he  did  not  want,  which  would  suit  my  pur- 
pose exactly  and  which  could  not  be  got  elsewhere.  It  was  conpara- 
tively  light  stuff,  and  my  mules  were  utterly  broken  down  by  want  of 
forage.  I had  previous  experience  that  the  requisitions  of  the  engineer 
department  for  transportation  were  generally  neglected.  I had  then 
just  finished  the  work  at  Cummings  Point  by  using  drift  logs,  disinter- 
ring old  works,  breaking  up  old  flats,  &c.,  and  when  the  work  was  done 
not  one-third  of  the  lumber  required  for  it  had  been  delivered.  At  the 
same  time  materials  for  contractors  and  for  General  Ripley’s  orders  had 
been  transported  promptly.  I endeavored  to  take  advantage  of  this 
difference.  I thought  I was  consulting  the  interest  of  the  service  in  ar- 
ranging with  Mr.  O’Donnel  to  receive  from  him  the  lumber  for  which 
he  would  make  the  requisition.  I had  his  subsequent  assurance  that 
all  was  right;  was  shown  by  him  a bill  of  the  lumber  made  from  his  own 
inspection,  and  selected  what  I required.  I relied  upon  this,  and  for  a 


974 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  CIA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

fortnight  or  more,  though  annoyed,  was  not  surprised  at  a delay  which 
was  only  usual,  and  which  I had  learned  to  submit  to  as  insurmounta- 
ble. Finally  I found  on  inquiry  that  the  lumber  in  question  had  been 
taken  from  Mr.  O’Donnel  for  other  uses,  and  that  he  had  neglected  to 
inform  me.  I immediately  made  the  requisition  regularly,  now  nearly 
two  weeks  since,  but  it  is  not  yet  filled.  In  this  transaction  I failed  to 
obey  orders,  and  through  my  failure  only  did  the  department  fail  in  the 
technically  exact  fulfillment  of  its  duty. 

The  inefficiency  of  the  soldiers’  labor  adverted  to  by  General  Ripley 
I have  had  occasion  to  feel  the  more  painfully  that  the  help  for  it  was 
not  within  my  reach.  The  cause  and  the  remedy  were  both  obvious, 
but  not  in  the  control  of  the  engineer  department.  Details  of  100  to 
200  men  would  report  with  one  captain  or  lieutenant  and  that  one  would 
be  changed  twice  a day.  Colonel  Graham,  at  my  request,  detailed  one 
officer  to  superintend  permanently,  which  was  a great  improvement. 
But  neither  officer  nor  men  were  taught  by  the  attention  bestowed  upon 
it  by  their  superiors  to  regard  this  work  as  an  important  part  of  their 
duty.  I had  the  honor  of  waiting  on  General  Ripley,  as  stated  in  his 
letter,  and  without  any  knowledge  of  his  having  sent  Captain  Mitchel 
“to  see  the  state  of  things”  made  then  exactly  the  same  suggestions 
that  I had  made  days  before,  that  the  sole  cause  of  delay  was  the  want 
of  transportation.  I then  received  from  him  and  Colonel  Harris,  who 
was  present,  instructions  for  future  operations,  not  in  the  least  indicat- 
ing that  Captain  Mitchel  was  “to  prepare  to  do  the  work;”  nor  was 
any  inquiry  made  of  me  tending  to  throw  light  on  the  affirmed  necessity 
for  so  doing. 

The  difficulty  of  procuring  negroes  for  labor,  so  far  as  my  experience 
goes,  has  been  affected  chiefly  by  the  failure  to  adhere  punctually  to 
the  terms  of  their  enlistment,  the  thirty  days  having  often  been  ex- 
tended to  sixty  and  eighty;  the  want  of  adequate  shelter,  of  fire-wood, 
and  straw  or  other  bedding,  and  the  failure  to  furnish  the  kind  of  food 
to  which  the  negroes  were  accustomed  engendered  much  sickness,  in 
which  they  were  cruelly  neglected.  For  weeks  together  during  the  last 
summer  400  negroes  on  Morris  Island  were  entirely  without  medical 
attendance,  medicine,  hospital-tents,  nurses,  or  any  provision  for  the 
sick,  who  sometimes  mounted  as  high  as  150.  Coming  with  scanty 
clothing  in  August,  they  were  kept  till  late  in  October,  their  owners 
prevented  from  supplying  their  wants  by  daily  expectation  of  their  be- 
ing dismissed.  On  all  these  points  the  engineer  department  could  do 
no  more  than  energetically  represent  the  existing  mischief,  and  that 
they  did. 

Although  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  “want  of  energy,  attention,  or 
proper  combination”  is  proved  upon  the  engineer  department  by  the 
fact  that  heavy  timber  has  since  been  carried  to  the  island  by  a boat  that 
they  had  not  the  use  of,  and  got  in  position  by  mules  well  fed  on  forage 
denied  to  those  in  their  service,  yet  here  again  the  short-coming  rests 
with  myself.  Knowing  that  I could  not  use  this  timber  I never  asked 
for  it. 

Finally,  in  self-defense,  I respectfully  submit,  without  impeaching  the 
intelligence  and  activity  of  the  gentleman  now  in  charge,  that  the  work 
has  not  gone  on  faster  or  in  any  respect  better  than  it  would  have  done 
under  its  proper  department,  aided  by  the  same  increase  of  laboring 
force  and  transportation;  that,  on  the  contrary,  time  was  inevitably  lost 
from  the  resulting  confusion. 

Respectfully, 


LAKGDOK  CHEVES. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


975 


South  End  Morris  Island, 

June  12, 18G3— 11.45  p.  m. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  : 

Observing  symptoms  of  work  on  Little  Folly  Island  this  morning,  I 
commenced  shelling  slowly.  About  50  men  are  reported  by  our  pickets 
as  having  left  Little  for  Big  Folly  Island.  Gunboats  came  up  the  creek 
and  shelled  our  pickets  on  Oyster  Point.  They  also  fired  from  Big 
Folly,  I replying  slowly. 

J.  0.  MITCHEL, 

Captain , Commanding . 


Secessionville,  June  12, 1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

A gunboat  has  run  up  Folly  Biver,  back  of  Folly  Island,  and  is  firing 
at  our  batteries  on  Morris  Island,  with  what  effect  I cannot  observe. 

CHAELES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Secessionyille,  June  12, 1863. 

Captain  Nance: 

No  changes  on  the  Stono  front.  The  steamer  in  Folly  Biver  con- 
tinued firing  until  after  sunset.  She  has  returned  to  her  position  in 
Stono  Bay. 

CHAELES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Secessionyille,  June  12, 1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

It  is  impossible  to  tell  from  this  place  the  result  of  our  firing  upon 
the  enemy.  The  only  battery  in  sight  opposite  Secessionville  was  filled 
with  men  during  the  firing  and  seemed  out  of  our  range. 

CHAELES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Charleston,  June  13, 1863. 
(Eeceived  Eichmond  June  13,  1863.) 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjuta.nt  and  Inspector  General: 

Enemy’s  iron-clads  and  forces  still  here,  as  heretofore  reported  to  De- 
partment, excepting  a gunboat  expedition  reported  in  Altamaha  and 
one  preparing  for  Saint  John’s  Eiver,  Florida.  I will  prepare  far  as 
practicable  for  contingencies  referred  to  in  Department  letter  10th 
instant.  Please  send  me  any  positive  information  relative  to  move- 
ments or  intentions  of  enemy. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGABD, 

General , Commanding. 


976  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Va .,  February  12,  1864. 
His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis,  President , &c. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  herewith  the  charges  and  specifica- 
tions against  Maj.  H.  0.  Guerin,  commissary  of  subsistence,  together 
with  the  accompanying  papers,*  as  called  for  by  a resolution  of  the 
Senate  of  the  24th  of  December,  1863. 

It  was  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  War  Department  on  the  17th 
of  January,  1863,  by  the  Commissary-General  of  Subsistence,  that  Maj. 
H.  0.  Guerin,  chief  commissary  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  had  been 
placed  in  arrest  by  General  Beauregard.  A telegram  was  sent,  inquir- 
ing as  to  the  cause  of  arrest  and  the  facts  of  the  case,  on  the  18th.  The 
reply  stated  the  charges  to  be  disobedience  to  orders,  disrespect  to 
superior  officers,  and  general  incompetency. 

On  the  19th,  General  Beauregard  was  telegraphed  to  send  a copy  of 
the  charges  as  soon  as  possible.  A response  was  made  on  the  20th  that 
the  charges  would  be  forwarded,  and  the  right  to  bring  Major  Guerin 
to  trial  before  the  military  court  of  this  Department  was  asserted. 

On  the  30th  of  January,  the  copy  of  the  charges  not  having  been  re- 
ceived, General  Beauregard  was  telegraphed  to  release  Major  Guerin 
from  arrest,  to  allow  him  to  resume  the  duties  to  which  he  had  been  as- 
signed by  the  Commissary-General,  to  report  freely  to  the  head  of  his 
bureau,  and  to  send  charges  to  the  Adjutant- General  for  further  action. 
It  will  be  seen  that  more  than  sufficient  time  had  elapsed  within  which 
to  forward  the  charges  against  Major  Guerin,  who  had  been  arrested  on 
the  14th  of  January. 

On  the  4th  of  February,  the  charges  and  specifications  were  forwarded 
by  General  Beauregard,  with  a long  communication,  in  which  he  states 
them  to  be,  “so  far  as  prepared.” 

Matters,  I must  add,  are  developing  that  I expect  will  furnish  additional  charges 
of  neglect  of  duty. 

The  charges  are  “ disrespect  to  his  superior  officers,”  “ disobedience  to 
orders,”  and  “ neglect  of  duty.”  That  of  “ general  incompetency,”  named 
in  his  telegram,  seems  to  have  been  abandoned.  The  various  causes  of 
complaint  urged  by  General  Beauregard  in  his  communications  are 
deemed  to  be  without  just  reason. 

Whatever  may  be  the  competency  of  a general  commanding  a depart- 
ment to  arrest  and  bring  to  trial  an  officer  of  the  general  staff,  serving 
with  his  command,  there  can  be  no  possible  doubt  of  the  right  of  the 
President  or  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  who  is  his  representative,  to  call 
for  the  charges,  and  to  interpose  if  in  his  judgment  the  public  interests 
require  such  action  on  his  part. 

Upon  an  examination  of  the  charges  and  specifications,  it  was  con- 
sidered that  the  charge  of  “ disrespect  to  his  superior  officer”  could  not 
be  sustained.  The  indorsement  of  Major  Guerin,  which  was  the  founda- 
tion of  the  charge,  was  not  esteemed,  under  the  circumstances  and  the 
injurious  aspersions  to  which  they  responded,  to  be  disrespectful  or  im- 
proper. The  alleged  “disobedience  to  orders”  consisted  in  correspond- 
ing directly  with  the  chief  of  his  bureau,  instead  of  through  the  depart- 
ment headquarters,  as  he  had  been  ordered.  The  regulations  provide 
distinctly  that  the  correspondence  between  the  officers  of  the  general 
staff  and  the  heads  of  their  bureau  shall  be  direct,  and  not  through  the 
usual  military  channels.  This  regulation  is  not  subject  to  alteration  by 
a general  commanding.  The  order  was  in  violation  of  the  regulations, 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  977 

and  not  obligatory  upon  Major  Guerin,  who  was  guilty  of  no  offense  in 
disobeying  it. 

Without  commenting  on  the  legal  insufficiency  of  the  specifications 
to  the  charge  of  “neglect  of  duty,”  in  not  alleging  any  default  on  the 
part  of  Major  Guerin,  but  merely  a failure  to  provide  proper  and  suffi- 
cient rations  according  to  the  standard  authorized  and  directed  by  the 
regulations  of  the  Confederate  States  Army  (a  standard  which,  under 
the  privations  endured  by  soldiers  and  citizens  alike,  has  not  been 
reached  in  supplying  our  armies  during  the  war),  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  the  alleged  instances  of  default,  beginning  in  August,  1862,  and 
ending  in  January,  1863,  are  five  in  number  as  to  the  troops  on  James 
Island  and  two  as  to  those  at  Mount  Pleasant  and  in  Christ  Church 
Parish— all  that  could  be  brought  against  Major  Guerin,  in  a search 
the  hostile  spirit  of  which  is  clearly  shown  in  the  papers,  and  one  of 
which  appears  to  have  been  caused  by  the  order  of  Gapt.  J.  S.  Ryan, 
acting  commissary  of  subsistence,  to  the  butcher,  not  to  furnish  beef 
which  had  been  provided— and,  considering  the  scarcity  of  supplies  and 
the  deficiencies  of  transportation,  how  easily  such  occasional  failures 
might  occur  without  default  on  the  part  of  the  chief  commissary,  it  was 
not  deemed  necessary  or  promotive  of  the  public  interests  to  order  the 
case  for  trial  before  "receiving  the  other  expected  charges  of  “neglect 
of  duty  ” referred  to  by  General  Beauregard  in  his  letter  of  the  4th  of 
February,  1863. 

An  officer  was  sent  to  Charleston  to  become  acquainted  with  the 
office,  and  to  be  ready  to  take  Major  Guerin’s  place  when  the  case  was 
brought  to  trial.  Those  additional  charges  have  not  been  furnished,  nor 
has  the  Department  been  informed  that  they  would  not  be.  The  case 
has  thus  remained,  as  it  were,  suspended. 

Without  expressing  myself  as  entirely  satisfied  with  Major  Guerin’s 
conduct,  or  his  explanation  of  some  of  the  matters  mentioned  in  the 
papers,  which  may,  however,  hereafter  be  made  satisfactory,  and  with- 
out meaning  to  imply  that  his  official  conduct  may  not  be  properly  the 
subject  of  investigation  before  a legal  court,  and  though  the  Commis- 
sary-General and  Major  Guerin  have  urgently  requested  that  these 
charges  may  be  investigated  by  a competent  tribunal,  yet  it  has  not  been 
perceived  that  any  benefit  to  the  public  service  could  possibly  arise  from 
such  investigation  had  upon  the  charges  and  specifications  as  forwarded; 
and  the  tone  of  animosity  against  Major  Guerin  which  pervades  the  cor- 
respondence demonstrates  the  propriety,  for  the  sake  of  justice,  of  the 
control  over  the  proceedings  assumed  by  the  War  Department. 

While  it  is  true  that  the  members  of  the  military  courts  are  appointed 
by  the  President,  and  not  even  upon  the  recommendation  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding  the  departments  to  which  they  are  attached,  yet  it 
must  be  remembered  that  the  prosecutor,  being  the  commanding  gen- 
eral, would  have  no  little  control  over  the  accused  in  matters  of  impor- 
tance relating  to  the  trial,  and  would  be  the  officer  to  review  the  pro- 
ceedings if  the  trial  was  had  before  the  military  court  of  that  department. 
It  would  not  be  proper,  in  the  infirmity  of  human  nature,  to  intrust  to 
any  one  whose  feelings  had  become  so  excited  the  discharge  of  duties 
involving  questions  of  such  importance  to  the  person  accused. 

There  are  several  topics  of  controversy  discussed  in  the  papers  con- 
nected more  or  less  directly  with  the  chief  subjects  to  which  the  atten- 
tion of  the  War  Department  was  attracted,  but  it  is  not  deemed  neces- 
sary to  refer  specifically  to  them. 

Most  respectfully,  J*  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


62  k r — VOL  XIV 


APPENDIX 


Embracing  documents  received  too  late  for  insertion  in  proper  sequence. 


JUNE  16,  1862. — Engagement  at  Secessionville,  James  Island,  S.  C.* 

Report  of  the  Judge- Advocate- General  and  accompanying  documents . 


Executive  Mansion, 
Washington , January  3,  1863. 

Judge-Advocate-General  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  The  bearer  of  thist  makes  an  appeal  in  behalf  of 
General  Benham.  I have  told  him  that  if  you  can  carefully  examine  the 
case,  and  therefore  do  advise  the  restoration  of  General  Benham  [sic]. 
I do  not  order  you  to  do  this,  but  leave  it  to  yourself.  I send  the  papers 


m my  possession. 

Yours,  very  truly, 


A.  LINCOLN. 


Judge- Advocate-General’s  Office, 

January  26,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States  : 

' Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  written  direction,  under  date  of  3d  in- 
stant, I have  carefully  examined  the  case  of  Major  Benham,  and  have 
now  the  honor  to  submit  the  following*  report : 

The  appointment  of  Major  Benham  as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers 
was,  by  your  order,  revoked  on  the  7th  of  August  last,]:  on  the  recom- 
mendation of  Major-General  Halleck,  of  same  date,  approved  by  the 
Secretary  of  War.  W hile  in  command  at  James  Island,  South  Carolina, 
a short  time  previously,  he  had  directed  an  attack  on  an  earthwork  near 
Secessionville,  in  which  his  troops  had  been  repulsed  with  severe  loss. 
In  a communication  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  War  by  Major-General 
Hunter  on  the  27th  of  June,  inclosing  letteiS  from  Brigadier-Generals 
Wright  and  Stevens  explanatory  of  this  attack  and  repulse,  is  found  the 
following  language : 

You  will  see  from  the  letters  of  General  Wright  and  General  Stevens  that,  in  a 
council  of  war,  held  on  the  evening  previous  to  the  attack,  these  officers,  together 
with  Colonel  Williams,  commanding  a brigade,  remonstrated  strongly  and  emphat- 
ically with  General  Benham,  and  warned  him  that  he  was  about  to  fight  a battle  in  viola- 
tion of  orders. 


* See  pp.  41-104. 
t Benjamin  N.  Martin. 

{This  revocation  of  General  Bonham’ s appointment  was  canceled  February  6, 


980  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Gaxr.  XXVI. 


This  warning  is  spoken  of  alone  in  the  letter  of  General  Stevens  to 
Major-General  Hunter,  on  the  8th  July,  and  is  thus  referred  to  : 

General  Wright,  moreover,  warned  General  Benharn  that  his  orders  were,  in  fact, 
orders  to  fight  a battle.  In  this  General  W illiams  and  myself,  in  express  terms,  con- 
curred. 

It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  nothing  said  in  this  warning  as  to 
any  violation  of  orders.  General  Hunter  has  blended  in  his  statement 
his  own  conviction  with  the  language  of  General  Wright  as  quoted. 
He  doubtless  intended  to  say  that  General  Benharn  was  warned  that 
his  orders  to  his  own  generals  were,  in  fact,  orders  to  fight  a battle, 
which  he  (General  Hunter)  averred  was  a violation  of  his  orders  to 
him.  His  language,  however,  bears  readily  the  interpretation  that  the 
generals  named  had  warned  General  Benharn  that  he  himself  was  about 
to  violate  the  orders  given  him  by  General  Hunter,  an  interpretation 
which  would  be  a total  departure  from  the  fact,  as  we  clearly  ascertain 
by  recurring  to  the  words  of  General  Stevens.  Upon  this  emphatic 
declaration  of  General  Hunter,  without,  probably,  examining  the  letter 
of  General  Stevens  to  see  how  far  it  was  justified,  General  Benham’s 
appointment  was,  no  doubt,  revoked. 

Strange  to  say,  this  paragraph  in  the  letter  of  General  Stevens  was 
printed  in  the  New  York  Times  in  precisely  the  sense  in  which  Gen- 
eral Hunter  had  cited  it,  though  in  different  language.  It  reads,  as 
published  in  that  journal,  thus  : 

General  Wright,  moreover,  warned  General  Benharn  that  his  orders  were,  in  fact, 
orders  not  to  fight  a battle.  In  this  General  Williams  and  myself,  in  express  terms, 
concurred* 

It  will  be  seen  that  by  the  introduction  of  the  “not  ” the  meaning  of 
the  sentence  was  totally  changed  and  reversed.  This  publication  hav- 
ing met  the  eye  of  General  Stevens,  he,  on  the  20th  of  July,  addressed 
a note  to  the  editor  of  the  New  York  Times,  the  original  of  which  is 
now  before  me,  in  which  he  says : 

I desire  to  correct  an  error,  either  of  the  printer  or  copyist,  in  my  official  report  to 
General  Hunter.  In  the  copy  as  printed  in  your  issue  of  the  16th  instant  it  is  stated, 
“ General  Wright  warned  General  Benharn  that  his  orders  were,  in  fact,  orders  not 
to  fi'dit  a battle.”  It  should  read,  “ General  Wright  warned  General  Benharn  that 
his  orders  were,  in  fact,  orders  to  fight  a battle,”  meaning,  thereby,  General  Benham’s 
own  orders  to  his  subordinates  in  relation  to  the  operations  of  the  morrow,  and  that 
a battle  must  inevitably  result  from  them,  and  not  General  Hunter’s  orders  to  Gen- 
eral Benharn,  which  were  not  a matter  brought  before  the  conference. 

It  thus  appears  that  the  principal  ground  on  which  General  Benharn 
was  dismissed  from  the  volunteer  service  was  a total  misapprehension, 
and  has  been  completely  swept  away  by  the  frank  and  emphatic  testi- 
mony of  General  Stevens.  The  question  still  remains  to  be  determined 
whether  the  attack  on  the  earthwork  was,  in  fact,  a violation  of  General 
Hunter’s  order  to  General  Benharn.  This  order,  the  only  one  issued 
on  the  subject,  bears  date  “ On  board  United  States  transport  Delaware, 
Stono  River,  South  Carolina,  June  10,  1862,”  and  is  in  these  words: 

In  leaving  the  Stono  River  to  return  to  Hilton  Head,  I desire,  in  any  arrangements 
that  you  may  make  for  the  disposition  of  your  forces  now  in  this  vicinity,  you  will 
make  no  attempt  to  advance  on  Charleston  or  attack  Fort  Johnson  until  largely  re- 
enforced, or  until  you  receive  specific  instructions  from  these  headquarters  to  that 
effect.  You  will,  however,  provide  for  a secure  intrenched  encampment,  where  your  front 
can  be  covered  by  the  fire  of  your  gunboats  from  the  Stono  on  the  left  and  the  creek 
from  Folly  River  on  the  right. 

A glance  at  the  map  which  accompanies  the  papers  makes  it  per- 
fectly clear,  in  my  opinion,  that  the  attempt  made  to  capture  the  earth- 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


981 


work  at  Secession ville  was  not  “ an  advance  on  Charleston,”  distant 
10,  nor  “ an  attack  of  Fort  Johnson,”  distant  7 miles.  General  Ben- 
ham  had  located  his  “intrenched  encampment”  so  as  to  meet  the  con- 
ditions of  the  order,  by  placing  it  within  the  protection  of  the  gunboats 
from  Stono  Biver  on  the  left  and  from  the  creek  of  Folly  Fiver  on 
the  right.  He  found,  however,  that  it  was  covered  by  the  fire  of  the 
earthwork  at  Secessionville,  immediately  in  his  front,  from  which  shot 
and  shell  were  thrown  into  the  camps  both  of  Generals  Stevens  and 
Wright.  To  render  his  encampment,  therefore,  in  the  language  of  the 
order,  “secure,”  and,  indeed,  to  enable  him  to  continue  its  occupation, 
it  was  absolutely  indispensable  that  the  earthwork  should  be  taken. 
The  enterprise  was  not  deemed  difficult  or  its  success  at  all  doubtful. 
It  was  believed  by  General  Benham  then,  and  is  believed  by  him  now, 
that  the  movement  was  not  only  not  a violation  of  General  Hunter’s 
order,  but  that  it  was  in  strict  compliance  with  it,  and  was,  indeed, 
under  all  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed,  “ a military  neces- 
sity.” It  must  be  admitted,  at  least,  that  the  order  was  susceptible  of 
the  interpretation  he  gave  it;  and  for  following  the  sincere  convictions 
of  his  judgment  he  should  not  be  summarily  dismissed  and  degraded. 

General  Hunter  has  preferred  no  charges  against  General  Benham 
because  of  this  attack  on  the  earthwork,  though  it  appears  from  a 
single  expression  in  one  of  his  letters  to  the  Secretary  of  War  that  he 
regarded  the  movement  as  in  violation  of  his  order.  It  must  be  inferred 
that  it  was  in  opposition  to  some  plan  or  purpose  actually  entertained 
by  him,  but  that  it  was  a violation  of  any  purpose  or  wish  disclosed  by 
him  in  the  order  to  General  Benham  cannot  be  successfully  maintained. 

The  question  of  disobedience  of  the  order  mentioned  being  thus  dis- 
posed of,  it  remains  to  inquire  whether  the  attack  itself  evidenced  such 
rashness  or  incapacity  as  justified  the  Government  in  stripping  Gen- 
eral Benham  of  his  commission.  Nothing  is  found  in  the  record  which 
would  warrant  an  affirmative  response  to  this  inquiry.  The  earthwork 
was  defended  by  but  about  600  men.  General  Benham  had  some  fifteen 
regiments  and  two  batteries  with  which  to  assault  it;  and  the  knowl- 
edge he  had  that  the  work  was  being  rapidly  strengthened,  urged  him 
to  prompt  action.  The  plan  and  all  the  arrangements  for  the  move- 
ment, though  bold,  appear  to  have  been  well  matured,  and  justified  the 
confident  expectation  of  a favorable  issue.  The  cause  of  the  failure 
which  followed  sufficiently  appears  from  the  statement  of  Colonel  Haw- 
ley, who  commanded  a brigade  on  the  occasion,  and  was  in  the  front. 
His  detailed  explanations,  which  are  illustrated  by  a map,  leave  no  rea- 
son to  doubt  but  that  had  the  officer  charged  with  conducting  the  assault 
arrived,  as  it  was  intended  he  should,  earlier,  and  directed  personally 
and  in  proper  order  the  march  of  the  troops  in  their  advance,  and  had 
he  not  ordered  the  troops  under  Colonel  Hawley  to  fall  back,  the  attack 
would  have  been  successful.  When  this  order  to  retreat  was  given,  our 
troops,  though  suffering  severely,  were  “ advancing  steadily,”  and  were 
within  “ 100  yards  of  the  works.” 

Generals  Stevens  and  Wright  allege  that  in  the  council  which  was 
held  the  evening  before,  they  expressed  openly  their  opposition  to  the 
attack  being  made.  General  Stevens  certainly  preferred  that  it  should 
be  made  in  open  daylight,  and  both  he  and  General  Wright  may  have 
felt  the  opposition  announced  after  the  disaster  occurred;  but  Captain 
Drayton,  of  the  IT.  S.  Navy,  who  was  present,  describes  their  bearing 
and  conversation  in  the  following  words  : 

In  the  meeting  referred  to,  I cannot  recollect  any  opposition  to  your  proposed  ad- 
vance on  Secessionville  the  following  morning,  except  as  regarded  the  time  you  had 


982  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 


fixed  on,  Brigadier-General  Stevens  being  in  favor  of  deferring  it  until  tbe  afternoon. 
Although,  however,  no  direct  objections  were  made,  I judged  from  a series  of  ques- 
tions which  were  put  to  General  Stevens  by  General  Wright,  in  regard  to  the  effect 
produced  or  likely  to  be  produced  on  the  enemy’s  works  by  the  battery  of  the  latter 
(former),  that  he  was  not  in  favor  of  a forward  movement  at  the  present  time.  The 
impression  was  made  on  me  by  the  general  tone  of  the  conversation  that,  while  ex- 
pressing every  desire  to  further  your  views  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  the  three 
officers  above  named  (Generals  Stevens  and  Wright  and  Colonel  Williams)  were 
scarcely  in  favor  of  the  movement ; none  of  them,  however,  said  as  much  as  this,  and 
General  Wright  did  observe  that  we  could  take  the  battery,  he  thought. 

The  affidavit  of  William  O’Connor  proves  that  on  the  night  previous 
to  the  attack,  in  reply  to  a question  of  General  Benham,  General  Ste- 
vens expressed  the  opinion  that  they  could  succeed. 

Whatever  opposition,  however,  may  have  been  felt  or  manifested  by 
these  officers,  General  Benham  was  not  bound  to  yield  to  it.  Military 
men  may,  and  often  should,  hear  the  opinions  of  their  subordinates,  but 
it  is  their  privilege,  and  at  times  it  becomes  their  duty,  to  disregard 
them.  I think  I am  justified  in  holding  that  the  attack  on  the  earth- 
work was  not  in  fact,  and  certainly  was  not  intended  to  be,  a violation 
of  orders  ; nor  was  it  an  ill-digested  or  criminally  rash  movement,  but 
one  which  was  made  from  a sense  of  duty,  which  should  have  succeeded, 
and  which  failed  from  no  fault  of  General  Benham,  but  from  causes 
which  he  could  not  control.  There  is  a total  absence  of  that  clear  proof 
of  culpability  which  alone  would  justify  the  summary  proceeding  which 
has  been  resorted  to  against  him. 

General  Benham  is  a soldier  by  profession.  He  graduated  at  West 
Point  in  1837,  first  of  his  class,  and  as  an  engineer  has  since  adorned 
the  highest  walk  of  military  science.  He  has  now  given  some  twenty- 
five  years  of  his  life  to  his  country,  and  it  does  seem  to  be  dealing 
harshly  and  unjustly  to  thus  strike  him  down  and  dishonor  him  with- 
out a trial,  even  though  the  criticisms  of  men,  it  may  be,  more  cautious 
than  himself  should  pronounce  his  conduct  in  moving  upon  the  enemy 
ill-considered  and  rash.  Over-aggressiveness  has  certainly  not  been  so 
prevailing  a vice  in  the  military  service  during  the  present  war  as  to 
call  for  such  an  example  as  the  sudden  dismissal  of  this  officer  presents. 
Bashness  and  over-eagerness  to  strike  the  enemy  may  certainly  become 
culpable  and  be  fraught  with  disaster,  but  the  inaction  of  military  men 
is  often  yet  more  to  be  deplored.  General  Benham’s  record  as  a sol- 
dier is  one  of  which  he  may  well  be  proud  ; it  belongs  to  the  country, 
and  should  not  be  hastily  darkened  by  such  a condemnation  as  that 
which  now  rests  upon  him.  Had  he  done  nothing  more  than  offer  his 
life  upon  the  field  of  Buena  Vista,  where  he  fought  bravely  and  was 
wounded,  he  would  have  done  much  .to  entitle  him  to  the  kind  consid- 
eration of  his  Government.  General  Wool,  speaking  of  his  conduct  on 
that  occasion,  says : 

He  was  very  gallant,  zealous,  and  efficient  at  all  times,  night  and  day,  in  the  per- 
formance of  the  important  duties  with  which  he  was  charged. 

Lieutenant-General  Scott,  referring  to  the  same  events,  uses  this  em- 
phatic language  to  the  Secretary  of  War: 

There  is  much  merit  in  the  services  mentioned  within,  deserving,  in  my  opinion, 
of  an  additional  brevet.  Brevet  Captain  Benham  deserved  that  rank  for  his  great 
services  on  the  22d  of  February,  first  day  of  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista,  and  the 
brevet  of  major  for  the  next  day. 

His  zeal,  ability,  and  efficiency  are  yet  further  attested  and  com- 
mended in  earnest  terms  by  some  of  the  most  accomplished  officers  con- 
nected with  the  civil  and  military  administration,  all  of  whom  speak  of 


Chap.  XXVI.l  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


983 


what  they  have  personally  known  in  their  experience  of  his  character 
and  conduct:  among  whom  may  be  mentioned  Commodore  Joseph 
Smith,  of  the  Bureau  of  Yards  and  Docks;  Brigadier-General  Totten, 
Professor  Bache,  and  Brigadier-General  [Thomas  A.]  Morris.  Brigadier- 
General  Totten,  after  alluding  to  the  various  positions  m which  he  had 
known  him,  says : 


In  all  these  situations  ho  has  performed  his  duty  to  my  entire  satisfaction,  always 
exhibiting  the  strictest  care  of  the  public  interest ; excellent  m judgment,  great  in- 
telligence, persevering  industry,  and  a stirring  zeal  that  never  allows  itself  to  be  tied 
down  within  the  limits  nf  any  special  trust. 


Professor  Bache  holds  this  language  in  regard  to  him : 


I would  respectfully  commend  him  in  the  highest  terms  as  a man  of  excellent  judg- 
ment,  of  great  kindness,  and  yet  firm  in  his  dealings  with  his  subordinates  and  dis- 
creet in  his  management  of  officers  and  men,  and  with  a faithfulness,  energy,  and 
industry  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty  which  cannot  be  exceeded.  The  loyalty  ot 
character  and  devotion  which  he  shows  to  the  service  in  which  he  is  engaged  can- 
not be  surpassed. 

Brigadier-General  Morris,  under  date  of  18th  of  July,  1861,  alluding 
to  his  campaign  in  Western  Virginia,  writes  : 

Captain  Benham  has  been  on  service  with  my  column  ever  since  we  have  been  in 
Virginia,  and  if  we  have  done  anything  that  merits  the  approval  ot  our  friends,  we 
owe  to  Captain  Benham  an  enduring  gratitude  for  the  valuable  aid  and  counsels 
afforded  us.  I have  on  all  occasions  given  the  command  of  the  attacking  column  to 
the  captain,  and  his  great  energy,  his  superior  skill,  and  indomitable  courage  have 
been  fully  appreciated  by  our  men,  and  have,  on  every  occasion,  led  us  to  victory. 


Surely,  in  the  presence  of  such  testimonials  as  these,  General  Benham 
should  not  be  condemned  as  incapable  or  unfaithful,  precipitately  or 
without  a hearing.  His  restoration  is  respectfully  recommended. 

J.  HOLT, 

Judge- Advocate-  General. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  May  17,  1862. 

Major-General  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South : 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  direction,  I have  the  honor  to  submit 
to  you  in  writing  the  substance  of  the  plan  I had  proposed  to  you  for 
the  attack  upon  Charleston  and  the  forts  in  that  harbor,  which  I had 
arranged  and  submitted  verbally  to  yourself  and  to  Flag-Officer  DuPont 
about  the  1st  instant,  the  morning  after  wTe  obtained  the  information 
from  the  negro  deserters  from  the  boat’s  crew  of  General  Ripley,  as  also 
such  modifications  of  this  plan  as  seem  expedient  from  the  more  receut 
information  of  other  deserters. 

Of  the  eighteen  regiments  of  infantry  and  the  three  regiments  of  en- 
gineers, artillery,  and  cavalry,  and  two  batteries  of  fourteen  pieces  of 
field  artillery,  I found  about  15,000  men  effective.  Of  these,  I proposed 
to  leave  the  1,800  men  now  at  Fernandina  and  Saint  Augustine,  Fla., 
at  those  posts,  and  to  retain  about  3,000  men  in  this  vicinity,  say  from 
Tybee  to  Port  Royal  Islands,  distributed  as  follows:  Say  one  regiment 
and  one  company  of  artillery  at  Pulaski,  with  an  infantry  picket  of  one 
company  at  Tybee  Island,  and  one  company  of  infantry,  and  probably 
one  of  cavalry,  at  Dawfuskie  Island  ; one  regiment  of  infantry  and  four 
pieces  of  artiller^and  two  companies  of  cavalry  at  Beaufort  and  Port 
Royal  Island,  which  might,  in  any  great  pressure  of  force,  be  abandoned 


D84  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

and  the  troops  brought  to  Hilton  Head,  where  I propose  a regiment 
(possibly  twelve  or  fourteen  companies)  of  infantry,  two  companies  of 
engineers  and  two  of  artillery,  and  one  squadron  or  one  battalion  of 
cavalry  to  protect  Hilton  Head,  which,  with  the  battery  of  the  ship  of 
the  line  Vermont  and  two  or  three  gunboats,  if  available,  one,  say,  for 
Calibogue  Sound,  between  Cooper  and  May  Eivers,  and  the  others  in 
the  Savannah  and  Cooper,  will,  I think,  effectually  secure  these  central 
or  main  positions  during  the  operations  projected  against  Charleston. 

For  these,  I would  then  propose  to  have  available  about  10,000  men, 
nearly  4,000  of  which  are  now  under  the  command. of  General  Wright 
at  Edisto  and  Otter  Islands.  The  two  batteries  (Hamilton’s,  of  six  guns, 
and  Eockwell’s,  of  four  guns)  and  three  and  a half  squadrons  of  cavalry 
and  the  pontoon  train,  with  two  engineer  companies,  I would  send  up 
as  early  as  possible,  in  the  proper  boats,  to  be  landed  in  the  night,  and 
as  covertly  as  possible,  at  North  Edisto ; sending  up  also  one  or  two 
regiments  in  the  other  available  boats,  to  be  lauded  there  in  the  same 
way,  thus  getting  fully  one-half  the  proposed  force  there  all  ready  for 
transportation  across  to  Eockville  at  any  moment  ; that  infantry,  with 
about  half  of  each  of  the  other  troops,  being  designed  to  march  north- 
ward on  Wadmalaw,  on  the  west  of  Bohicket  Creek,  and  under  General 
Wright. 

These  preparations  made,  I would  gather  the  rest  of  the  infantry 
here  upon  the  proper  vessels  in  this  harbor,  under  General  Stevens, 
and  the  division  headquarters  brigade,  under  Colonel  Williams,  having 
them  either  on  this  island  or  in  the  vessels,  so  as  to  be  transferred  or 
to  be  on  board  at  early  morning  upon  the  day  fixed,  so  that  the  vessels 
might  sail  very  nearly  together,  and  to  reach  North  Edisto  at  high  tide 
in  the  afternoon;  to  disembark  the  troops,  those  from  the  lighter 
draught  vessels,  at  least,  at  the  landing  at  John’s  Island,  understood  to 
be  from  1J  to  3 miles  above  Eockville,  on  the  east  side  of  Bohicket 
Creek,  such  vessels  returning  immediately,  either  to  land  the  balance 
of  General  Stevens’  force  or  to  ferry  over  the  advance  of  General  Wright 
to  Eockville,  as  may  then  be  deemed  most  expedient. 

With  a sufficient  number  of  vessels  for  this,  as  is  believed  to  be  in 
this  district,  and  properly  timed,  it  is  thought  that,  without  unavoida- 
ble accidents  from  bad  weather,  &c.,  the  mass  of  the  troops,  certainly 
the  infantry  (except  a small  regiment  to  be  left  in  depot  at  Edisto),  can 
be  landed  by  dark,  and  moved  forward  in  the  night  the  whole  distance 
of  some  12  miles  for  the  east  or  Stevens’  column  to  P.  Gervais’,  and  at 
Eivers’  [T.  Grimball’s],  at  the  bend  of  the  Stono,  next  above  Legareville, 
and  some  16  miles, for  Wright’s  column,  at  Fripp’s,  about  2 miles  above 
Eivers’,  where,  at  one  or  both  places,  they  might  cross  that  river  at 
points  not  more  than  1 to  1J  miles  distant,  to  unite  at  James  Island. 

The  crossing  was  intended  to  be  by  the  pontoon  train,  divided  in  two 
parts,  one  with  each  column,  to  be  used  either  as  a rope  ferry  or  as  a 
flying  bridge,  which  at  least  appears  feasible  at  the  upper,  or  Fripp’s, 
landing,  from  the  information  obtained;  and,  either  column  once  across, 
the  other  could  pass  without  difficulty,  and  the  two  batteries  near  the 
mouth  of  the  Stono  and  the  “old  battery”  about  2J  miles  above  them 
being  taken  in  rear,  as  they  could  be — probably  by  the  causeway,  posi- 
tively said  to  lead  from  the  last  to  the  two  former,  or,  possibly,  by  de- 
scending the  river  in  scows,  boats,  or  pontoons — the  mouth  of  the  Stono 
would  be  open  to  the  Navy  and  to  our  vessels,  to  be  ready  loaded  and 
in  Edisto  Inlet  with  the  breaching  ordnance  for  Fort  Sumter,  and 
the  large  columbiads,  with,  perhaps,  some  mortars  fdf  shelling  Charles- 
ton, and  the  latter  could  at  once  be  taken  (a  distance  of  6 or  7 miles 


Crap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


985 


only)  to  about  1 or  2 miles  west  of  Fort  Johnson  for  shelling  Charles- 
ton, after,  of  course,  the  troops  previously  across  the  Stono  shall  (as  it 
is  presumed  they  will  be  in  force  sufficient)  have  routed  the  enemy  from 
James  Island,  below  Newton  Cut  and  James  Island  Creek.  The  heavy 
breaching  ordnance  (Parrott  and  James  guns)  were  to  be  kept  afloat 
till  it  was  determined  whether  Morris  Island  could  at  once  be  taken 
and  the  batteries  planted  there  against  Fort  Sumter,  or,  in  a doubt  of 
this,  they  could  be  landed  at  the  same  place  with  the  columbiads,  at 
the  easternmost  reach  of  the  Stono,  and  transferred  to  Fort  Johnson 
for  use  at  that  more  .distant,  but  possibly  effective,  point  for  Fort  Sum- 
ter. If  successful  at  James  Island,  and  we  appear  sufficiently  strong 
to  spare  the  force,  especially  if  Morris  Island  were  seized,  I had  also  in 
project  to  send  around  and  from  the  Stono  nearly  one-half  of  our  force, 
to  be  landed  in  Dewey’s  Inlet,  about  9 or  10  miles  north  of  Fort  Moul- 
trie, under  cover  of  gunboats,  if  needed,  and  then  to  march  down  about 
6 or  7 miles,  with  Parrott  artillery,  to  a point  about  1 mile  northwest  of 
Moultrie,  for  the  purpose  of  attacking  that  fort. 

In  connection  with  and  as  a part  of  these  operations,  I proposed 
that,  from  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  the  transfer  of  the  cavalry 
and  artillery,  the  enemy  should  be  threatened  and  kept  on  the  alert  in 
the  Savannah  River  and  at  Warsaw  Sound;  that  boat  or  other  pickets 
should  be  frequently  pushed  forward  to  the  extreme  limits  of  safety ; 
that  the  balloon  should  be  sent  up  every  two  or  three  days,  and  that 
the  heavy  gunboats  in  the  vicinity,  especially  at  Warsaw,  should  be  fre- 
quently moving  as  if  in  reconnaissance,  and  toward  the  Bonaventure  or 
Thunderbolt  Bluff,  as  near  as  may  be  fully  safe.  This  to  continue 
till  directions  are  sent  that  it  is  of  no  further  use  toward  deceiving  the 
enemy,  and  at  the  latest  moment  possible,  before  transferring  the  main 
body  of  the  infantry  from  Port  Royal,  I propose  to  have  a detachment 
from  General  Stevens’  command  make  a dash  at  the  railroad,  which, 
the  general  states,  is  entirely  practicable  either  toward  the  Salkehatchie 
or  the  Coosawhatchie,  and  burn  or  otherwise  destroy  the  trestling  or 
bridges,  so  as  to  put  this  route,  temporarily  at  least,  out  of  repair. 

It  was  also  in  my  original  project  to  submit  for  consideration  of  your- 
self and  the  flag-officer  the  employment  on  service  with  our  land  forces, 
to  strengthen  them,  of  a body  of  such  marines  and  others  trained  to  the 
use  of  small-arms,  as  could  be  spared  from  the  blockading  squadron, 
while  the  squadron  itself  might  aid  us  greatly  by  diversions,  properly 
timed,  say,  to  the  hour  at  which  wjjg*cach  or  expect  to  reach  the  Stono, 
by  a tire  of  shot  and  shell  at  the  batteries  at  the  mouth  of  the  Stono, 
and  also  by  a similar  fire  upon  Sullivan’s  Island  and  the  troops  near 
Beach  Inlet,  if  it  can  be  done  with  safety  to  themselves  from  artillery 
tire  from  the  land,  the  vessels  avoiding  in  all  cases  any  attack  at  or 
near  Dewey’s  Inlet,  our  projected  possible  landing  place. 

The  above  is  the  sum  of  my  original  project,  as  prepared  at  the  time. 
stated,  about  the  1st  instant.  The  information  that  we  have  recently 
gained,  and  that  appears  to  be  reliable,  from  the  negroes  of  the  steamer 
Planter  and  the  Fort  Sumter  deserters,  which  seems  to  assure  us  of 
the  evacuation  and  destruction  of  the  batteries  at  Stono  Inlet,  would 
lead  me  to  modify  my  plan  as  follows : 

The  original  project  of  the  transfer  of  the  infantry,  cavalry,  and  field 
artillery  (except  one  four-gun  battery)  to  Edisto  as  secretly  as  possible 
for  General  Wright  being  carried  out,  I would  have  the  last  column  (Ste- 
vens’) and  this  four-gun  battery  ready  to  move  to  Stono  Inlet  in  vessels, 
after  having  had,  the  day  previous  to  their  landing,  the  inlet  reconnoi- 
fered,  and,  if  found  evacuated,  then  to  be  occupied  by  the  Navy,  that 


986  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

our  transports  may  safely  enter;  after  which  I would  send  about  one- 
half  this  force,  with  the  battery  from  the  light-draught  vessels,  to  be 
thrown  at  earliest  favorable  time  into  Light-  nouse  Inlet,  to  seize  and 
hold  Morris  Island  for  the  purpose  of  breaching  Fort  Sumter;  while 
at  the  same  time  tbe  balance  of  General  Stevens’  column  should  go  up 
the  Stono,  to  be  landed  on  its  left  bank,  at  the  point  previously  referred 
to,  where  it  should  be  met,  as  near  as  it  is  possible  to  time  it,  by  General 
Wright’s  column  with  Colonel  Williams’  headquarters  brigade  regi- 
ments, passing  by  the  route  intended  originally  for  General  Stevens,  to 
the  east  of  the  Bohicket  Creek ; and  if  the  naval  vessels  can  aid  in  the 
transfer  of  General  Stevens’  force  for  the  6 or  8 miles  up  the  Stono,  the 
proper  steamers  can  be  sent  back  to  Edisto  for  the  transfer  of  General 
Wright’s  force  to  Bohicket  Creek,  the  ordnance  for  breaching  Sumter 
and  for  bombarding  Charleston,  of  course,  to  follow  as  soon  as  practica- 
ble after  our  forces  shall  have  possessed  themselves  of  the  proper  posi- 
tions at  Cumming’s  Point,  on  Morris  Island,  or  near  Fort  Johnson,  on 
James  Island,  respectively.  I find,  from  later  information  from  Mr. 
Boutelle,  that  it  is  very  probable  that  the  troops  of  General  Stevens, 
last  proposed  for  the  Stono,  may,  perhaps,  with  more  facility  go  up  Folly 
River,  and  up  the  large  creek  to  the  left,  about  5 miles  distant  from 
Cole’s  Island  to  Legare’s  place,  which  may  be  found  most  expedient  on 
our  arrival  there. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 

Brigadier- General , Comdg.  Northern  Dist .,  Dept,  of  the  South. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Private.]  (Received  at  1 a.  m.  June  7, 1862.) 


Brigadier-General  Benham, 

Comdg.  Northern  District , Department  of  the  South: 


Dear  General  : I understand  you  wish  me  to  make  an  armed  re- 
connaissance of  the  enemy’s  position,  and,  if  the  result  be  favorable,  to 
follow  it  up  by  a dash,  in  order  to  seize  James  Island, below  James  River, 
and  Newtown  Cut.  We  shall  probably  be  as  well  able  to  make  it  day 
after  to  morrow  (daylight)  as  at  any  other  time. 

Should  you  decide  to  make  it  day  after  to-morrow,  it  is  of  the  first 
consequence  to  make  that  decisioi^without  delay.  It  will  require  all 
day  to-morrow  to  prepare  for  it.  WFould  suggest  that  not  more  than 
three  companies  be  left  at  Legareville  ; that  everything  else  be  brought 
over  to  morrow,  including  the  six  guns  of  Hamilton’s  battery ; that 
arrangements  be  made  with  the  gunboats  to  open  cross-fires.  The  sys- 
tem of  signals  will  require  careful  studying  and  arrangement. 

I desire  that  the  dash,  if  determined  upon,  be  successful,  and  there- 
fore I want  to  see  every  man*  thrown  in;  but  I desire  particularly  to 
express  my  judgment  that,  in  the  present  position  of  our  troops,  twenty- 
four  hours  of  vigorous  work  is  absolutely  essential  in  the  way  of  prepa- 


ration. 

I expect  to  have  the  balloon  inflated  to-morrow  by  noon.  The  oper- 
ator hopes  to  get  it  done  by  10  o’clock. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

ISAAC  I.  STEYENS. 


[#  Not©  by  General  Benham. — One  ground  of  accusation  of  General  Hunter  was 
the  number  of  men  taken  on  the  16th.  ] 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


987 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Northern  Dist.,  Dept.  South 

No.  13.  I Stono  River , near  Legaremlle , S.  G.,  Jwwe  8,  looz. 

******* 

YII.  The  division  of  General  Stevens  will  be  formed  near,  or  in  front 
of  bis  present  encampment  at  tbe  hour  to  be  designated,  and  the 
division  of  General  Wright  and  brigade  of  Colonel  Williams  will,  it 
practicable  to  transport  the  infantry  there  by  water,  be  formed  to-day 
at,  or  just  above,  Thomas  GrimbalPs  place,  on  the  left  bank  ot  the 
Stono.  Each  regiment  to  have  its  spare  ammunition  (100  rounds)  m a 
wagon  by  itself;  each  man  to  have  2 pounds  of  cooked  meat  and  a due 
proportion  of  hard  bread  in  his  haversack,  canteen  filled,  &c. ; knap- 
sacks to  be  left  in  camp,  but  blankets,  or,  in  preference,  oil  cloths,  to 
be  taken  by  the  men,  with  60  rounds  of  cartridges,  the  cannon  ammu- 
nition to  the  extent  of  200  rounds  to  be  taken  with  the  artillery.  The 
obiect  of  this  movement  is  a heavy  armed  reconnaissance  of  the  lines  or 
works  of  the  enemy  believed  to  extend  from  “ Boyals,”  in  James  Island 
Creek,  to  near  Secessionville,  on  the  marshes  on  our  right  flank,  and 
for  this  purpose  the  division  of  General  Stevens  will  take  the  advance, 
and  be  the  attacking  force.  The  division  of  General  Wright  will  be  the 
supporting  column,  kept  at  a distance,  generally,  of  about  one-halt 
mile  in  rear,  and  the  brigade  of  Colonel  Williams  will  be  immediately 
in  rear  of  General  Wright’s  command,  to  act  as  a reserve  for  either  the 
main  attack  toward  those  lines  or  to  aid  the  command  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Armstrong,  near  Newtown  Cut,  if  that  should  be  necessary. 

VIII.  The  troops  are  expected  to  be  at  the  point  designated  by  early 
in  the  evening,  and  to  move  forward  to  their  respective  positionson  the 
route  toward  the  enemy,  by  moonlight,  the  column  of  General  Wright 
and  Colonel  Williams  starting  last  from  Thomas  GrimbalPs,  after  the 
movement  of  General  Stevens  shall  have  been  assured,  and  moving  to 
a position  as  near  the  enemy  as  possible,  and  with  the  utmost  quiet, 
without  alarming  them.  The  two  columns  will  rest  until  3 a.  m.,  when 
they  will  move  forward  rapidly  and  quietly  to  the  attack. 

These  orders,  though  dated  on  this  day,  the  8th  instant,  will  not, 
however,  be  carried  out  this  night  as  to  the  movement  in  the  last  para- 
graph until  further  and  final  orders  given  to  Generals  Stevens  and 
Wright  and  Colonel  Williams  from  these  headquarters. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.W.Benham:  omTv 

1.  K.  SLA-Lx, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Note.— The  Nos.  I to  VI,  inclusive,  of  the  above  preparatory  order  divided  the 
forces  into  two.  divisions  and  one  brigade,  and  it  was  at  once  issued  to  these  three 
commanders,  Generals  Wright  and  Stevens  and  Colonel  Williams,  so  that  they  might 
as  early  as  possible,  he  familiar  with  the  proposed  plan  for  a night  attack,  again 
arranged  for  on  the  10th,  and  finally  ordered  for  the  16th  of  June— [H.  W.  B.] 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Burnside  Expedition, 

Newport  News , Fa.,  Sunday , July  20,  1862. 

To  the  Editor  of  the  New  York  Times: 

I desire  to  correct  an  error,  either  of  the  printer  or  copyist,  in  my 
official  report  to  General  Hunter.  In  the  copy  as  printed  in  your  issue 


988  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Ch*p.  XXVI. 

of  the  16th  instant  it  is  stated,  u General  Wright  warned  General  Ben- 
ham  that  his  orders  were,  in  fact,  orders  not  to  fight  a battle.”  It 
should  read,  “ General  Wright  warned  General  Benham  that  his  orders 
were,  in  fact,  orders  to  fight  a battle,”  * meaning  thereby  General 
Benham’s  own  orders  to  his  subordinates  in  relation  to  the  operations 
of  the  morrow,  and  that  a battle  must  inevitably  result  from  them,  and 
not  General  Hunter’s  orders  to  General  Benham,  which  were  not  a 
matter  brought  before  the  conference. 

I trust  to  your  sense  of  justice  to  insert  this  note.  I will  simply  state 
that  I have  nothing  further  to  add  to  my  official  report,  except  to  say 
that  I am  prepared  to  make  good,  in  an  official  way,  my  declaration 
that  I can  establish  every  word  of  my  report  by  incontrovertible  testi- 
mony. 

I leave  with  my  command  and  my  associates  my  vindication  from 
charges  of  misconduct  on  that  battle-field,  begging  leave,  however,  to 
quote  this  paragraph  from  General  Benham’s  official  report,  made  to 
General  Hunter  on  the  day  of  the  battle  itself : 

Throughout  the  whole  of  this  affair  I have  great  pleasure  in  reporting  that  the 
gallantry  and  good  conduct  of  General  Wright  and  Colonel  Williams,  directly  under 
my  eye,  as  also  that  of  the  several  regiments  engaged  on  the  left  wing,  was  most  ad- 
mirable, while  the  careful  arrangement  and  skillful  disposition  of  the  forces  of  Gen- 
eral Stevens,  guided  as  they  were  by  his  own  cool  courage  in  action,  supported  as  he 
was  by  some  of  the  best  troops  in  the  service,  have  mainly  contributed  to  the  success 
of  this  reconnaissance,  and  the  safe  and  orderly  return  of  our  forces. 

Yery  respectfully,  yours, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS. 


[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

THE  BATTLE  ON  JAMES  ISLAND. 

To  the  Editor  of  the  New  York  Times  : 

The  reckless  statements  in  the  letter  of  General  Stevens  to  General 
Hunter,  dated  July  8,  in  relation  to  the  affair  at  James  Island,  seem  to 
be  explicit,  and  shall  have  an  explicit  reply  from  me,  though  I have 
carefully,  up  to  this  time,  avoided  any  connection  whatever  with  what 
has  been  published  about  the  matter. 

In  the  first  place,  I would  state  that  I had  the  meeting  of  the  officers 
referred  to  solely  with  reference  to  a concert  of  the  action  to  be  taken 
the  next  day,  and  not  to  discuss  the  propriety  or  necessity  of  the  move- 
ment, of  which  I conceived  there  was  no  doubt,  and  so  told  them  ; that 
I considered  it  indispensable  if  we  were  not  to  be  driven  from  the 
Stono  ; and  I understood  the  movement  to  have  been  most  fully  sanc- 
tioned previously,  at  three  different  times,  once  in  writing,  even  by  Gen- 
eral Hunter,  before  he  left.  And  perfectly  indifferent  to  what  combina- 
tion General  Stevens  may  have  attempted  to  bolster  him  up  in  his  failure 
from  his  disobedience  of  my  orders,  for  which  but  for  my  kindness  I 
should  have  arrested  him  for  trial,  I aver  most  solemnly  that  through 
all  our  interviews  not  one  word  was  said  by  either  of  the  three  officers 
that  I could  construe  into  an  objection  to  the  necessity,  propriety,  or 
probable  success  of  this  movement ; and  in  this  I am  fully  borne  out 
by  the  letter  of  Commander  Drayton,  of  the  Navy,  the  only  witness 
present  who  is  not  now  made  a party  in  the  matter.  This  letter  (asked 


Correctly  printed  on  p.  49. 


Chat.  XXVX] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


989 


for  by  me  when  the  after- thought  of  Stevens,  after  his  failure,  first  gave 
him  the  effrontery  to  make  such  pretenses  to  me)  states  explicitly  that, 
if  these  officers  were  not  in  favor  of  the  movement,  “ none  of  them  said 
as  much  as  this.”  It  has  never  been  pretended  by  me  that  they  were 
in  favor  of  it,  though  I did  not  have  any  reason  to  suspect  they  were 
not,  is  what  I distinctly  assert. 

Of  the  three  questions  put  by  General  Wright  to  General  Stevens, 
and  not  in  response  to  any  call  for  his  opinion , one  was,  “Has  youi 
battery  had  any  effect  upon  the  fort  % ” A second,  “ Do  you  expect  it 
to  have  any  effect  ? ” To  both  of  which  General  Stevens  replied  briefly 
in  the  negative ; replies  that  were,  of  course,  favorable  to  my  early 
attack.  And  I deny  explicitly  that  General  Wright  gave  aDy  warning 
whatever  as  to  what  my  orders  were,  or  as  to  its  being  against  the  orders 
to  me,  while  I am  able  to  say  that  General  Stevens  (who  had  read  Gen- 
eral Hunter’s  order  to  me)  did  say  to  me  after  the  affair  that  it  was  a 
movement  that  it  was  my  right  and  perfectly  competent  foi  me  to  order. 

I gave  those  orders,  therefore,  no  one  objecting,  and  General  Stevens 
making  but  few,  if  any,  of  the  speeches  he  has  now  written  out  in  his 
letter  He  did  propose  the  full  daylight  or  the  afternoon,  and  unloaded 
muskets,  both  which  I forbade,  but  both  which  he  virtually  carried  out. 

I told  him  his  men  “ would  be  cut  to  pieces  ” if  he  assaulted  the  fort  m 
open  dav,  and  that  he  “ must  pass  over  the  open  space  in  front,  and  be 
upon  the  fort  before  good  aiming  light,”  and  with  loaded  muskets,  but 
not  capped,  for  a night  attack ; that  his  attack  must  not  be  later  than 
4 a m.  at  furthest.  And  our  supporting  column,  resting  at  about  the 
same  distance  from  the  fort,  1 to  1J  miles  distant,  was  to  move  as  soon 
as  we  heard  his  fire  (expected  to  be  that  of  the  pickets),  or  as  soon  as 
a staff  officer  reached  us  from  General  Stevens,  as  he  proposed. 

The  first  firing  we  heard,  which  proved  to  be  the  guns  of  the  fort 
upon  Stevens’  column,  was  fully  as  late  as  5 o’clock  and  after  sunrise, 
on  which  we  moved  at  once,  his  messenger  reaching  us  some  ten  minutes 
after.  It  was  certainly  after  5 o’clock,  and  General  Stevens7  watch,  it 
he  looked  at  it,  proved  that  to  him,  for  I had  been  careful  the  night  pre- 
vious to  have  our  watches  set  together;  and,  more  than  this,  General 
Stevens  knows,  for  we  three  talked  of  it  in  the  evening,  that  General 
Wright  had  been  expressing  our  great  surprise  at  his  delay,  while  we 
were  waiting  for  his  fire  for  more  than  the  whole  hour  that  morning. 
And  late  as  this  was,  the  appearances  are  all  such  that  had  General 
Stevens  been  anywhere  near,  or  with  his  troops  to  guide  and  direct 
them  and  to  keep  them  closed,  I cannot  have  a doubt  that  the  assault 
would  still  have  been  successful.  I was  never  able  to  hear,  nor  did  any 
of  my  staff,  as  far  as  I could  learn,  ever  find  that  he  was  nearer  than  the 
second  hedge,  or  over  800  yards  from  the  fort;  and  while  his  leading 
regiment  and  a part  of  his  fourth  regiment  reached  the  work  and  re- 
mained there  “some  twenty  minutes  or  more;”  and  when,  as  the  gallant 
Morrison  repeatedly  stated  to  me,  “With  40  men  I could  have  taken 
the  fort:”  and  when  the  men  at  the  parapet  and  ditch  would  have 
readily  pushed  over  it,  if  one-half  even  of  the  other  four  regiments  had 
been  pushed  forward  instead  of  being  left  (for  the  noble  fellows  did  not 
run)  to  wither  under  the  fire  of  the  fort,  at  some  hundreds  of  yards  dis- 
tance, without  the  presence  of  their  general — their  only  educated  soldier 
near— to  guide  and  direct  them.  As  part  evidence  of  this  1 have  his  note, 
in  his  own  handwriting,  sent  to  me  on  the  battle* field,  which  he  cannot 
gainsay  now,  in  which  he  says,  “ The  advance  company  mounted  the 
parapet,  but  the  supports  did  not  follow  closely  enough.”  And  in  this 


990  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

lies  the  main  secret  of  the  failure  after  the  attack  in  open  day,  which  I 
did  not  authorize  and  would  not  sanction  the  repetition  of— au  attack 
started,  in  defiance  of  mv  repeated  orders,  in  open  light.  Captain  Doyle, 
of  the  Eighth  Michigan,  who  led  the  advance  companies,  stated  to  me, 
that  it  “was  good  light  to  aim”  when  they  met  the  first  pickets,  just 
after  starting,  or  nearly  1 mile  from  the  fort.  And  the  man  who  de- 
layed this  attack  is  the  person,  and  the  only  person,  in  my  opinion,  who 
is  responsible  for  all  the  slaughter  there,  and  for  the  loss  of  the  key  to 
the  eventual  attack  on  Charleston. 

With  this  and  the  statement  that  I have  now  General  Stevens’  letter, 
volunteered  to  me,  with  his  own  propositions  “to  seize  James  Island 
below  James  Fiver,”  and,  of  course,  including  this  fort,  sent  just  before 
this  similar  movement  was  first  planned,  I am  willing  to  let  the  subject 
be  submitted  to  an  intelligent  public. 

H.  W.  BENHAM. 

New  York,  July  16, 1862. 

[Inclosure  No.  6.] 

New  York,  July  28, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  \ U.  IS.  Army : 

Sir  : As  the  three  applications  which  I have  made  to  the  Adjutant- 
General  of  the  Army  have  remained  unnoticed  or  unreplied  to,  I avail 
myself  of  what  I understand  to  be  the  custom  and  the  right  of  officers 
in  such  cases,  and  appeal  to  the  next  superior,  yourself,  to  ask  that  the 
arrest  on  limits,  which  has  now  been  continued  upon  me  for  forty  days, 
against  the  spirit,  if  not  the  letter  even,  of  the  Articles  of  War,  shali  at 
once  be  remitted,  or  that  I shall,  at  least,  be  furnished  with  a copy  of 
any  charges  or  allegations  against  me,  and  a court-martial,  or,  at  least 
a court  of  inquiry,  to  examine  the  same,  or  that,  if  there  are  no  such 
charges,  I ask  that  I shall  at  once  be  honorably  released,  as  I know  I 
deserve  to  be,  and  restored  to  my  usefulness  in  the  Army.  From  the 
moment  of  my  arrest  to  this  time  I have  not  had  the  slightest  intima- 
tion as  to  the  cause  of  this  arrest,  though  it  is  true,  some  hours  pre- 
viously, General  Hunter  did  allege  that  I had  disobeyed  his  orders,  a 
copy  of  which  I herewith  inclose,*  and  with  a map,  self-explanatory,  as 
I think,  and  I submit  that  I did  not  disobey  his  orders,  but  that  L did 
endeavor  to  obey  them,  as  I intended  to,  most  implicitly.  I did  not 
“advance  on  Charleston  or  attack  Fort  Johnson,”  nor  did  I move  at  all 
on  the  routes  to  these  positions,  some  6 to  10  miles  distant,  and  I did 
endeavor  to  “ provide  a secure  intrenched  encampment,”  by  attempting 
to  seize  a rebel  battery  that  covered  our  camps  with  its  fire,  scarcely 
leaving  beyond  it  a quarter  of  a mile  square  of  dry  land  on  James  Island 
for  our  9,000  to  10,000  men,  and  this  attack  I claim,  and  will  swear,  was 
twice  verbally  authorized,  as  far  as  I could  understand  words  of  approval 
by  General  Hunter  in  my  private  conversations  with  himself  before  he 
left  the  Stono.  I therefore,  as  an  act  of  the  commonest  justice  due  to 
the  most  inferior  officer  of  the  Army,  not  to  refer  to  my  present  rank, 
nor  to  the  good  opinion  I do  not  doubt  you  entertained  of  me  while  a 
member  of  the  same  Corps  of  Engineers,  would  ask  an  early  investiga- 
tion of  my  case  by  yourself,  if  possible,  and  with  me  preseut,  if  the  two 
inclosed  papers  are  not  sufficiently  explanatory  ; for  I feel  well  assured 


See  p.  46. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


991 


that  a candid  examination  of  the  affair  will  at  once  restore  me  to  the 
position  of  honor  and  usefulness  that  I can  prove  that  my  whole  course 
in  this  war  has  entitled  me  to  claim. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ BENHAM 

Brigadier-  General. 


p#  g. a longer  explanation  was  sent  to  the  Secretary  of  War  on 

June  27,  to  which  I respectfully  refer. 

[Indorsements.] 

August  7, 1862. 

I respectfully  recommend  that  Brigadier-General  Benham  be  mus- 
tered out  of  service  as  a brigadier-general  of  voJjjnteers. 

H.  W.  HALLEOK., 

General-in - Chief. 

August  7, 1862. 

Approved .»  EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


[Inclosnre  No.  7.] 

Washington,  D.  0.,  August  13, 1862. 
His  Excellency  the  President  : 

Sir  : I have  to  appeal  to  you  from  what  I conceive  to  be  the  most 
cruel  injustice  ever  inflicted  upon  an  officer  of  our  army.  By  a note,  of 
which  I inclose  a copy,  from  Adjutant-General  Townsend,  I am  informed 
that  you  have  directed  the  revocation  of  my  commission  as  brigadier- 
general,  and  this  without  any  cause  assigned,  and  when  I have  four 
times  in  the  past  month  asked  at  the  War  Department  if  there  were 
any  allegations  against  me  there,  and  all  without  reply.  I am,  there- 
fore, left  to  infer  or  suspect  that  it  is  in  consequence  of  charges  such  as 
have  lately  been  published  in  the  newspapers  in  relation  to  the  affair  on 
James  Island,  South  Carolina,  on  the  16th  of  June:  First,  that  in  direct- 
ing that  attack  I disobeyed  the  orders  of  General  Hunter ; second,  that 
I overruled  the  remonstrances  of  the  other  generals  $ third,  that  it  was 
not  necessary,  and,  fourth,  that  it  was  badly  planned.  Not  aware  of 
anything  else  but  these,  which  I have  here  brought  into  definite  shape, 
I would  here  state  that  I feel  I could  refute  completely  every  one  of 
these  charges  if  I could  only  have  a trial.  I claim  I could  show  that  I 
did  not  disobey  the  orders  of  General  Hunter,  but  that  I implicitly  fol- 
lowed them  in  attacking  the  Secession ville  battery,  as  he  ordered  me  in 
writing  to  “provide  a secure  intrenched  encampment,”  aud  had  twice 
verbally  authorized  this  attack.  Second,  I aver  that  neither  of  the 
generais  remonstrated  against  this  attack,  nor  did  I have  a suspicion 
that  they  were  opposed  to  it,  and  the  inclosed  printed  letter  of  Senior 
Naval  Officer  Drayton  (the  only  witness  not  a party  now)  shows  that, 
though  he  had  that  suspicion,  yet  “no  one  said  as  much  as  this”  (that 
he  was  opposed  to  it),  and  that  the  only  opposition  to  my  plan  was 
General  Stevens’  wish  to  attack  in  the  afternoon  instead  of  at  day- 
light, as  I ordered.  That  wish  I did  overrule,  and  that  only;  while 

* Appointment  as  brigadier-general  United  States  Volunteers  revoked  same  day. 


992^  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 

General  Wright  thought  “ we  could  take  the  battery.”  Third,  Gen- 
eral Hunter  had  left  the  Stono  while  this  battery  was  daily  shelling 
our  camps,  an  encampment  which  he  ordered  me  to  make  secure. 
No  alternative  remained  but  to  abandon  James  Island,  this  key  to 
Charleston,  which  General  Hunter  had  not  authorized  when  I repre- 
sented it  to  him,  or  to  take  this  battery,  an  order  for  which  he  had 
previously  approved,  as  he  did  again  verbally,  while  his  written  order 
appeared  expressly  to  require  it.  Moreover,  after  our  battering  it 
for  two  days  ineffectually,  deserters  informed  me  (as  was  confirmed 
afterward)  that  seven  more  heavy  guns  were  ready  to  be  put  up,  and 
that,  while  they  were  strengthening  the  works  night  and  day,  it  was  as 
yet  unprotected  by  either  abatis  or  stockade,  and  it  was  garrisoned 
only  by  two  battalions.  For  holding  our  position,  therefore,  an  attack 
was  necessary,  and  for  success,  an  immediate  one.  Fourth,  as  to  the 
plan,  I ordered  the  assault  to  be  made  at  the  earliest  daylight,  and  with 
loaded  muskets,  with  the  bulk  of  Stevens’  command  (his  adjutant-gen- 
eral told  me  he  took  4,000  men),  while  I guarded  his  left  with  3,000 
more,  the  most  of  which  I sent  to  protect  and  aid  him.  The  two  bat- 
talions in  the  fort  appear,  by  the  rebel  accounts  I have,  to  have  num- 
bered only  550  men,  while  the  only  other  battalion  engaged,  as  they 
state,  is  believed  to  be  the  one  driven  by  my  column  on  our  left.  Our 
force  seemed  sufficient  to  crush  out  all  opposition,  and  if  it  had  come 
up  at  the  time,  and  as  I ordered,  it  must  have  done  so,  and  thus  secured 
our  foothold  against  Charleston.  But  my  column  waited  over  one  hour, 
till  after  5 o’clock,  and  after  sunrise,  before  the  fire  of  the  fort  opened 
upon  Stevens’  command,  and  though  I have  praised  him  on  his  own 
reports,  after-accounts  showed  to  me  fully  that  he  started  in  open  light, 
with  his  muskets  for  the  great  part  unloaded ; that  his  supports,  as  his 
own  dispatch  shows,  were  “ not  close  enough,”  while  his  advance  was 
on  the  parapet,  and  that  his  men  wavered  and  were  in  confusion  in 
part,  while  he  himself  was  at  no  time  nearer  than  500,  if  even  nearer 
than  800,  yards  of  this  earthwork,  and  this  was,  in  my  belief,  the  main 
cause  of  the  repulse.  I would  ask,  Mr.  President,  if,  after  a most 
unsullied  reputation,  both  personal  and  official,  for  twenty-four  years  of 
service  before  this  war,  and  after  commanding  as  a general  in  four  of 
the  most  successful  affairs  previously  in  this  contest — at  the  rout  and 
death  of  Garnett,  where  I was  in  sole  command  of  all  the  troops  en- 
gaged; at  Carnifix  Ferry,  where  I commanded  the  leading  and  only 
brigade  in  action ; and  in  the  rout  of  Floyd  in  Fayette  County  in  Novem- 
ber, where  I pursued  him  till  recalled,  with  commendation  by  General 
Schenck,  having  caused,  as  the  rebel  accounts  stated,  “ the  most  dis- 
graceful rout  their  armies  had  suffered  during  the  war ; ” and  at  the  cap- 
ture of  Fort  Pulaski  I was  in  full  command  of  all  the  troops  engaged, 
and  was  night  and  day  in  the  batteries  until  that  work  surrendered — I 
would  ask  is  it  not  most  unjust,  most  cruel,  that  I should  now  be  stricken 
down  and  my  name  dishonored,  without  a trial,  without  a hearing,  and 
without  the  knowledge  even  (for  I have  as  yet  but  a suspicion)  of  the 
accusations  against  me,  as  brought  by  the  very  man  who  did  the  wrong. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 

Major  of  Engineers. 

I respectfully  inclose  copies  of  the  order  of  General  Hunter*  to  me 
and  of  Captain  Drayton’s  letter ; also  the  extract  from  General  Stevens’ 
letter  of  July  20,  which  contradicts  General  Hunter;  also  copies  of  Gen- 


See  p.  46. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


993 


eral  Hunter’s  letters  of  June  27  and  July  10,  and  General  Stevens’  letter 
of  June  22,  indorsed  by  General  Wright. 

P.  S. — A close  examination  of  letters  of  Generals  Hunter  and  Stevens, 
just  obtained,  reveals  important  facts.  General  Stevens’  letter  of  June 
22,  relating  to  mine  of  June  20,  and  indorsed  by  General  Wright,  is, 
perhaps,  literally  true,  but  au  artful  suggestio  falsi  throughout.  This 
letter  assumes  that  I had  said  they  forced  the  attack  on  the  16th.  I 
never  said  so,  only  that  they  did  not  oppose  it  as  contrary  to  orders, 
and  Captain  Drayton’s  letter  confirms  me.  General  Stevens  also  states 
that  he  was  utterly  opposed  to  the  attack  “on  the  morning  of  the  16th.” 
So  he  was  for  the  morning,  but  he  proposed  it  for  the  afternoon.  As 
Captain  Drayton  states,  he  only  objected  to  the  time  of  day,  and  that 
only  I “ overruled.”  General  Stevens  “ understood  ” that  General  Wright 
was  opposed  to  the  attack.  He  does  not  say,  nor  does  General  Wright 
himself  say,  that  lie  so  expressed  himself,  and  Captain  Drayton  says 
explicitly  he  did  not ; “none  of  them  said  as  much  as  this.”  But,  more 
than  this,  neither  in  General  Hunter’s  two  letters  of  June  27  and  July 
10  nor  at  any  time  that  I can  learn  since  my  first  explanation  to  him 
before  my  arrest  has  he  accused  me  of  disobeying  his  orders.  He  as- 
sumes in  this  letter  of  June  27  that  these  officers  warned  me  that  I 
“ was  about  to  fight  a battle  in  violation  of  orders.”  A close  examina- 
tion of  their  letters  will  show  they  make  no  such  statement ; and  by  a 
letter  of  General  Stevens  of  July  20,  published  in  the  New  York  Times 
of  the  22d,  that  he  explicitly  denies  the  assumption  of  General  Hunter, 
saying  that  “ General  Hunter’s  orders  to  General  Ben  ham  were  not  a 
matter  before  the  conference,”  as  by  the  copy  inclosed.  It  will,  therefore, 
be  seen  that  I have  been  condemned  unheard,  on  the  superficial  exam- 
ination of  these  letters,  and  on  the  false  assumptions,  not  contained  in 
them,  that  I was  distinctly  opposed  in  the  “ council”  as  to  that  attack, 
and  that  I disobeyed  (and  was  so  notified)  the  orders  of  General  Hun- 
ter, which  assumption  was  utterly  untrue.  In  fact,  neither  these  letters 
nor  General  Hunter’s  letters  or  orders  leave  anything  against  me  what- 
ever. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM. 

[Inclosure  No.  8.] 

Washington,  August  16, 1862. 

I find  now,  on  having  access  to  the  papers  before  the  Judge-Advocate- 
[General],  the  allegations  against  me  appear  to  be : First,  that  General 
Hunter,  in  his  letter  of  June  27,  assumes  that  my  subordinate  generals 
“ warned  ” me  that  I “ was  about  to  fight  a battle  in  violation  of  orders.” 
An  examination  of  the  letters  of  these  officers  shows  that  they  make  no 
such  statement,  and  in  a letter  of  General  Stevens  of  July  20,  published 
in  the  New  York  Times  of  July  22,  he  expressly  denies  this  allegation 
of  General  Hunter’s,  and  states  that  “General  Hunter’s  orders  to  Gen- 
eral Beuham  were  not  a matter  before  the  conference ; ” and  in  no  paper 
that  I can  find  before  the  Department  does  General  Hunter  himself 
accuse  me  of  disobeying  his  orders,  and  in  my  report  of  the  attack  I 
remind  him  of  his  approval  of  the  movement,  which  he  does  not  deny. 
Second,  is  the  allegation  that  General  Stevens  makes,  that  himself  and 
the  other  officers  expressly  remonstrated  with  me  against  the  attack.  I 
aver  that  he  did  not  make  any  remonstrance,  except  as  to  the  time  of 
day,  and  that  the  others  did  not  remonstrate  at  all  against  it $ and  the 
letter  of  Captain  Drayton,  senior  naval  officer,  fully  confirms  this,  and 
63  R R — VOL  XIV 


294  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

contradicts  General  Stevens’  allegations.  Even  if  they  had  been  true, 

1 submit  that,  whether  a commanding  officer  either  approves  or  overrules 
the  opinion  of  his  subordinates  in  a council,  it  cannot  be  made  a matter  of 
charges  against  him  afterward,  or  such  council  would  probably  never 
be  called.  I may  add  that  the  fact  that  General  Stevens  differed  as  to 
the  hour  only  shows  his  concurrence  in  the  main  attack,  which  is  fur- 
ther proved  by  his  volunteered  letter  that  I received  June  7,  in  which 
he  proposes  the  arrangements  for  a ‘‘dash”  to  seize  James  Island, 
below  James  Eiver  (including,  of  course,  this  battery),  and  hopes  to  see 
every  man  thrown  in,  and  even  named  the  time,  “ daylight,”  the  hour 
that  I eventually  decided  upon,  and  that  he  then  opposed. 

The  orders  of  General  Hunter  directed  me  to  provide  a secure  camp, 
in  a particular  position,  limited  and  specified,  in  fact,  by  stating  from 
what  position  it  was  to  be  protected  by  our  gunboats.  That  position 
had  not  over  about  one- third  of  a mile  square  of  dry  land  not  covered 
completely  by  the  fire  of  the  battery  that  we  attacked,  and  I had  about 
fourteen  regiments  and  two  large  batteries  to  “ provide  a secure  en- 
campment” for. 

To  obey  General  Hunter’s  orders,  therefore,  that  attack  was  indis- 
pensable,"and  as  to  whether  that  attack  was  well  planned  by  myself  and 
well  executed  by  General  Stevens,  while  I submit  that  it  is  a proper 
subject  of  investigation,  as  it  may  be  in  every  case  of  non-success  in  this 
war,  such  investigation,  I do  not  fear,  will  be  other  than  triumphant 
for  me. 

I need  not  remark  on  what  the  results  would  be  if,  as  in  the  present 
case,  every  commanding  officer  who  directs  a movement  that  has  failed 
is  to  be  stricken  down  by  the  very  reports  (and  those  unknown  to  him) 
of  the  actual  subordinate  whose  disobedience  of  orders  caused  the 
failure. 

H.  W.  BEN  HAM. 

llnclosure  No.  9.J 

Executive  Department, 

Albany , N.  Y.,  September  25,  1862. 

General  H.  W.  Benham,  Portsmouth , N.  E. : 

My  Dear  General:  Yours  of  the  17th  reached  me  only  to-day.  As 
regards  the  reconnaissance  ordered  for  the  11th  of  June  last  on  James 
Island,  General  Hunter  will  not  dare  deny  that  he  knew  of  it,  or  that 
he  delayed  going  to  Hilton  Head  for  twenty-four  hours  in  order  to  learn 
the  result  of  it.  I returned  from  Hilton  Head  and  Edisto  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  10th.  A skirmish  had  been  going  on  between  Wright’s 
forces  and  the  enemy,  but  preparations  were  being  actively  made  for 
the  reconnaissance  the  next  morning.  Inquiries  were  made  about  signal 
rockets.  The  conversation  was  general  in  the  saloon  of  the  Delaware, 
and  General  Hunter  was  present  and  took  part  in  it.  You  appealed  to 
him  regarding  the  rockets,  and  I told  him  and  you  that  I had  seen 
some  on  board  the  Mattano.  General  Hunter  seemed  to  take  as  much 
interest  in  it  as  he  did  in  any  of  the  movements.  Directly  after  this, 
he  and  you  prepared  his  order  to  you,  as  he  had  determined  to  leave 
the  next  morning.  After  he  had  prepared  it,  he  concluded,  at  your  sug- 
gestion, to  stay  over  the  11th  and  learn  the  result  of  the  reconnaissance. 
There  was  some  further  talk  about  the  work  for  the  next  morning,  and  we 
made  preparations  for  an  early  start ; but  somewhat  late  came  a note 
from  General  Wright,  saying  his  men  were  too  much  exhausted  to  take 
part  in  the  reconnaissance.  This  you  communicated  to  General  Hunter, 
and  the  reconnaissance  was  postponed. 

The  next  day,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  11th,  I had  a talk  with  General 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  995 

Wright,  in  which  he  expressed  his  doubts  about  being  able  to  maintain 
liis  position,  and  blamed  General  Hunter  for  sending  away  those  three 
companies  of  New  Hampshire  troops  with  Major  Drew.  I told  him  of 
General  Hunter’s  order,  and  he  said  that  was  all  right,  and  that  he  and 
Williams  should  hold  on  at  all  hazards. 

The  reason  for  your  ordering  the  attack  of  the  16th  was  that  the 
enemy  were  shelling  our  camp.  I was  cognizant  of  the  fact  that  they 
threw  their  shell  into  the  Stono,  near  General  Wright’s  headquarters, 
and  among  his  camps,  and  also  among  Stevens’  troops,  and  yoiwbecame 
convinced  that  unless  they  were  dislodged  they  would  drive  us  off  the 
island ; and,  besides,  it  was  impossible  for  the  gunboats  to  get  up  into 
the  creek,  so  as  to  protect  us  on  that  side,  so  long  as  the  enemy  held 
that  position,  and  we  could  not  move  down  beyond  their  reach,  for  want 
of  room  to  camp  above  high  water. 

On  the  day  of  the  battle  we  expected  Stevens  to  open  at  4 o’clock, 
but  he  did  not  until  5.  We  heard  cheering  twice,  and  thought  every- 
thing was  well,  when  unexpectedly  Stevens  sent  word  that  his  troops 
could  not  stand  the  fire,  and  that  he  needed  a whole  brigade  to  gain  the 
day.  You  ordered  Colonel  Williams  to  take  two  [of  his]  best  regiments 
and  go  to  the  right  and  report  to  Stevens,  and  put  himself  under  his 
orders.  Instead  of  this,  Williams  sent  his  two  regiments  to  the  extreme 
left,  where  they  could  not  reach  the  fort  and  were  badly  cut  up.  You 
afterward  sent  word  to  Stevens  that  he  should  prepare  himself  for 
another  assault,  and  that  whenever  he  thought  he  could  get  his  men 
up  without  being  too  much  exposed,  if  he  would  notify  you,  you  would 
support  him  with  the  whole  force,  except  two  regiments  to  guard  the 
extreme  left,  leaving  it  to  his  judgment.  There  was  an  interval  of  half 
an  hour,  during  which  there  was  not  a shot  fired  from  the  fort.  About 
this  time  the  shells  from  our  gunboats  coming  in  among  our  artillery, 
you  were  obliged  to  retire  it  to  some  distance,  and  as  Stevens  made  no 
movement,  and  the  enemy  had  appeared  again  in  the  fort  and  recom- 
menced firing,  you  ordered  the  forces  to  be  drawn  off,  which  was  done  in 
good  order. 

Yours,  truly, 

A.  B.  ELY, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure  No.  10.] 

Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  December  1,  1862. 
His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States  : 

Sir  : I appeal  to  you  against  an  act  of  great  injustice  which  has  been 
done  me,  as  I cannot  doubt,  from  an  entire  misapprehension  at  the  War 
Department,  or  a misrepresentation  of  the  facts  in  relation  to  me  there. 

By  a note  from  Colonel  Townsend,  assistant  adjutant-general,  of 
August  7, 1862,  I have  been  informed  that  my  “ appointment”  as  briga- 
dier-general of  volunteers  has  been  revoked.  No  cause  is  assigned,  and 
no  reason  whatever  given,  for  this  great  wrong  to  me;  nor  have  I ever 
been  able  from  that  date  to  the  present,  with  all  my  efforts,  to  ascer- 
tain directly,  or  with  any  certainty,  what  could  be  the  cause  of  this 
harsh  and  summary  action  toward  me,  under  that  law  which,  as  I under- 
stand it,  authorizes  such  action  only  for  a “ cause.” 

As  a faithful  servant  of  my  country,  claiming  a most  loyal  devotion 
to  its  service  and  to  my  duties;  with  an  unbroken  record  of  high  praise 
from  every  chief  commander  I have  had  for  a quarter  of  a century,  up 
to  and  including  my  first  two  commanding  generals  in  this  war,  as  seen 


996  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


by  the  accompanying  papers,  I earnestly  appeal  to  you  against  this 
cruel  treatment,  never  before  inflicted  upon  any  general  in  our  history. 
And  when  every  other  general,  whether  accused  of  inactivity , disobe- 
dience, fraud,  cowardice , treachery , or  murder , each  holds  his  rank  or 
command,  or  has  a trial,  1,  against  whom  no  cause  is  alleged,  who 
can  appeal  to  my  repeated  services  in  battles  and  in  victories,  from 
Buena  Vista  to  Carnifix  Ferry  and  Carriers  Ford,  the  rout  of  Gar- 
nett, an<J  Fort  Pulaski,  in  the  last  two  of  which  I was  the  sole  com- 
mander of  the  troops  engaged,  I respectfully  ask  that  these  services 
and  my  long  record  of  good  and  faithful  conduct  should  avail  me  for  a 
hearing ; that  the  note  ot  revocation  of  Colonel  Townsend  should  be 
canceled,  and  that  an  investigation  of  my  case  shall  be  ordered  before 
impartial  officers,  as  is  allowed  to  all  others.  For  I have  the  full  assur- 
ance not  only  that  I can  most  completely  refute  every  allegation  against 
me,  but  that  I can  show  that  upon  every  occasion  in  the  field  my  course 
and  conduct  have  been  worthy  of  the  same  commendation  that  is  given 
me  by  the  inclosed  letters,  the  originals  of  nearly  all  of  which  are  on 
file  in  the  War  Department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  BENHAM, 

U.  8.  Army. 

[Inclosure  No.  11] 

His  Excellency  the  President  of  the  United  States  : 

/ Sir  : Well  known  to  Your  Excellency  as  we  are  in  our  united  efforts 
for  the  prosecution  of  this  war,  in  which  we  think  that  the  services  ot 
every  individual  of  loyalty  of  heart  and  of  any  amount  of  military 
knowledge  should  be  made  available  for  the  country,  we  deem  it  a duty 
to  call  upon  you  for  your  interference  to  prevent  the  continuance  of 
what  we  conceive  to  be  a great  injury  to  our  cause,  by  the  seclusion 
from  active  service  in  this  war  of  an  officer  of  undoubted  loyalty,  en- 
ergy, and  ability.  We  allude  to  the  case  of  General  Benham,  an  officer 
well  known  to  us  personally  or  by  reputation  as  one  of  the  most  enter- 
prising and  zealous  officers  of  the  army.  We  learn  that  he  has  been, 
without  any  previous  examination,  suspended  from  his  duties  or  de- 
prived of  his  rank  as  a general,  now,  at  the  time  of  all  others,  when 
active  and  efficient  officers  are  most  needed,  and  we  cannot  doubt  that 
this  has  occurred  through  some  mistake  or  misrepresentation,  that 
would  immediately  be  corrected  upou  a full  examination  of  the  case. 

We  have  reason  to  know  that  his  record  of  services  for  near  a quarter 
of  a century  before  this  war  is  most  clear  and  commendable  ; that  he 
has  the  highest  written  praise  from  his  principal  commanders  during 
this  time;  and  the  confidence  of  New  Eugland  in  this  officer  has  been 
such  that  the  President  was  called  upon  by  the  letters  from  every  State, 
signed  by  every  Representative  and  every  Senator,  to  give  him  a high 
rank  upon  the  increase  of  the  Army,  some  six  or  eight  years  since,  while 
you  had  the  unanimous  application  of  the  representation  of  his  own 
State  to  give  him  the  appointment  of  a general  in  this  war,  a rank 
which  we  think  he  has  honored  by  repeated  victories.  And  yet  we  find 
that  he  alone,  under  this  extraordinary  law,  of  all  your  hundreds  of 
generals,  he  alone  of  all  the  graduates  of  West  Point,  has  been  deprived 
of  his  rank  and  command,  without  a trial,  notwithstanding  his  repeated 
applications  and  his  constant  assertions  that  he  can  disprove  every 
allegation  against  him.  And  this  trial  is  still  denied  him,  as  we  learn, 
while  it  appears  that  in  all  other  cases,  whether  it  be  disobedience  of 
orders,  gross  peculation,  cowardice  on  the  battle-field,  treachery,  or  even 
murder  that  is  charged,  in  all  these  cases  the  generals  accused  have 


Chap.  XXVI.l 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


997 


been  retaiued  in  tbeir  rank  or  commands,  or  have  been  given  a hearing 
or  a court,  and  not  one  of  them  has  yet  been  dismissed  or  punished  but 

We  do  not  profess  to  know  the  details  of  the  accusations  against 
General  Benham  or  of  the  rebutting  evidence,  but  from  different  sources 
we  have  seen  enough  to  be  assured  if  much  has  been  said  by  way  of 
attack,  much  more  also  can  be  brought  forward  in  his  defense  ; and  we, 
doubt  not,  if  you  will  accord  to  him  the  justice  of  a fair  trial,  such  as  is 
given  to  all  others,  he  will  prove  himself  guiltless  of  every  accusation, 
and  that  his  whole  military  course  in  this  war  will  sustain  his  former 

high  character.  . . , , , , 

With  the  belief,  therefore,  in  your  own  desire  for  justice,  and  that  you 
would  not  willingly  see  any  officer  wronged,  while  there  is  a higher 
duty  still  to  the  country,  that  no  efficient  officer  should  be  kept  from 
its  service  at  such  a crisis,  we  unite  in  urgently  asking  of  you  the  re- 
vocation of  the  suspension  from  rank  of  this  officer,  and  that  you  will 
grant  him  a court  tor  the  investigation  of  any  charges  against  him  on 
the  written  record  alone,  if  other  evidence  is  not  available,  to  the  end 
that,  in  case  he  proves  his  innocence,  he  may  be  promptly  restored  to 
his  active  command  in  the  army,  where  we  are  satisfied  he  can  render 
most  efficient  service.  And  we  cannot  forbear  expressing  our  opinion 
that  it  is  our  highest  duty  to  secure  the  services  of  every  person  who 
has  military  ability  and  loyalty  to  the  cause,  and  that  nothing  of  per- 
sonal feeling  or  of  doubtful  accusation  against  an  officer  of  previous 
good  character  should  prevent  his  services  from  being  given  to  this  war. 

And  should  there  be  unavoidably  a delay  in  ordering  such  a court  to 
enable  General  Benham  at  once  to  go  into  more  active  service  with  the 
confidence  which  we  entertain  in  his  capacity  for  usefulness  as  already 
well  known  to  several  of  us,  we  would  earnestly  request  of  you  that  he 
should  now  be  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Department  of  New  Eng- 
land or  some  other  important  command  of  that  character,  to  aid  us,  as 
we  are  satisfied  he  can  do,  most  effectively  in  the  proper  preparation  and 
forwarding  of  the  re-enforcements  to  our  armies  in  the  field,  believing 
that  while  this  war  continues,  such  an  officer  will  be  constantly  useful 
if  not  indispensable  to  us.  ^ g BERRY; 

Governor  of  New  Hampshire. 

[Indorsements.] 

I have  such  confidence  in  the  patriotism  and  capacity  of  General 
Benham,  that  I look  earnestly  for  his  opportunity  to  be  heard  by  a 
competent  tribunal,  in  the  hope  that  he  may  thus  be  enabled  to  return 
to  the  field.  Meantime  it  is  clear  that  a general  officer,  with  proper 
power,  could  expedite  our  military  preparations,  saving  us  from  the  de- 
lays caused  by  constant  correspondence  with  staff  officers  at  remote 

p0StS’  &C'  JOHN  A.  ANDREW. 

Upon  the  ground  that  no  officer  should  be  cut  down  without  a hear- 
ing, I unite  with  Governors  Andrew  and  BerrjMn  1 gp^^jp 

Rhode  Island. 

I concur  in  the  above.  TW^.„Tr 

FREDERICK  HOLBROOK, 

Governor  of  Vermont. 

I concur  in  above.  ISRABL  WASHBURN,  Jr. 


998 


COASTS  OF  S.  C GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


[Inclosure  No.  12.1 


Portsmouth,  H.  H.,  December  9,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  learned  recently  that  a friend  who  had  approached  you 
to  ask  that  there  might  be  a hearing  or  investigation  of  my  case,  and 
of  the  allegations  against  me,  had  found  you  apparently  impressed  with 
the  most  earnest  conviction  of  ray  “ unworthiness  ’?  and  “ incapacity.”  I 
would,  sir,  a thousand  times  prefer  to  be  in  my  grave  than  to  merit  such 
an  opinion  from  you  ; and  I would  almost  sooner  be  there  now  than  to 
be  even  unjustly  believed  so ; but  for  my  children’s  sake  and  honor,  and 
for  that  good  name  which  to  me  is  far  more  than  life  itself,  and  for  my 
final  triumph,  which  will  surely  come , it  is  my  duty  to  bear  all  my  present 
sufferings,  for  it  is  no  ordinary  insensate  that  is  thus  struck  down. 
And  if  the  purity  of  a high  and  unimpeached  official  character  for  more 
than  twenty- four  years  of  faithful  service  does  not  avail  to  obtain  for 
me  even  a hearing,  to  give  a doubt  even  that  I could  so  suddenly  have 
changed  to  a vile  and  worthless  character,  the  consciousness,  the  knowl- 
edge that  I have  been  always  right  in  my  acts  and  faithful  and  high- 
minded  in  my  intention,  will  still  bear  me  up  against  these  cruel  opin- 
ions and  harsh  treatment. 

I consider,  sir,  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  that,  after  so  many 
years  of  unimpeached  good  conduct,  I could  all  at  once  have  changed, 
or  done  such  things  as  to  merit  the  opinion  you  appear  to  have  of  me, 
without  my  being  conscious  of  or  able  to  suspect  some  wrong  thing  that 
I have  done.  But  it  is  so.  I cannot  suspect  even  a single  act  of  wrong 
that  I could  be  charged  with  doing,  and  although  I know  that  some 
three  or  four  persons  have,  from  the  most  causeless,  bitter  feelings,  re- 
peatedly attempted  to  injure  me,  I have  learned  nothing  that  even  they 
have  said  that  can  account  to  my  mind  for  your  opinion,  as  1 learn  it, 
that  you  have  been  mild  with  me  and  that  a trial  would  be  worse  for 
me.  I cannot  suspect  a cause. 

I know  of  and  can  find  nothing  in  the  Department  but  the  assump- 
tion, the  intimation,  not  the  charge,  that  I had  disobeyed  orders  at  James 
Island,  and  the  statement  that  I was  remonstrated  with  in  vain  by  my 
juniors.  And  1 consider  that  I have  the  most  ample  proof  that  both 
these  allegations  are  entirely  false,  and  even  that  my  course  there  was 
most  praiseworthy  and  indispensably  the  only  one  to  pursue.  And  of 
General  Bosecrans’  charges,  with  the  exception  of  one  remark,  not  the 
threat , to  the  man  whose  carelessness  caused  my  horse  to  fall  in  the 
river  with  all  his  equipments  on,  wffiile  I was  going  at  night  to  attack 
an  enemy,  I aver  (what  I believe  I can  prove  most  fully)  that  each  and 
every  specification  is  most  foully  false. 

I appeal  to  the  record  of  my  previous  praise  from  every  commander 
for  twenty-four  years  to  ask  you  for  a hearing  by  an  impartial  person  ; 
to  allow  the  Judge-Advocate-General,  to  whom  personally  I must  be  a 
stranger,  to  take  up  my  case,  and  send  for  me,  and  report  upon  it  to 
you.  I ask  but  a day  or  a half  day  of  this  or  some  such  officer’s  time, 
to  save  the  months  or  years  of  suffering  to  myself  and  of  efficient  field 
service  to  my  country. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

II.  W.  BENHAM. 


CHAP.  XXVI.J  engagement  at  secessionville,  s.  c. 


999 


[In closure  No.  13.] 

BRIEF  STATEMENT  AS  TO  THE  JAMES  ISLAND  AFFAIR. 

In  my  report  to  General  Hunter,  I reminded  him  that  he  had  himself 
approved  the  movement,  and,  although  I was  at  once  deprived  of  com- 
mand and  put  in  arrest  under  the  verbal  pretense  of  disobedience  of  orders , 
he  has  never  preferred  any  such  charge  against  me  officially.  I can 
find  nothiug  at  the  War  Department  in  the  way  of  accusation,  except 
two  letters  of  General  Hunter,  one  of  June  27,  forwarding  a letter  of 
General  Stevens  of  June  22,  with  indorsement  of  General  Wright,  and 
another  of  July  10,  forwarding  a letter  of  General  Stevens  of  July  8, 
which  was  printed  in  the  New  York  Times  of  July  16,  in  neither  of 
which  does  General  Hunter  call  for  or  suggest  any  action  against  me. 

In  his  first  letter,  General  Hunter  assumes  that  the  letter  of  General 
Stevens  states  that  my  subordinate  generals  warned  me  that  I uwas 
about  to  fight  a battle  in  violation  of  orders  .”  This  assumption,  however, 
General' Stevens’  letter  will  not  warrant.  He  says  simply  that  I u was 
warned  that  under ” “ my"  orders  they  were  going  to  fight  “ a battle ,”  and 
in  a subsequent  card  published  in  the  New  York  Times,  July  22,  he  fully 
refutes  General  Hunter’s  assumption,  saying  that  “ General  Hunter's 
orders  to  General  Benham  were  not  a matter  brought  before  the  conference ." 

General  Stevens’  letter  is  a very  artful  production,  and  wonderfully 
calculated  to  deceive.  He  assumes  that  I had  said  that  he  and  General 
Wright  favored  the  attack  I never  said  so,  only  that  1 hey  did  not  oppose 
it*  and  Captain  Drayton,  who  was  present  at  the  conference,  sustains  me 
in  this,  when  he  states  that  if  they  were  opposed  to  it , “ none  of  them , how- 
ever, said  so  much  as  this."  General  Stevens  also  alleges  that  he  was  op- 
posed to  the  attack  on  the  morning  of  the  1 6th,  and  that  he  understood  that 
General  Wright  was  opposed  to  it,  but  neither  does  he  nor  General  W right 
say  that  General  Wright  or  Colonel  Williams  expressed  themselves  so  op- 
posed, while  Captain  Drayton  states  that  neither  of  them  expressed  any  op- 
position. General  Stevens  indeed  opposed  making  the  attack  in  the  morning, 
or  rather  he  proposed  its  beingmade  inthe  afternoon.  That  he  absolutely 
favored  an  attack  I had  every  reason  to  believe  from  a letter  I had  from 
him  on  the  7th,  proposing  for  the  9th  the  details  for  a “ dash,  with  every 
man  thrown  in,”  and  at  “ daylight  to  seize  the  lower  part  of  James  Island,” 
embracing,  of  course,  this  battery ; to  receive  which  letter  I was  waked 
up  at  1 o’clock  in  the  morning,  though  my  headquarters  were  but  a few 
hundred  yards  from  General  Stevens’. 

The  simple  facts  were,  first,  that  this  battery  covered  our  main  land- 
ing and  essentially  commanded  our  camps  ; second,  that  the  first  order 
to  attack  this  battery  was  issued  by  me  with  the  full  knowledge  and  ap- 
probation of  General  Hunter  ; third,  that  while  this  attack  was  in  prepara- 
tion, General  Hunter’s  order  (draughted  by  myself)  directing  me  “ not  to 
advance  on  Charleston ,”  10  miles,  and  not  to  u attack  Fort  Johnson,"  7 miles 
distant,  but  ordering  me  to  “ provide  for  a secure  intrenched  encampment , 
where  my  front  could  be  covered  by  the  fire  of  the  gunboats  from  the  Stono 
on  the  left  and  the  creek  from  Folly  River  on  the  right,"  was  issued  by  him ; 
fourth,  that  circumstances  having  delayed  the  execution  of  my  first 
order  to  attack,  it  became,  in  my  judgment,  absolutely  necessary  to  re- 
new it  after  his  departure  from  the  Stono,  and,  therefore,  in  obedience  to 
a military  necessity,  to  prevent  our  being  driven  from  the  island,  as  well 
as  in  obedience  to  the  order  of  General  Hunter,  to  secure  our  camps  and 
enable  our  gunboats  to  ascend  the  Folly  River  Creek , which  could  not  other- 
wise be  done,  I ordered  the  attack  which  was  made  on  the  16th  5 fifth, 
I did  not  advance  one  yard  on  the  route  to  Charleston  or  Fort  Johnson, 


1000  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  xxvi. 

in  attempting  to  obey  the  second  branch  of  General  Hunter’s  order 
which  was  a necessity,  while  the  first  was  a mere  expediency;  sixth’ 
General  Stevens  had  nearly  4,000  troops  with  which  to  carry  an  earth- 
work defended  by  less  than  600  men,  and  he  disobeyed  my  positive  orders 
“ to  be  upon  the  work  by  the  earliest  daylight,”  and  “ with  loaded 
muskets,”  by  starting,  as  he  did,  so  as  to  reach  there  after  sunrise , and 
by  ordering  them  u not  to  load  seventh,  General  Stevens  was  not  per- 
sonally with  his  troops  in  the  battle,  and  he  ordered  them  to  withdraw 
after  the  guns  of  the  enemy  had  been  silenced,  and  when  the  work  was 
essentially  within  the  grasp  of  his  men,  he  being,  by  the  best  evidence  I 
can  obtain,  fully  seven-eighths  of  a mile  distant,  and  unaware  of  his 
own  success.  If  the  attack  failed,  as  I claim  by  no  fault  of  mine,  but  . 
by  reason  of  the  disobedience  and  bad  management  of  my  subordinate 
I ought  not  to  be  judged  without  a hearing,  much  less  should  I be  pun- 
ished upon  the  essentially  false  statements  of  a junior,  made  after  I had 
left  the  department,  and  which  otherwise  he  had  never  ventured  to  sug- 
gest. * 


The  papers  corroborative  of  the  above  statement  are  the  letters  of 
General  Hunter  of  June  27  and  July  10, 1862,  and  the  letter  of  General 
Stevens  of  June  20  [22],  and  his  denial  card  dated  July  20,  and  pub- 
lished July  22  ; also  letter  of  Captain  Drayton  of  June  18,  and  order  of 
General  Hunter  of  June  10,  together  with  my  notes  upon  them,  respect- 
ively, with  which  may  be  considered  my  notes  on  a letter  to  me  from 
Colonel  Hawley,  the  commander  of  the  leading  brigade  during  its  ad- 
vance to  the  assault,  with  extracts  from  published  rebel  accounts,  and 
a map  of  the  position,  with  notes  and  explanations,  all  herewith  respect- 
fully submitted ; also  an  affidavit  sent  me  that  General  Stevens  was 
heard  to  say  he  believed  the  attack  would  be  successful.*  The  follow- 
ing affidavit  was  offered  to  Capt.  A.  B.  Ely,  the  assistant  adjutant- 
general  of  General  Benham,  in  Boston,  after  the  publication  in  the 
newspapers  that  General  Stevens  did  not  expect  success  : 


State  of  Massachusetts,  Suffolk,  s 8 : 

I,  William  O’Connor,  of  Boston,  Mass.,  on  oath,  declare  and  say,  that  I am  a mari- 
ner; that  I was  employed  as  such  in  the  Department  of  fhe  South  ; that  I was  cox- 
swain of  the  gig  used  by  General  II.  W.  Benham  on  the  Stono  River  during  the 
occupation  of  James  Island  by  the  Federal  forces ; that  I was  in  the  boat  the  night  of 
the  loth  ot  June,  before  the  battle  of  James  Island,  and  carried  General  Benham  and 
General  Stevens  between  the  shore  and  the  steamer  Delaware  on  the  evening  before 
the  battle  ; that  I heard  General  Benham  say  to  General  Stevens,  “ Do  you  think  we 
can  succeed?”  and  General  Stevens’  reply,  “I  think  we  can.” 

WILLIAM  O’CONNOR. 

Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before  me  this  21st  August,  1862. 

J.  W.  PRESTON, 

Justice  of  the  Peace  for  Suffolk  County. 


The  letter  of  General  Steven  . forwarded  with  this  [Hunter  to  Stanton, 
July  10,  1862,  p.  48],  was  dated  July  8,  and  published  in  the  New  York 
Times,  July  16.  The  sum  of  the  allegations  in  it  is,  that  the  generals 
strongly  remonstrated  with  General  Benham  against  the  attack. 

The  only  reference  to  Generals  Wright  and  Stevens  in  General  Ben- 
ham’s  letter  of  J une  20  to  General  Hunter  is  in  the  following  paragraph  : 

Those  orders  of  General  Hunter,  I may  say,  were  made  known  to  General  Stevens 
and  to  General  Wright,  and  that  neither  of  them  ever  intimated  or  appeared  to  think 
that  the  movement  upon  the  fort  on  the  16th  would  be  contrary  to  those  orders— 
orders  1 most  heartily  approved  and  was  most  anxious  to  carry  out. 


l or  General  Hunter’s  letters  of  June  27  and  July  10,  and  his  order  of  June  10,  see 
pp.  43,  48,  46;  for  General  Stevens’  letter  of  June  22,  see  p.  44  ; extracts  from  pub- 
lished rebel  accounts,  not  found ; map  to  appear  in  Atlas. 


€hap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  1001 


Here  nothing  is  stated  to  the  effect  that  either  General  Wright  or 
General  Stevens  favored  the  proposed  attack ; but  that  they  did  favor 
it  might  well  be  supposed  when  General  Wright’s  letters  of  May  16  and 
22  say,  “Once  on  James  Island  and  the  gunboats  in  the  Stono,  and  the 
thing  is  done  to  all  intents  and  purposes.  Taking  possession  of  the 
Stono  solves  the  question  of  the  taking  of  Charleston.  It  is  no  longer 
anything  but  a question  of  time;”  and  General  Stevens’  letter, received 
June  7,  suggests  “an  armed  reconnaissance  and  a dash  day  after  to- 
morrow (daylight),  in  order  to  seize  James  Island  below  James  Eiver 
and  Newtown  Cut,  with  every  man  thrown  in,”  which  included  the 
taking  of  this  battery,  the  final  failure  to  take  which  compelled  the 
abandonment  of  the  island. 


[Extract  from  a card  by  General  Stevens,  published  in  tbe  New  V oik  Times,  July  22,  1862.] 

HE  VDQUARTERS  FIRST  DIVISION,  BURNSIDE  EXPEDITION, 

Newport  News,  Va.,  Sunday , July  20,  1862. 
To  the  Editor  of  the  New  York  Times: 

I desire  to  correct  an  error  either  of  the  printer  or  copyist  in  my  official  report  to 
General  Hunter.  In  the  copy  as  printed  in  your  issue  of  the  16th  instant  it  is  stated, 
“ General  Wright  warned  General  Benham  that  his  orders  were,  in  fact,  orders  not  to 
tight  a battle.”  It  should  read,  “General  Wright  warned  General  Benham  that  his 
orders  were,  in  fact,  orders  to  fight  a battle,”  meaning  thereby  General  Benham’s 
own  orders  to  his  subordinates  in  relation  to  the  operations  of  the  morrow,  and  that 
a battle  must  inevitably  result  from  them,  and  not  General  Hunter’s  orders  to  General 
Benham,  which  were  not  a matter  brought  before  the  conference.* 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

ISAAC  I.  STEVENS. 


The  above  refutes  General  Hunter’s  assumption  of  June  27. 

That  the  subordinate  generals  did  not  remonstrate  with  General  Ben- 
ham is  positively  shown  by  the  following  letter  from  Captain  Drayton, 
U.  S.  Navy,  who  was  at  the  conference,  he  being  the  commanding  or 
senior  naval  officer : 


United  States  Steamer  Pawnee, 

Stono,  June  18,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Benham, 

Commanding  at  the  Stono  : 

Sir  : In  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  17th,  just  received,  I beg  to  state  that,  in  the 
meeting  referred  to  in  it,  I cannot  recollect  any  opposition  being  offered  to  yTour  pro- 
posed advance  on  Secessionville  the  following  morning,  except  as  regarded  the  time 
you  had  fixed  on,  Brigadier-General  Stevens  being  in  favor  of  deferring  it  until  the 
afternoon.  Although,  liowefer,  no  direct  objections  were  made,  I judged  from  a 
series  of  questions  which  were  put  to  General  Stevens  by  General  Wright,  in  regard  to 
the  effect  i>roduced,  or  likely  to  be  produced,  on  the  enemy’s  works  by  the  battery  of 
the  latter  (former),  that  he  was  not  in  favor  of  a forward  movement  at  the  present 
time. 

I cannot  call  to  mind  any  particular  expressions  of  Colonel  Williams  which  would 
enable  me  to  form  any  opinion  as  to  his  views,  but  must  confess  that  the  impression 
was  made  on  me  by  the  general  tone  of  the  conversation  that,  while  expressing  every 
desire  to  further  your  views  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  the  three  officers  above 
named  were  scarcely  in  favor  of  the  movement.  None  of  them,  however,  said  as  much 
as  this,  and  General  Wright  did  observe  that  we  would  take  the  b'attery,  he  thought. 

The  only  change  made  in  your  first  plan  of  operations,  so  far  as  I could  see,  was  to 
defer  the  movement  a half  hour  later  than  first  intended  by  you. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

P.  DRAYTON. 


These  [expressions  of  Colonel  Williams]  were,  “Has  your  battery  had 
any  effect  yet?”  “Do  you  expect  it  to  have  any?”  To  both  questions 
General  Stevens  replied,  “No,”  and,  of  course,  giving  more  reason  for 
an  early  attack. 


* For  the  whole  of  this  letter,  see  p.  987. 


1002  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA  , AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

The  following  is  General  Hunter’s  order : * 

There  were  fifteen  regiments  and  two  large  batteries  of  artillery  to 
“provide  a secure  encampment”  for,  and  in  the  space  fixed  by  General 
Hunter  in  the  second  paragraph  there  was  not  over  about  one-fourth  of  a 
square  mile  of  dry  laud  not  covered  by  the  fire  of  the  rebel  battery  at 
Secession ville.  Consequently,  the  reduction  of  this  battery  was  a neces- 1 
sity,  in  order,  first,  to  afford  the  troops  necessary  camping  ground,  and,  1 
second,  to  enable  light- draught  gunboats  to  ascend  the  creek  from  Folly  5 
River,  on  the  right,  so  as  to  cover  our  front,  which,  as  it  was  commanded 
by  that  battery,  they  could  not  do. 

General  Benham,  on  June  10,  ordered  a reconnaissance  for  the  next 
morning,  stating,  “it  being  deemed  important  that  the  batteries  of  the 
enemy  which  have  borne  upon  our  camps  at  Thomas  Grimball’s  to-day 
should  be  closely  reconnoitered  or  broken  up,  if  possible,  at  the  earliest 
moment,  * * * a rush  will  be  made  upon  and  toward  them  at 

between  3.30  o’clock  and  the  earliest  daylight.” t This  was  read  to  and 
approved  by  General  Hunter,  and  he  delayed  his  departure  from  the 
Stono  one  day  after  he  had  issued  his  order  ot*  the  10th,  to  learn  the  re- 
sult of  this  reconnaissance,  which  was  then  pending.  In  consequence 
of  an  attack  of  the  enemy  on  our  lines  on  the  afternoon  of  the  10th,  the 
reconnaissance  ordered  for  the  11th  was  postponed,  and  was  again 
ordered  for  the  16th,  in  obedience  to  the  terms  of  General  Hunter’s 
order,  as  well  as  to  the  military  necessities  of  the  case. 

On  the  30th  of  August,  General  Benham  first  met  Colonel  Hawley 
after  the  James  Island  affair;  and,  after  giving  much  verbal  informa- 
tion, he  the  next  day  addressed  General  Benham  a long  letter  of  detail 
upon  the  information  contained,  in  which  is  offered  the  following  notes 
on  a letter  (of  ten  pages,  dated  August  31,  1862)  from  .Col.  J.  R.  Haw- 
ley, Seventh  Connecticut  Regiment,  the  commander  of  the  leading  bri- 
gade at  the  first  of  the  assaults  on  the  rebel  battery  on  James  Island. 
The  letter  of  Colonel  Hawley  gives  information  on  several  important 
particulars  previously  unknown  to  me,  both  as  to  the  march  of  General 
Wright  across  John’s  Island  and  as  to  the  attack  on  Secessionville  by 
General  Stevens. 

As  to  General  Wright,  it  was  arranged  with  him  for  a previous 
twenty-four  hours’  notice,  that  he  might  rapidly  cross  the  Edisto  and 
march  to  the  Stono,  15  miles,  to  unite  with  the,rear  column  on  arriving 
there,  for  a coup  de  main  across  James’  Island  for  the  seizure  of  Fort 
Johnson.  It  appears  from  this  letter  that  General  Wright  had  his  in- 
fantry 5 miles  out  on  June  2,  and  it  is  certain  the  eight  pieces  of  his 
artillery,  and  a part,  at  least,  of  his  cavalry  over,  so  that  the  mass,  if  not 
all,  of  his  effective  strength  was  over,  and  within  about  10  miles,  by  a 
good  road,  of  the  Stono  and  of  our  rear  (then  advanced  column) ; and 
it  did  not  rain  any  of  consequence,  if  at  all,  for  twenty-five  or  thirty 
hours  after;  and  General  Wright,  for  a portion  of  his  horses  or  cav- 
alry only,  as  it  appears  (not  needed  for  his  effective  strength),  remained 
there  without  moving  for  three  nights  aud  two  days,  consuming  his 
rations,  and  for  the  last  half  of  the  time  in  severe  rains  in  open  bivouac; 
wdiile  the  enemy,  then  knowing  our  point  of  attack,  sent,  as  we  learned, 
over  15,000  men  from  Savannah,  and  the  dash  across  James  Island,  to 
bring  Charleston  under  our  guns,  became  impossible  for  our  small 
force. 

And,  as  to  General  Stevens’  attack  on  the  Secessionville  fort,  my 
orders  were  for  Stevens’  whole  force  to  be  upon  the  outer  picket  line 
(about  a half  mile  beyond  the  causeway)  before  3 a.  in.,  and  “ before  good 


* See  p.  46. 


t See  Benham  to  Wright,  p.  350. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


1003 


aiming  light,  and  with  guns  loaded.”  By  Colonel  Hawley’s  letter  it  ap- 
pears that  General  Stevens  “ordered  him  not  to  load that  before  his 
column  moved  to  the  causeway  and  picket  line  it  was  light  enough  to 
distinguish  persons  “75  yards  distant,”  and,  on  coming  in  sight  of  the 
work,  “ to  see  a man  at  that  distance,”  as  he  estimated,  “700 yards;”  that 
the  brigades  (of  three  regiments  each)  were  ordered  up  (and,  of  course, 
by  the  commander,  General  Stevens)  in  brigade  line  on  this  converging 
piece  of  ground  between  the  two  marshes,  by  which  “four  out  of  the  six” 
regiments  “were  sent  clear  of  the  works  into  the  marsh;”  that  General 
Stevens  was  not  on  the  ground  to  rectify  the  error,  but  at  Legare’s 
house  in  rear  (which  is  seven  eighths  of  a mile  from  the  fort);  that  Colo- 
nel Fenton  came  up  while  Colonel  Hawley  was  extricating  his  men  from 
the  marsh,  and  ordered  him  across  the  front  of  fire  of  the  fort,  within  120 
yards  distance,  and  that  when  thus  across,  and  within  “ about  100  yards,” 
and  “ advancing  steadily,”  to  support  the  Eighth  Michigan  and  Seventy- 
ninth  New  York,  then  (as  Lieutenant  Colonel  Morrison,  of  the  Seventy- 
ninth,  told  me)  in  the  ditch  aicaiting  this  support  for  the  next  assault, 
Captain  Stevens  galloped  up,  and,  in  General  Stevens’  name,  ordered 
the  men  hade,  and  this  when  the  guns  of  the  fort  were  silenced  and 
the  advance  were  only  awaiting  this  support.  This  shows  fully  that 
General  Stevens  disobeyed  my  orders  as  to  the  loading  of  the  muskets 
and  as  to  the  starting  hour,  for  it  was,  in  fact,  after  sunrise  when  the 
fort  opened  on  him  ; that  he  most  injudiciously  arranged  his  troops  for 
the  assault,  and,  remaining  himself  about  seven-eighths  of  a mile  in  the 
rear,  he  did  not  and  could  not  correct  that  bad  arrangement;  and  that 
when  the  regiments  had  recovered  from  the  confusion  and  were  advanc- 
ing to  support  the  men  at  the  parapet  and  ditch,  his  son  and  assistant 
adjutant  general  came  forward  and  ordered  them  back,  thus  giving  up 
all  the  chances  of  success  to  the  affair.  Colonel  Hawley  stated  to  me, 
verbally,  that  he  judged  it  to  be  only  about  ten  minutes  from  the  time 
he  first  met  the  obstruction  of  the  marsh  in  his  advance  till  he  was 
ordered  back  by  Captain  Stevens ; also  that  he  never  saw  General 
Stevens  “more  than  2 rods  in  front”  of  the  road  at  Legare’s  house. 

The  published  rebel  accounts  state  (from  Charleston  Mercury,  in  New 
York  Journal  of  Commerce,  of  June  26, 1862) : 

But  25  of  the  garrison  were  awake.  It  was  a complete  surprise,  and  nothing  but 
the  nerve  and  promptitude  of  the  officers,  especially  the  commanding  officer,  saved 
the  battery  from  easy  capture.  The  first  round  was  fired  when  the  column  was  within 
30  yards  of  the  guns;  the  wearied  men,  startled  by  the  sound  or  aroused  by  shakes 
or  bayonet  punches  from  the  officers,  going  to  their  guns. 

And  to  this  it  need  simply  be  remarked,  if  the  attack  after  sunrise 
was  such  a surprise,  how  much  more  completely  successful  must  it  have 
been  if  executed  when  ordered  at  daylight. 

It  may  be  added  in  reference  to  General  Wright’s  delay,  that  Caj  t.  J. 
Hamilton  (General  Wright’s  chief  of  artillery)  states  in  letters  of  No- 
vember 19  and  20, 1862,  that  six  pieces  of  his  artillery  were  posted  at  the 
Haulover  Cut  on  the  afternoon  and  evening  of  June  2,  and  that  the  two 
remaining  pieces  were  across  the  Edisto  the  same  evening  about  8 
p.  m.,  and  started  at  1 a.  m.  of  the  3d  to  join  him  at  the  Cut,  as  they 
did  about  7 a.  m.  This  shows  that  all  General  Wright’s  artillery  were 
over,  as  Colonel  Hawley  states  all  his  infantry  was  across  and  at  the 
Haulover  Cut. 

Further,  in  reference  to  the  statement  of  General  Hunter,  in  letter  ot 
July  10,  that  the  three  officers  all  “ represented  the  movement  as  one 
almost  impossible  of  accomplishment,”  1 will  state  positively  that  to  a 
remark  of  mine  to  General  Wright,  that  I felt  “the  attack  must  be  a 


1004  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI 

certain  success,”  his  reply  was,  “ Oh,  we  can  take  the  battery,”  and  1 
aver  that  this  was  said  without  qualification,  though  Captain  Drayton 
appears  to  think  he  heard  the  words,  “ he  thought”  added.  And  as  to 
General  Stevens,  a person  who  it  appears  had  charge  of  the  boat  that 
took  General  Stevens  and  myself  to  the  steamer  Delaware  from  the 
“conference,”  met  my  adjutant-general  in  Boston  and  stated  to  him  that 
he  heard  the  question  put  directly  by  myself  to  General  Stevens  dur- 
ing that  return,  if  he  “ thought  we  should  be  successful,”  and  to  this 
General  Stevens  replied  in  the  affirmative,  of  which  fact  this  man’s 
affidavit  has  been  sent  me,  and  it  is  not  pretended  that  Colonel  Williams 
ever  said  one  word  on  the  subject  either  way. 

And  as  I have  been  informed  that  General  Hunter  has  given  as  a 
reason  for  sending  me  from  the  department  the  want  of  confidence  felt 
in  me  by  my  command  there,  it  is  due  to  myself  to  state  the  following 
facts:  Upon  the  evening  of  the  16th  of  June,  after  the  attach  and  re- 
pulse, I was  requested  to  meet  those  three  officers,  Generals  Wright 
and  Stevens  and  Colonel  Williams,  at  the  headquarters  of  the  former, 
where  they  had  been  together  some  hours.  And  upon  arriving  there, 
after  a short  time  spent  in  general  conversation  on  the  events  of  the 
day,  in  which  not  one  word  was  said  to  the  effect  that  any  person  had 
objected  to  the  movement,  or  that  I myself  was  in  the  slightest  degree 
to  blame  or  responsible  for  the  failure,  Colonel  Williams  stood  up  and 
addressed  me  at  some  length,  the  other  two  officers  most  markedly 
appearing  to  assent  to  his  remarks,  among  which  were  the  following  ex- 
pressions, which  I distinctly  recollect : “ General  Benham,  you  must 
push  General  Hunter  aside;  you  must  send  some  one  of  your  own  staff 
to  Washington  to  demand  re-enforcements,  and  we  will  hold  on  to  this 
position  till  they  come,  and  we  can  make  the  attack  on  Charleston. 
You  must  push  General  Hunter  aside.”  To  which  my  reply  was,  “No, 
gentlemen ; General  Hunter  has  been  too  kind  to  me  for  it  to  be  possi- 
ble that  I should  do  anything  of  this  kind ; but  I will  do  all  I can  to 
hold  this  place,  as  I think  we  ought  to,  till  we  can  get  re-enforcements.” 
This,  I am  satisfied , Colonel  Williams  will  not  deny,  and  it  shows  con- 
clusively whether  those  officers  then  blamed  or  had  lost  confidence  in 
myself,  and  tne  whole  plan  of  the  expedition,  as  well  as  of  the  attack, 
was  entirely  my  own,  as  General  Stevens  took  occasion  to  say  to  me 
explicitly  the  next  day. 

H.  W.  BENHAM. 

[Sub-inclosure.] 

Astor  House, 

New  Yorh , August  31,  1862. 

General  H.  W.  Benham: 

General:  I take  advantage  of  a few  hours’  leisure,  while  awaiting 
the  departure  of  the  steamer  for  Port  Royal,  to  answer  briefly  the  in- 
quiries you  made  yesterday. 

Last  May  1 was  at  Fort  Pulaski  as  lieutenant  colonel,  commanding 
the  Seventh  Connecticut  (my  present  commission  not  having  arrived). 
Under  your  orders,  the  regiment  embarked  on  the  Cosmopolitan  on  the 
night  of  May  31.  You  remember  the  errors  which  led  the  captain  of 
the  steamer  to  land  us  at  North  Edisto,  instead  of  taking  us  directly  to 
General  Stevens’  command,  on  the  Stono. 

I reported  to  General  H.  G.  Wright,  at  North  Edisto,  on  Sunday 
afternoon,  June  1.  My  arrival  was  unexpected,  and  while  he  was  de- 
liberating upon  the  disposal  of  the  regiment,  your  order  came  to  cross 
that  night  to  John’s  Island  (or  Seabrook’s,  a part  of  John’s).  Tumbling 


IP.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


1005 


a <hore  all  our  tents  and  baggage,  but  two  loads  of  ammunition,  hospital 
si  ores,  and  provisions,  and  leaving  all  who  were  likely  to  prove  non- 
etfective  in  a fatiguing  march,  and,  possibly,  a fight,  I went  over  to  the 
pontoon  wharf  on  John’s  Island.  The  tide  was  strong,  and  in  spite  of 
careful  management,  the  steamer  struck  and  seriously  injured  the  whart, 
so  that  I was  obliged  to  land  my  men  and  baggage  by  small  boats. 
The  commanding  officer  of  the  gunboat  Crusader  very  kindly  lent  me 
a large  boat,  and  furnished  a good  crew,  who  worked  all  night.  Ihe 
morning  was  far  advanced  before  I could  possibly  get  ready  to  march. 
Other  regiments  and  the  battery  and  cavalry  were  brought  over  by  the 
Planter  and  the  May  Flower,  which  could  come  up  to  the  disaoled 
wharf.  A portion  of  the  battery  and  most  of  the  infantry  started  before  I 
did.  (I  forgot  to  mention  that  three  companies  of  the  h orty -sixth  Is  ew 

York,  under  Captain were  attached  to  us,  it  having  been  found 

impossible  to  take  the  whole  of  the  Forty-sixth  trom  Tybee,  as  was 

111  Wo' moled  at  noon  on  the  2d.  It  was  exceedingly  hot,  and,  going 
on  foot  myself,  I regulated  the  march  most  carefully.  The  Third  New 
Hampshire  and  a portion  of  the  battery  passed  us  on  the  way.  Arriv- 
ing within  a mile  of  Haul  over  Cut,  we  found  a portion  of  the  force  halted 
and  another  portion  returning  from  a road  on  the  right,  which  it  was 
said  it  had  taken  by  mistake.  I think  it  was  not  far  from  4 o clock, 
possibly  a little  later,  when  we  arrived  at  the  Cut.  Two  regiments,  at 
least  (the  Sixth  Connecticut  Volunteers  was  one  of  them),  had  crossed 
the  causeway  and  bridge,  and  occupied  the  rising  ground  about  the 
large  house.  Before  sunset  the  infantry  (all,  I am  quite  sure),  a portion 
at  least  of  the  artillery,  which  was  composed  of  Hamilton  s or  Ransom  s 
battery,  and  a section  of  the  Rhode  Island,  and  some  of  the  cavalry  had 
arrived  at  the  Cut.  We  bivouacked,  my  command  forming  the  reserve, 
perhaps  40  yards  from  the  causeway.  On  this  ground  we  remained 
Monday  night  and  until  Thursday  morning.  During  Tuesday  the  cav- 
alry continued  to  come  up.  I cannot  say  positively  whether  or  not  all 
got  there  before  Wednesday.  I think,  but  I will  not  positively  say, 
that  a section  or  so  of  the  artillery  did  not  get  there  until  Tuesday.  I 
had  been  ordered  to  leave  Pulaski  with  three  days’  cooked  rations  and 
five  uncooked  (the  intention  having  been,  as  before  stated,  to  send  us 
to  the  Sfcono  directly).  As  my  cooked  rations  would  run  out  Tuesday 
night,  I took  advantage  of  the  delay  to  run  my  single  wagon  (one  had 
been  lost  in  unloading  in  the  Edisto)  back  to  the  landing  for  the 
rations  I had  been  obliged  to  leave  there,  Wednesday  there  was  much 
regret  expressed  at  the  delay,  and  many  of  the  regiments  began  to  get 
out  of  food.  All  the  transportation  at  command,  including  what  could 
be  detached  from  the  artillery,  was  most  actively  employed  in  running 
back  about  5 miles  to  the  landing  for  provisions,  &e.  We  understood 
at  the  time  that  the  delay  was  unavoidable  on  account  ot  the  detective 
transportation  and  the  great  labor  of  bringing  over  the  artillery  and 
cavalry  and  the  horses  and  wagons  belonging  to  the  infantry. 

General  Wright  came  on  Wednesday,  not  till  afternoon,  I think,  having 
remained  at  the  Edisto  to  drive  the  work.  There  was  a hasty  review 
of  the  force  toward  sunset  on  Wednesday.  m , 

Sunday  and  Monday  were  pleasant  days.  Tuesday  and  Tuesday 
night  it  rained  most  heavily,  and  some  rain  fell  on  Wednesday,  though 
I do  not  find  that  my  letters  to  my  wife  (which  I consult  for  some  ot 

these  facts)  make  any  mention  of  that. 

In  conversations  at  the  time  (without  reference  to  official  returns)  the 
officers  considered  the  force  as  amounting  to  about  5,000,  including  the 
artillery,  eight  pieces,  and  about  600  of  the  First  Massachusetts  Gav- 


1006  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


airy,  Colonel  Williams,  or  rather  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sargent,  the  colo- 
nel acting  as  brigadier- general. 

On  Thursday  morning,  June  5,  at  2 o’clock,  the  troops  were  ready  to 
move ; at  2.30  we  started.  The  Third  New  Hampshire  led ; next  came 
a section  of  artillery ; then  my  command.  It  was  very  cloudy  and  dark 
and  soon  after  we  moved  a very  heavy  rain  began,"  which  continued’ 
with  slight  intervals  of  drizzling,  until  we  reached  Legareville.  I think 
I came  up  to  the  village  about  9.30  a.  m. ; you  assigned  us  quarters. 

While  we  staid  at  Haulover,  the  enemy’s  mounted  scouts  were  sev- 
eral times  seen,  and  we  confidently  expected  opposition  in  our  march 
of  13  miles  to  Legareville.  We  met  none  whatever,  but  we  heard  after- 
ward that  a considerable  force  of  the  enemy  came  down  there  the  dav 
after  we  left. 

Some  of  your  questions  were  concerning  the  fight  near  Secession ville. 

The  Seventh  Connecticut  was  on  James  Island,  in  General  Stevens’ 
division  (called  the  Second  until  about  the  20th  of  June,  when  it  be- 
came the  First).  The  First  Brigade  was  composed  of  the  Eighth  Mich 
lgao,  Colonel  Fenton,  commanding  the  brigade;  the  Seventh  Connec- 
ticut Volunteers,  and  the  Twenty-eighth  Massachusetts;  the  Second 
[Brigade],  the  Seventy-ninth  New  York,  One  kun.iredtk  Pennsylvania, 
Colonel  Leasure,  commanding  the  brigade,  and  the  Forty-sixth  New 
York. 

Late  at  night,  June  15,  I received  orders  to  form  my  regiment  on  the 
color  line  at  1 a.  m.  of  the  coming  morning,  in  light  marching  order, 
with  60  rounds  per  man  and  one  day’s  cooked  rations,  and  there  await 
orders.  The  [order]  was  precisely  and  punctually  obeyed.  I was  then 
ordered  to  wait  until  the  Twenty  eighth  Massachusetts  moved,  and  to 
follow  it.  I obeyed,  and  it  was  between  1.30  and  2 when  we  took  the 
road  behind  them.  On  coming  to  Colonel  Fenton’s,  we  exchanged 
places  with  the  Twenty-eighth,  and  became  the  second  regiment,  the 
Eighth  Michigan  taking  the  lead.  During  the  halt  in  the  field  just  east 
of  Colonel  Fenton’s  headquarters,  I received  orders  from  General  Ste- 
vens himself;  also  from  Colonel  Fenton,  through  his  aide,  Lieutenant 
Belcher,  not  to  load,  to  move  in  perfect  silence,  and  to  trust  to  the  bay- 
onet. Before  this,  I had  ascertained  that  the  Eighth  Michigan  had 
loaded,  and  I had  followed  its  example.  I so  stated,  and  was  told  posi- 
tively not  to  fire.  I asked  if  no  discretion  was  left  me,  and  was  told 
(this  was  by  Mr.  Belcher)  that,  in  the  last  emergency,  I might  do  as  I 
pleased  in  self-defense. 

The  line  moved  till  the  head  rested  near  the  causeway.  While  wait- 
ing here,  I was  instructed,  through  Lieutenant  Belcher,  to  be  ready  when 
the  proper  time  came  to  move  into  line  on  the  left  of  the  Eighth  Michi- 
gan, and  to  watch  and  guard  against  any  movement  of  the  enemy  on 
its  left.  Shortly  after,  the  division  started  in  perfect  silence,  crossed  the 
causeway,  passed  through  a field,  then  took  into  and  through  a corn- 
field. Near  the  eastern  edge  of  this  stood  a house,  used  as  a hospital 
during  the  fight,  and,  at  its  close,  burned.  I have  made  a very  rough 
sketch  of  the  ground  where  our  division  fought,  and  refer  to  it.*  Near 
this  house  the  enemy’s  pickets  fired  into  the  Eighth  Michigan,  and  were 
captured.  The  Eighth  started  forward  with  a prolonged  yell,  and  we 
kept  close  behind.  As  I passed  through  the  hedge,  at  A,  I received 
word  from  Lieutenant  Belcher  to  move  on  the  right  into  line.  I ob- 
served the  Eighth  Michigan  getting  into  line  as  at  C,  and  my  regiment 
hurried  on  at  the  double-quick,  over  the  cotton  rows,  by  companies,  as 
indicated  at  B,  soon  getting  a good  line  as  at  D,  at  which  time  the 


See  p.  1009. 


■Chap.  XXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECRSSIONVILLE, 


S.  C. 


1007 


Eighth  Michigan  appeared  as  at  E.  Clambering  over  the  second  hedg^ 

I caught  my  first  good  view  of  the  earthwork.  ^ 

You  ask  about  the  time.  It  is  utterly  impossible  for  me  to  tell.  Be- 
fore we  started  to  cross  the  causeway,  I remember  noticing,  and  easily 
distinguishing,  General  Stevens  and  party  at  the  distance  of,  perhaps, 

75  yards  and  when  we  crossed  the  second  hedge  I could  perfectly  well 
see  the  window  in  the  gable  of  the  little  house  in  the  earthwork  There 
soon  came  a flash  from  it.  The  lookout  or  tower  was  cleariy  distm- 
euishable,  and  I could  have  seen  a man  at  that  distance.  I saw  that  t 
work  presented  a short  front,  and,  supposing  that  to  be  the  object  of 
attack  though  not  forgetting  my  injunctions  to  protect  the  left  of  the 
Eighth  I told  my  color-bearers  to  direct  their  steps  toward  the  right, 
but  suddenly  I found  my  left  wing  plunging  into  low  bushes  and  marsh 
and  unavoidably  breaking  into  confusion,  while  the  ^ 
oil  Rifle  and  grape  shot  poured  upon  us  heavily.  The  line  staggeie 
anil  halted  as  at  F,  say  120  yards  from  the  work,  though ismg e men  and 
groups  pressed  nearer.  The  men  edged  back  a little,  but  did  not  run, 
or  even  intend  to  walk  away.  The  Twenty -eighth  came  up  on 
obliquiug  as  they  saw  the  marsh,  but  soon  got  into  the  same  difficulty 
and  fell  back  to  the  first  hedge,  or  near  there,  to  reform.  1 got  out 
colors  into  the  open  field,  and  reformed  my  line  under  a constant  fire, 
as  at  G.  Colonel  Fenton  came  up  during  our  labors  at  reforming.  A 
portion  of  my  men  were  permitted  to  fire,  and  made  good  use  of  thei 
opportunities^  but  I soon  stopped  it,  as  I feared  it  might  interfere 
with  somebody’s  scaling  the  work.  Colonel  Benton  ordered  us  \° 
move  by  the  right  flank  across  the  fire,  and  we  obeyed.  When  partly 
across  the  field,  the  Seventy-ninth* -came nip,  advancing  mhneot  bat- 
tle striking  across  and  somewhat  disturbing  my  left.  We  soon  alter 
filed  to  the  left,  and  were  in  the  position  indicated  by  the  dotted  lines 
at  H l myself  being  at  the  place  marked  x,  near  the  H,  and  hurrying 
to  the  head  of  my  men,  when  Captain  Stevens  galloped  up  to  me, 
saving  ‘‘  The  general  wishes  you  to  call  the  men  off.”  The  rifle  fire  at 
this  moment  was  very  sharp  from  the  enemy’s  left,  and  my  tot  and 
second  companies  were  suffering,  but  advancing  steadily.  The  head 
was  perS  100  yards  from  the  work.  I do  not  remember  noticing 
anv  abatis  on  the  front ; it  might  have  been  there.  All  my  energies 

were  directed  to  cheering  and  regulating  my ^y^rifle  ball" 
and  walked  steadily,  faced  by  the  rear  rank,  and  followed  by  rifle  balls, 
to  the  second  hedge,  where,  by  General  Stevens  order,  we  halted  and 
look  shelter,  as  at  I.  After’  a time  the  general  called  us  back  to  the 
first  hedge.  All  but  the  last  company  had  got  through  the  opening, 
when  the  general  said  he  wanted  us  again,  and  we  faced  about  and 
re  entered  the  open  field,  where  I completely  reformed  my  regiment  at 
K,  equalizing  companies,  reassigning  officers,  &c.  My  left  compaiiy 
(Sharps’  rifles)  General  Stevens  retained  to  protect  Rockwell  s battery . 
General  Stevens  rode  through  the  hedge,  and  looked  on  a few  moments. 
At  other  times  when  I saw  him  lie  was  where  I have  marked  his  posi- 
tion + on  the  sketch,  and  where  he  had  a good  view  of  the  field. 

Soon  after  we  moved  again  to  I,  and  lay  in  the  dry  ditch,  and  two 
howitzers,  and  afterward  a rifle  of  Rockwell  s,  came  up,  and,  part  y P 
tected  by  the  hedge,  tired  perhaps  100  rounds,  so  they  said,  my  men, 
and  I myself,  assisting  somewhat  in  moviug  the  guns  and  serving  am- 

T have  always  r thought]  that  it  was  the  Seventy-ninth.  P°ssibly  it  was  the  One 

the  Si!,  or 

need  not  have  done  so. — J.  R.  H. 


1008  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

munition.  The  howitzers  started  with  grape,  to  clear  the  bushes  on 
either  side  of  the  work,  but  I represented  that  many  of  our  men  must  be 
about  the  field  wounded,  and  the  distance  was  so  great  that  we  should 
hurt  them  more  than  the  enemy,  and  the  gunners  changed  to  spherical  1 
case.  Captain  Gray  and  myself  watched  closely  the  effects,  and  in- 
formed the  gunners,  at  their  request,  as  they  fired  very  rapidly.  They 
lost  some  horses  at  this  place.  The  enemy  fired  grape  and  other  shot, 
but  the  infantry  kept  their  cover  tolerably  well,  and  were  not  hurt.  In 
permitting  my  best  marksmen  to  practice  on  the  work  from  this  point, 

I remarked  that  they  might  set  their  leaf  sights  at  700.  1 think  my 

Enfield  rifles  rather  inferior  and  they  under-shoot.  The  distance  must 
be  full  500  yards  from  the  second  hedge  to  the  work.  After  Rockwell’s 
guns  had  got  back  to  the  first  hedge,  my  men  arose  and  marched  with 
admirable  steadiness  back  to  the  first  hedge  and  filed  through.  Grape 
and  heavy  shot  followed  us,  but  hurt  no  one.  We  found  the  Seventy- 
ninth  standing  in  line  there.  After  some  delay,  General  Stevens  or- 
dered us  to  camp. 

Of  course,  I do  not  give  all  the  details,  but  I am  sure  of  what  I have 
asserted.  I knew  in  a general  way  that  we  were  expected  to  surprise 
some  work,  but,  aside  from  that,  I have  given  all  the  orders  that  I re- 
ceived before  or  during  the  fight.  I have  never  seen  the  report  of  a 
single  regimental  commander  engaged  in  that  battle,  though  I should 
be  exceedingly  glad  to  read  them. 

I have  individually  laid  the  failure  of  the  attack  to  the  adherence  to 
the  order  to  advance  in  brigade  line.  Had  the  other  regiments  followed 
in  the  footsteps  of  the  Eighth  Michigan,  along  the  open  field,  or  had 
none  but  my  own  (which  sufficiently  reconnoitered  that  marsh)  been 
suffered  to  pitch  into  the  mud  and  bushes,  I have  always  thought  that 
we  should  have  taken  the  work.  It  was  impossible  that  the  regiments 
should  come  up  in  prompt  support  successively,  when  they  were  ordered  j 
forward  in  a direction  that  would  have  sent  four  out  of  the  six  clear  of 
the  work’s  right  flank.  I suppose  that  the  Second  Brigade  was  ordered 
forward  like  ours.  The  work  had  not  the  front  of  a regiment  by  a \ 
good  deal. 

I trust  that  I have  not  overstepped  the  bounds  of  propriety  in  my 
remarks,  for  I have  no  intention  to  do  so.  These  same  opinions  I have 
always  expressed,  without  knowing  with  whom  any  particular  order  • 
originated,  and  having  always  been  treated  with  the  greatest  kindness 
by  my  superior  officers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  R.  HAWLEY. 

Notes  on  map.* 

Colonel  Hawley’s  verbal  statement,  on  August  29,  to  me  was  that 
General  Stevens  once  rode  through  the  first  hedge,  “about  2 rods,”  to 
speak  to  him,  after  his  regiment  had  been  called  back  to  that  hedge,  and 
that  he  had  never  seen  him  in  advance  of,  or  more  than  2 rods  in  front 
of,  that  hedge  during  the  day. 

H.  W.  BENHAM. 

Colonel  Hawley  also  stated  to  me  that  from  the  time  his  regiment 
first  encountered  the  marsh,  at  F,  till  he  had  reformed  and  brought  it 
to  the  position  at  H,  advancing,  and  witbiu  100  yards  of  the  fort,  when 
he  was  recalled  by  Captain  Stevens,  was  about  ten  minutes,  as  near  as 
he  could  judge. 

H.  W.  BENHAM. 


See  p.  1009. 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C.  1009 


64  R E — VOL  XIV 


1010  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

[Inclosure  No.  14.] 

116  Fourth  Street,  New  York, 

January  10, 1863. 

Hon.  Joseph  Holt,  Judge- Advocate-  General : 

Dear  Sir  : In  my  interview  with  you  on  Saturday  last,  when  I brought 
you  from  the  President  the  papers  relating  to  the  case  of  General  Ben- 
ham,  you  will  remember  that  there  was  among  them  a letter  of  General 
I.  I.  Stevens,  printed  in  the  New  York  Times  of  July  22, 1862,  of  which 
you  suggested  to  me  that  some  authentication  was  necessary. 

I have  now  the  satisfaction  of  transmitting  herewith  the  original  of 
that  document,  which,  as  you  suggested,  was  possible  had  been  pre- 
served in  the  New  York  Times  office.  I know  not  whether  any  authen- 
tication of  such  an  original  is  important,  but  I add  the  depositions  of 
Mr.  Wilson,  the  managing  editor,  and  of  Mr.  Fuller,  the  intimate  friend 
and  correspondent  of  General  Stevens,  in  this  city,  authenticating  the 
signature  and  proving  the  publication  from  this  manuscript  in  the 
Times  of  that  date. 

Your  kindness  in  permitting  me  on  the  occasion  of  that  interview  to 
direct  your  attention  to  some  of  the  points  of  General  Benham’s  case, 
emboldens  me,  as  the  friend  perhaps  most  familiar  with  the  facts  of  his 
defense,  to  beg  that  your  particular  attention  may  be  directed  to  this 
document,  as  well  as  to  another  of  much  consequence,  the  letter  and 
map  of  Colonel  Hawley,  of  Seventh  Connecticut  Kegiment.  The  facts 
in  these  two  letters  are  new,  and  have  never  hitherto  been  laid  before 
the  authorities,  though  General  Benham  has  been  anxious  to  secure 
some  attention  to  them.  They  are  believed  to  be  not  only  important, 
but,  if  carefully  considered,  absolutely  decisive  on  all  the  important 
points  of  the  alleged  charges  against  him.  Your  kindness  will,  I trust, 
permit  me  to  point  out  their  bearing. 

The  main  charge  against  him,  so  far  as  General  Benham  is  informed, 
for  his  defense  labors  under  the  disadvantage  of  having  no  formal  or 
accurate  knowledge  of  what  the  charges  are,  is  contained  in  two  letters 
of  General  Hunter  to  the  War  Department,  copies  of  which,  with  some 
notes  of  General  Benham  upon  them,  I left  with  you.  The  principal  ac- 
cusation contained  in  these  letters  is,  that  General  Benham  was  warned 
■on  the  evening  before  the  battle , in  a conference  of  the  three  generals  on 
James  Island , that  he  was  about  to  fight  a battle  u in  violation  of  orders.” 

This  charge  General  Hunter  presents  on  the  authority  of  a report  of 
'General  Stevens,  respecting  the  facts  of  his  own  defeat.  This  concur- 
rence of  superior  and  subordinate  officers  in  charging  upon  General 
Beuliam  a willful  and  clear  violation  of  orders  was,  it  is  believed,  the 
only  and  sufficient  ground  of  his  disgraceful  dismissal  from  the  roll  of 
brigadiers. 

Upon  the  publication,  however,  of  his  report  and  letter  to  General 
Hunter,  General  Stevens  made  haste  to  correct  his  statement,  and  to 
disclaim,  by  this  publication,  the  imputation  which  had  thus,  in  his 
name,  been  cast  upon  General  Benham.  In  the  printed  letter,  the  au- 
thenticated original  of  which  I now  send,  he  declares  this  charge  to 
have  been  a mistake,  and  that  the  orders  under  which  General  Benham 
was  acting  were  not  a subject  before  the  conference. 

This  statement  agrees  with  that  of  General  Benham  himself,  and  of 
Commodore  Drayton,  the  impartial  naval  officer  who  witnessed  the  in- 
terview to  which  the  charge  refers,  in  a letter  which  is  among  those 
submitted  by  the  President.  The  charge  rests  only  on  General  Stevens’ 
authority,  and  his  disclaimer  of  it  is  believed  to  be  an  absolute  and 
complete  refutation  of  this  most  serious  charge.  At  the  same  time  no 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SECESSIONVILLE,  S.  C. 


1011 


official  disclaimer  was  ever  forwarded,  and  the  charge  thus  publicly 
disavowed  in  the  newspapers,  by  the  only  person  on  whose  authority  it 
was  made,  remains  on  the  tiles  of  the  Department,  to  the  great  injustice 
and  disgrace  of  General  Benham. 

This  statement  is  supposed  to  he  the  only  one  of  sufficient  weight  to  have 
called  forth  the  severe  censure  of  the  Department  under  which  General 
Benham  is  suffering , and  its  complete  refutation  would , of  itself \ seem  to 
he  sufficient  reason  why  that  censure  should  he  canceled  and  the  dismissed 
general  restored  to  his  rank. 

This  document  of  General  Stevens  is  important  in  another  respect. 
It  shows  that  there  was  no  question  in  the  mind  of  any  general  at  the 
conference  preceding  the  battle  about  any  violation  of  orders  in  the 
prospective  fight.  The  subject  was  not  alluded  to.  Now,  General  Ben- 
ham expressly  declares  that  the  orders  of  General  Hunter  to  him  were 
announced  to  the  other  generals  of  his  command.  This  assertion,  more- 
over, is  unquestioned.  They  all  knew  under  what  orders  he  fought. 
It  appears,  then,  that  while  the  three  generals  were  aware  of  those 
orders,  no  one  of  them  alleges  that  they  supposed  General  Benham’s 
action  in  ordering  the  battle  to  be  a violation  of  them.  They  must  be 
considered,  therefore,  to  have  believed  his  action  legitimate  in  this 
respect,  as  he  himself  did.  None  of  them  supposed  the  battle  to  he  in 
violation  of  General  Hunter’s  orders.  This  position  is  substantiated  by 
a consideration  of  the  older  of  General  Hunter,  which  General  Benham 
is  charged  with  violating.  It  is  very  brief,  and  forbids  “any  attempt  to 
advance  on  Charleston  or  to  attack  Fort  Johnson,”  both  which  prohibi- 
tions General  Benham  faithfully  observed.  It  moreover  enjoined  him 
to  “provide  for  a secure  intrenched  encampment , where  youi  front  can  be 
covered  by  the  fire  of  the  gunboats.” 

This  injunction  he  faithfully  endeavored  to  carry  out.  It  required 
him  to  attack  a battery,  which  was  firing  into  his  camp,  as  he  honestly 
believed  5 and  it  now  appears  that  no  one  of  his  associate  generals  con- 
sidered his  act  a violation  of  the  instructions  he  had  received. 

Such  is  the  bearing  of  the  letter  of  General  Stevens,  now  for  the  first 
time  brought  to  the  official  notice  of  the  President. 

The  other  new  presentation  of  the  facts  is  that  made  in  a letter  already 
mentioned — of  Colonel  Hawley,  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers.  It 
speaks  for  itself,  as  a moderate,  judicious,  and  perfectly  intelligible  state- 
ment of  the  causes  of  the  failure  of  a well  planned  and  promising  attack. 
Colonel  Hawley’s  letter  contains  so  distinct  an  account  of  the  action, 
and  of  its  want  of  success,  that  no  comment  of  mine  is  necessary.  I 
would  observe,  however,  that  he  attributes  the  failure  to  a neglect  of 
General  Stevens  to  provide  for  the  proper  arrangement  of  his  regiments 
in  regimental  column.  He  moreover  points  out  the  headquarters  of 
General  Stevens  at  the  first  hedge , nearly  a mile  from  the  scene  of  the 
action,  and  in  a position  in  which  it  was  impossible  that  he  could  wit- 
ness or  direct  the  advance  of  the  troops  at  that  early  hour,  for  the 
attack  was  ordered  to  take  place  at  daylight. 

If  the  attack  failed  from  General  Stevens’  erroneous  dispositions, 
surely  great  caution  should  be  observed  in  admitting  any  statements 
by  which  he  has  endeavored  to  throw  off  the  responsibility  of  concur- 
ring in  it. 

Moreover,  Colonel  Hawley,  who  had  advanced  to  within  100  yards  of 
the  work  when  he  was  recalled  by  the  aide-de-camp  of  General  Stevens, 
declares  that  he  saw  no  abatis  or  formidable  ditch,  and  that  he  “ attrib- 
utes the  failure  to  the  adherence  to  the  order  to  advance  in  brigade 
line.” 


1012  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI, 

It  seems,  therefore,  that  there  were  no  circumstances  which  rendered 
the  attack  a foolish  or  desperate  one,  or  which  forbade  in  any  way  the 
hope  of  its  success. 

As  for  the  statement  that  the  generals  remonstrated  against  it,  this, 
as  I have  said,  is  to  be  received  with  caution,  as  a statement  made  after 
the  disastrous  failure.  General  Benham  did  not  understand  their  in- 
quiries as  designed  to  express  a remonstrance,  and  the  letter  already 
referred  to  of  Commodore  Drayton  to  General  Benham  expressly  de- 
clares, “ I cannot  recollect  any  opposition  being  offered  to  your  proposed 
advance  on  Secessionville,  except  as  regards  the  time  you  had  fixed 
on,  General  Stevens  being  in  favor  of  deferring  it  until  the  afternoon.” 

This  most  unexceptionable  testimony  shows  that  there  was  no  decided 
remonstrance  whatever  against  the  proposed  movement.  When  subse- 
quently it  became  important  to  evade  the  responsibility  of  having 
ordered  or  concurred  in  the  attack,  a very  slight  question  as  to  its  pro- 
priety was  magnified  into  a remonstrance,  by  the  generals,  who  then 
became  able  to  see  it  as  injudicious. 

On  the  whole,  then,  it  appears  that : First,  there  was  no  remonstrance 
against  Benham’s  action,  as  a violation  of  General  Hunter’s  orders ; 
and  this  is  the  important  charge.  Second.  There  was  no  idea  that  the 
attack  teas  a violation  of  orders,  either  in  the  mind  of  General  Benham 
or  of  any  one  of  his  associate  generals.  Third.  The  attack  was,  on  his 
part,  a simple  adherence  to  what  he  supposed  to  be  the  true  meaning 
and  effect  of  General  Hunter’s  order.  Fourth.  The  attack  was  not  ex- 
travagant or  rash,  and  failed  only  from  an  unhappy  arrangement  of 
the  troops,  and  not  from  any  inherent  impracticability  in  the  work  at- 
tempted. 

These  points  General  Benham  considers  fully  proved  by  the  testimony 
submitted  } but  if  not  absolutely  established,  thus  much,  at  least,  is 
dear,  that  the  force  of  the  charges  is  greatly  weakened  by  these  au- 
thentic statements.  The  ground  of  censure  is  brought  very  much  into 
doubt ; nothing  ivhatever  can  be  regarded  as  established  against  him.  No 
ground  is  made  out  as  clearly  justifying  the  public  severity  with  which 
he  has  been  treated,  now  that  General  Stevens  has  retracted  the  ac- 
cusation which  alone  seemed  to  call  for  the  censure  of  the  Department. 

If  there  are  other  charges  against  General  Benham,  of  which,  how- 
ever, the  President  mentioned  none  to  me,  he  has  no  knowledge  of  them, 
and  is,  of  course,  unable  to  attempt  a vindication  of  himself  against 
them.  It  would  seem  that  justice  requires  that  he  should  be  informed 
of  them  if  such  other  accusations  exist,  and  be  called  upon  for  expla- 
nation. 

After  having  given,  myself,  a most  careful  and  protracted  examination 
to  these  charges,  I feel  entirely  at  liberty  to  say  that  I am  fully  con- 
vinced that  they  are  wholly  groundless,  and  that  in  any  court  in  which 
General  Benham  could  have  the  liberty  of  examining  the  parties  who 
have  made  them,  their  futility  would  be  made  abundantly  conspicuous. 
No  one  will  ever  give  to  the  case  the  same  minute  examination,  with  the 
explanations  of  both  friend  and  foe,  that  I have  myself  done,  with 
clear  assurance  of  injustice  in  General  Benham’s  dismissal. 

One  topic  remains.  The  inquiry  suggests  itself,  Why  should  Gen- 
eral Hunter  deem  his  orders  violated,  and  press  the  case  for  censure 
against  his  subordinate  ? The  answer  to  this  inquiry  is  obvious  upon 
an  examination  of  the  case,  but  it  is  painful  to  state  it.  Among  the 
papers  which  I left  with  you  in  the  package  bearing  my  address,  is  a 
copy  of  General  Benham’s  original  plan  of  the  expedition.  It  bears 
date  May  17,  and  was  presented  to  General  Hunter  on  that  date,  form- 


CHAP.  XXVI.  1 engagement  at  secessionville,  s.  c. 


1013 


ally  written  at  his  request.  The  first  sentence  of  it  shows  that  General 
Ben  ham  had  presented  this  plan  more  than  two  weeks  before , upon  re- 
ceipt of  accurate  intelligence  of  the  small  number  of  troops  then  in  and 
about  Charleston.  At  that  time  six  or  eight  large  steamers  were  at 
command  in  the  department,  and  the  troops  could  have  been  trans- 
ported in  a single  day  to  the  scene  of  action.  General  Hunter,  however, 
hesitated  to  act,  and  the  opportunity  was  lost.  The  Quartermaster- 
General  at  Washington,  not  informed  of  the  possible  necessity  of  these 
steamers,  withdrew  them  from  the  department ; and  when,  after  repeated 
intelligence  confirming  the  originally  known  facts,  General  Hunter  at 
length  authorized  the  movement,  but  one  or  two  small  steamers  re- 
mained. This  lack  of  transportation  involved  an  additional  loss  ot  many 
days.  The  attack,  which  should  have  been  made  early  in  May,  was  de- 
layed for  a full  month.  The  enemy  gathered  re-enforcements,  and  the 
happiest  plan  of  the  war  was  spoiled  by  the  indecision  and  tardiness  of  the 
commanding  general , who  now  accuses  the  zealous  subordinate,  who  con- 
stantly urged  a more  active  and  early  attack. 

If  this  is  a true  statement,  it  abundantly  shows  the  animus  of  Gen- 
eral Hunter’s  censure  to  be  an  attempt  to  cover  his  own  delinquency. 
It  can  be  decisively  proved  in  every  particular,  as  I personally  know 
from  conversation  with  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  War,  Mr.  Wolcott. 

Pardon,  sir,  the  zeal  for  a friend  and  for  justice  which  prompts  this 
long  statement  of  the  case,  and  believe  me,  with  many  thanks  for  your 
kindness  on  a previous  occasion,  and  with  the  highest  confidence  m 
your  impartiality, 

Most  sincerely  and  respectfully,  yours,  ^ MASTIN'. 

P.  s.— I am  concerned  to  remember  that  several  of  the  papers  to  which 
I here  refer  are  only  copies.  The  circumstance  arose  thus  : I called  on 
the  President,  in  order  to  explain  the  case,  and  to  secure,  if  possible,  a 
formal  hearing  ♦for  General  Benham,  in  which  his  original  documents 
could  be  presented.  The  President  was  suddenly  called  away,  and 
hastily  took  my  papers,  disregarding  my  momentary  remonstrance  that 
they  were  only  my  own  copies,  as  I supposed,  for  his  own  examination. 
He  afterward  concluded  to  refer  them  to  yourself,  and  sent  me  with 
the  order  and  the  papers,  which,  of  course,  I felt  bound  to  deliver  to 
you  untouched.  General  Benham  most  earnestly  desires  the  oppor- 
tunity of  presenting  original  documents,  should  there  be  any  question 
about  the  validity  of  those  I have  left  with  the  President.  I earnestly 
hope  that  his  case  may  not  be  prejudiced  for  want  of  an  opportunity  o± 
duly  authenticating  his  statements.  Full  papers  m Washington  are  in 
the  hands  of  Senator  Hale. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Ellison  Capers,  Twenty  fourth  South  Carolina. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 

James  Island,  S.  C.,  June  23,  186- 

Colonel  : By  your  direction  I herewith  submit  the  following  report: 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant,  our  regiment  being  on  picket 
duty  on  the  roads  leading,  respectively,  to  the  Episcopal  and  Presbyterian 
churches  and  to  Rivers’  place,  about  daylight  the  enemy  was  reported 
advancing  from  Rivers’,  immediately  on  Secessionville.  I accompanied 
you  down  the  road  toward  the  causeway,  near  the  Rivers  place,  where 
Gooding’s  company  (D),  Tompkins’  company  (K),  We  vers  company 
(I),  and  Pearson’s  company  (G)  were  stationed.  While  we  were  deploy- 


1014  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

mg  these  companies  in  the  wood  south  of  Hill’s  house,  Colonel  Hagood 
joined  us  with  his  own  and  Simonton’s  regiments.  The  enemy  by  this 
time  was  near  the  work  of  Secessionville,  and  a force  had  crossed  to  our 
side  of  the  creek  by  the  Rivers  causeway,  and  had  takeu  position  be- 
yond Hill’s  negro  houses  and  immediately  opposite  the  Secessionville 
work,  and  a little  to  the  rear  of  its  right  flank.  From  this  position  we 
could  see  what  a telling  lire  he  was  pouring  into  the  battery.  Mean- 
while the  enfilade  battery  in  front  of  Clark’s  house  was  silent,  and  had 
not  fired  a shot.  Its  position  enabled  it  to  rake  the  front  of  the  Secession- 
ville work,  and  to  fire  right  into  the  rear  of  the  force  at  and  beyond  the 
negro  houses.  Colonel  Hagood  ordered  me  to  gallop  back  to  the  bat- 
tery and  order  it  to  open  fire  at  once.  This  I did  with  all  possible  speed, 
and  found  Lieut.  J.  B.  Kitching’s  15  or  18  men  there,  belonging  to 
Lamar’s  regiment.  To  my  demand  why  he  was  not  firing  on  the  enemy, 
the  lieutenant  said  that  he  and  his  men  had  but  just  come  from  the 
country,  had  no  orders  to  fire,  knew  nothing  of  the  service  of  the  guns 
or  ammunition,  but  would  gladly  fire  the  guns  if  I would  direct  them 
how  to  proceed.  I at  once  loaded*  sighted,  and  fired  the  right  piece, 
the  lieutenant  and  his  men  springing  to  the  work  in  gallant  style.  The 
shell  we  fired  burst  just  in  rear  of  the  fence  beyond  the  Hill  negro 
houses  with  fine  effect  on  the  enemy,  delighting  us  all. 

In  my  haste  I did  not  notice  that  the  guns  were  on  separate  and  very 
narrow  platforms,  elevated  about  2 feet.  As  I had  trailed  this  gun  to 
the  right,  to  get  a better  direction,  the  carriage  stood  crossways  the 
platform,  and  the  recoil  of  this  first  shot  dropped  it  off  the  platform 
and  disabled  the  pieee  for  the  rest  of  the  engagement.  We  loaded  the 
other  gun  at  once,  and  1 provided  against  a similar  accident  for  it,  and 
we  went  ahead.  Kitching  and  his  men  worked  gallantly,  and  with  re- 
markable aptitude,  so  much  so  that  I thought  it  my  duty  to  return  to 
my  command.  Passing  Clark’s  house,  I reported  to  General  Evans  the 
above  facts,  and  he  ordered  me  peremptorily  to  return  to  the  battery 
and  direct  its  fire  until  relieved.  This  I accordingly  did.  We  fired  as 
rapidly  as  we  could  load,  right  into  the  troops  at  the  negro  houses  and 
in  the  bushes  to  the  east,  and  when  they  retreated  we  directed  our  fire 
on  the  force  in  front  of  Secessionville. 

During  the  final  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  carry  the  work,  the  effect 
of  our  24  pounder  on  his  left  flank  was  very  perceptible  at  every  dis- 
charge. I am  satisfied  that  the  fire  of  this  battery  contributed  no  little 
to  our  success,  aud  am  gratified  to  inform  you  that  the  general  com- 
manding rode  to  the  battery  during  the  close  of  the  engagement  and 
warmly  thanked  us  for  our  work. 

I have  since  had  the  honor  to  receive  the  thanks  of  the  general,  in 
writing,  a copy  of  which  I herewith  inclose. 

The  enemy  fired  on  us  from  a light  battery,  but  did  us  no  harm. 

I am,  colonel,  vour  obedient  servant, 

ELLISON  CAPERS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Twenty  fourth  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

Col.  C.  H.  Stevens, 

Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters, 

James  Island , June  22,  1862. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Capers, 

Twenty-fourth  South  Carolina , James  Island  : 

Colonel  : In  the  absence  of  General  Evans,  first  in  command  on  the 
16th  instant,  allow  me  to  thank  you  and  the  small  detachment  of  South 


Chap.  XXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  1015 

Carolina  Artillery  under  your  command,  for  the  efficient  and  distin- 
guished service  which  was  rendered  by  Battery  Head  upon  that  day. 
Make  known  to  detachment  my, thanks. 

Respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

WM.  DUNCAN  SMITH, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


APRIL  7,  1863. — Engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

Statements  of  Brig.  Gen.  B.  S.  Ripley  and  Cols.  William  Butler  and  Alfred 

Rhett* 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston , October  12,  1863. 

General:  In  answer  to  the  letter  of  the  general  commanding  the  de- 
partment, dated  October  7,  inquiring  concerning  the  truth  of  the  state- 
ment of  WiUiam  H.  Seward,  Abolition  Secretary  of  State,  as  follows: 

» 

An  attack  By  the  fleet,  made  on  the  7th  of  April  last,  upon  the  forts  and  batteries 
which  defend  the  harbor  of  Charleston  failed  because  the  rope  obstruction  in  the  chan- 
nel fouled  the  screws  of  the  iron-clads,  and  compelled  them  to  return  after  passing 
through  the  fire  of  the  batteries.  These  vessels  bore  the  fire  of  the  forts,  although 
some  defects  of  construction  were  revealed  by  the  injuries  they  received.  The  crews 
passed  through  an  unexampled  cannonade  with  singular  impunity.  Not  a life  was 
lost  on  board  a monitor — 

I have  to  remark  that  the  statement  is  simply  false. 

The  mendacious  particulars  are — 

1st.  “That  the  rope  obstructions  fouled  the  screws  of  the  iron-clads,” 
&c.  These  would  probably  have  fouled  the  screws,  besides  producing 
other  effects,  but  no  Abolition  iron-clad  came  within  300  yards  of  them. 

2d.  “ After  passing  the  fire  of  the  batteries.”  But  one  of  the  fleet 
came  within  900  yards  of  Fort  Sumter,  or  1,000  from  the  batteries  on 
S ul li van’s  Island.  The  Keokuk  sank  next  morning.  None  ever  came 
within  effective  range  of  the  heaviest  batteries  at  all.  Whether  lives 
were  lost  or  not,  no  attempt  was  made  to  renew  the  attack ; and  on  the 
12th  the  whole  fleet  left  the  harbor.  1 had  an  excellent  point  for  obser- 
vation, and  cannot  have  been  mistaken. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  communications  from  Cols.  Al- 
fred Bhett  and  William  Butler,  commanding,  respectively,  the  batteries 
at  Fort  Sumter  and  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  relating  to  the  same  subject. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier-General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff, \ &c. 

[Inclosures.] 

Headquarters  Artillery, 

West  End  Sullivan’s  Island , October  9,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a commu- 
nication addressed  by  General  Beauregard,  commanding  tin*  Depart- 
ment of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  to  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Rip- 
ley, dated  October  7,  1863,  in  which  an  official  statement  made  by  Mr. 


See  p.  244. 


1016  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVL 


W.  H.  Seward,  United  States  Secretary  of  State,  relative  to  the  defeat 
of  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  fleet  on  the  7th  of  April  last,  is  presented,  and 
my  testimony,  as  one  of  the  officers  in  command  of  batteries  on  the 
occasion,  desired,  as  to  its  correctness.* 

The  statement  referred  to  is  thus  expressed : 

An  attack  by  the  fleet,  made  on  the  7th  day  of  April  last,  upon  the  forts  and  bat- 
teries which  defend  the  harbor  failed  because  the  rope  obstructions  in  the  channel 
fouled  the  screws  of  the  iron-clads,  and  compelled  them  to  return,  after  passing  through 
the  fires  of  the  batteries.  These  vessels  bore  the  fire  of  the  forts,  although  some  defects 
of  construction  were  revealed  by  the  injuries  they  received.  The  crews  passed 
through  an  unexampled  cannonade  with  singular  impunity.  Not  one  life  was  lost 
on  board  a monitor. 


This  statement  of  Mr.  Seward’s  is,  I beg  leave  to  say,  incorrect  in 
several  particulars.  Being  in  a position  where  I could  obtain  a good 
view  of  the  action,  I submit,  as  a fact,  that  none  of  the  iron  clads  ap- 
proached within  several  hundred  yards  of  the  obstructions,  and,  there- 
fore, the  screws  could  not  have  been  fouled  by  them. 

With  regard  to  the  fire  of  the  batteries,  through  which  it  is  said  by 
Mr.  Seward  that  the  iron-clads  passed,  I would  state  that  the  iron-clads 
were  not  any  time  within  fair  range  of  the  heaviest  guns  in  position  on 
Sullivan’s  Island,  but  to  the  fire  of  which  they  would  have  been  exposed 
(within  effective  range)  had  they  passed  “through  the  fire  of  the  bat- 
teries” and  into  the  harbor. 

It  is  known  that  the  turreted  iron-clad  Keokuk  sank  soon  after  re- 
tiring from  the  action,  within  sight  of  our  batteries ; and,  if  the  public 
journals  of  the  enemy  are  to  be  believed,  disabling  injuries  were  in- 
flicted upon  other  iron-clads  of  the  fleet,  and  some  officers  and  men 
killed. 


Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  BUTLEE, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Hdqrs.  First  Military  Fist ., 

Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia , and  Florida. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Second  Subdivision, 

First  Military  District , Sullivan’s  Island , October  10,  1863. 

While  forwarding  the  within,  I think  it  proper  to  state  that  on  the 
7th  of  April  I was  in  a position  from  which  I could  see  every  one  of  the 
vessels  engaged  during  the  entire  period  of  the  attack,  and  I know  pos- 
itively that  not  one  of  the  monitors  or  any  other  vessel  approached 
near  to  the  obstructions.  As  well  as  I could  judge  by  the  eye,  I would 
say  that  no  one  of  them  was  nearer  to  the  obstructions  than  half  a mile, 
nor  did  any  one  of  them,  when  nearest  to  our  batteries,  remain  station- 
ary many  minutes,  but,  after  receiving  a few  broadsides,  they  in  succes- 
sion rapidly  retreated. 

T.  L.  CLIKGMAK, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Hdqrs.  First  Begiment  South  Carolina  Artillery, 

Charleston , October  12,  1863. 

General:  In  reply  to  the  inquiry  touching  the  correctness  of  the 
statement  of  Mr.  W.  H.  Seward,  United  States  Secretary  of  State,  con- 


See  Beauregard  to  Cooper,  p.  244. 


Chap.  XX VI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


1017 


cerning  the  action  of  April  7,  1863,  I have  the  honor  to  say  that  it  is 
incorrect  throughout. 

The  obstructions  lay  between  Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie.  During 
the  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  I was  on  the  parapet  of  the  fort,  observing 
closely  with  a glass,  and  causing  notes  to  be  taken  of  the  progress  of 
the  fight  in  regard  to  time,  distances,  movements,  and  results.  So  far 
from  passing  through  the  fire  of  our  batteries,  the  object  of  the  enemy 
appeared  to  be  to  engage  Fort  Sumter  at  the  longest  effective  range 
of  their  15-inch  guns.  At  no  time  did  any  of  them  enter  within  the 
fire  of  our  heaviest  batteries,  which  did  not  bear  out  to  sea.  The 
leading  vessel,  the  Weehawken,  approached,  under  the  fire  of  our 
guns,  as  near  as  1,300  yards  of  Fort  Sumter  and  600  yards  of  the  ob- 
structions, and  passed  back  out  of  range  in  an  ellipse.  The  other  ves- 
sels, in  turn,  followed  the  course  of  the  Weehawken,  the  Ironsides  hav- 
ing come  to  anchor  at  about  1,800  yards  from  Fort  Sumter  and  about 
li  miles  from  the  obstructions.  Two  vessels  only,  the  Keokuk  and  the 
Nahant,  the  last  engaged,  came  nearer  than  1,300  yards  of  Sumter. 
The  Keokuk  left  the  line  and  came  in  toward  the  fort,  about  900  yards. 
Becoming  disabled  by  the  effect  of  our  shots,  she  drifted  in  with  the 
tide  (flood)  to  about  300  yards  of  the  obstructions,  when  she  managed 
to  get  under  way  again,  and  passed  out  of  range  in  a sinking  condition. 
The  next  morning  she  sank  in  shoal  water,  in  full  view.  This  was  the 
only  vessel  that  came  at  any  time  as  near  as  300  yards  of  the  obstruc- 
tions. The  Nahant,  in  support  of  the  Keokuk,  came  as  near  as  1,100 
yards  from  Sumter,  and  occupied  that  position  for  a short  time. 

I have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  statement  that  any  ol  the  ene- 
my’s iron-clads  on  the  7th  of  April  last  advanced  to  the  obstructions,  or 
that  they  fouled  their  propellers  in  the  obstructions,  is  utterly  untrue, 
and  I am  slow  to  believe  that  the  gallant  men  who  commanded  those 
vessels  upon  that  occasion  would  lend  themselves  to  the  false  state- 
ments of  their  Government. 

The  fleet  did  not  escape  with  impunity.  The  Keokuk  was  sunk ; 
others  were  damaged.  With  regard  to  the  loss  of  life,  I had  no  means 
of  ascertaining  the  facts  j but  when  the  iron-clad  fleet  withdiew  fiom  the 
harbor,  I visited  the  wreck  of  the  Keokuk  in  my  barge.  I found  that 
not  only  the  hull  of  the  vessel  had  been  penetrated,  but  that  the  10- 
inch  round  shot  and  rifled  bolts  had  made  clean  holes  through  the  tur- 
rets. Several  United  States  flags,  three  officers’  swords,  pistols,  &c., 
and  a quantity  of  bloody  clothes  and  some  bloody  blankets  were  taken 
out  of  the  turrets. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Colonel , Comdg.  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

General  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 

Charleston,  December  12, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : I must  apologize  for  calling  your  attention  to  a matter 
which  I am  not  assured  comes  under  your  control. 

A portion  of  the  workmen  employed  on  marine  torpedo  ram  are 
threatening  to  leave,  if  their  wages  (now  high)  are  not  increased.  I 
have  stopped  these  proceedings  so  far  as  the  white  men  are  concerned, 


1018 


COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA. 


[Chap.  XXVL 


assuring  them  that  such  a step  would  involve  their  immediate  return 
to  military  service.  As  I have  no  such  control  over  the  free  negro 
force,  I am  at  a loss  what  course  to  pursue.  One  of  them,  John  Mush- 
in  gton,  who  has  been  getting  $3  per  day,  has  already  left,  and  unless 
he  can  be  forced  to  return,  all  the  others  will  follow.  It  is  a matter  of 
the  utmost  importance  to  the  successful  prosecution  of  the  work  that 
some  decisive  step  be  now  taken,  as  the  number  of  skilled  shipwrights 
is  exceedingly  limited.  You  would  confer  an  especial  favor,  general, 
by  taking  such  immediate  action  in  this  matter  as  you  may  deem  ad- 
visable. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FEANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 


Charleston,  December  26, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff : 

General,  : I am  exceedingly  anxious  to  commence  bending  the  iron 
plating  for  marine  torpedo  ram,  and  if  the  plates  in  possession  of  the 
Navy  Department  at  this  place  could  be  transferred,  the  progress  of  the 
work  would  -be  greatly  facilitated. 

The  hull  of  the  boat  is  now  nearly  completed,  and  the  workmen  are 
now  engaged  in  calking  the  seams  and  preparing  the  clamps.  I hope 
to  be  enabled  to  report  the  deck  nearly  completed  by  the  close  of  the 
next  week.  The  workmen  sent  by  me  to  Savannah  are  rapidly  remov- 
ing the  engines,  and  they  report  that  everything  will  be  ready  for  ship- 
ment in  six  days.  Major  Childs  has  undertaken  the  manufacture  of 
the  friction  tubes  at  the  arsenal,  after  a plan  devised  by  me,  which  I 
think  will  insure  safety  and  certainty. 

I have  collected  and  furnished  to  Messrs.  Cameron  & Co.  a full  sup- 
ply of  cast-iron  for  prow,  and  hope  to  be  enabled  to  supply  them  in  a 
few  days  with  the  necessary  fire-wood  to  work  the  machinery  of  their 
establishment.  The  delay  in  this  matter  has  been  occasioned  by  want 
of  transportation  on  the  South  Carolina  Eailroad. 

Captain  [H.  J.]  Hartstene,  C.  S.  Navy,  has  expressed  to  me  a deep 
interest  in  the  undertaking,  and  is  desirous  of  assisting  me  in  the  con- 
duct of  the  work.  If  it  be  possible  to  obtain  the  services  of  so  able 
and  distinguished  an  ofiicer  as  Captain  Hartstene,  the  success  of  the 
undertaking  would,  I am  assured,  be  rendered  more  certain. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

FKANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 


Charleston,  January  6, 1862  [1863]. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  progress  of  marine  torpedo 
ram  for  week  ending  January  3,  1862  [1863]. 

The  entire  hull  proper  of  the  vessel  is  now  completed,  the  interior 
ceiling  and  clamping  put  on,  and  most  of  the  deck  timbers  in  place.  The 
placing  of  the  sponsings  and  shield  will  complete  the  ship-carpenter’s 
portion  of  the  work. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


1019 


The  workmen  sent  by  me  to  Savannah  have  removed  the  boiler  and 
engine  from  the  Barton,  and  are  taking  out  the  bed  plate.  The  boiler 
and  most  of  the  engine  have  safely  arrived  at  the  Charleston  and  Savan- 
nah Railroad  depot,  and  arrangements  have  been  made  to  transport  them 
to  the  ship  yard.  After  many  annoying  delays,  Messrs.  Cameron  & 
Co.  have  fairly  gone  to  work  at  the  torpedo  machinery  and  iron  prow, 
of  which  I hope  next  week  to  report  rapid  progress. 

Major  Childs  has  undertaken  the  manufacture  of  the  friction -tubes  at 
the  Charleston  Arsenal.  Captain  Hartstene,  C.  S.  Navy,  has  proffered 
me  his  aid  iu  carrying  the  work  to  completion.  As  I am  assured  that 
his  extensive  nautical  skill  will  render  his  services  invaluable  to  the 
successful  accomplishment  of  the  work,  I have  at  once  accepted  his  offer. 
This  action  on  my  part  will,  I hope,  meet  the  approval  of  the  command- 
ing general.  * 

The  only  obstacle  now  in  the  way  of  the  rapid  completion  of  the  work 
is  the  want  of  plating  for  armor.  Everything  is  now  ready  to  commence 
the  bending  of  the  plates  as  soon  as  they  may  be  placed  in  my  posses- 

^T’have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 


servant, 


FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 


Charleston,  January  28, 1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff: 


General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  all  the  necessary  machinery 
has  arrived  from  Savannah  for  marine  torpedo  ram,  and  that  the  boiler 
has  been  placed  in  the  vessel.  The  ship  carpenters  are  finishing  the 
deck  and  preparing  the  sponsings  and  shield. 

Messrs.  Cameron  & Co.,  having  transferred  their  works  to  the  Govern- 
ment, have  notified  me  that  application  must  hereafter  be  made  to  Major 
Childs  for  the  further  prosecution  of  that  portion  of  the  work  with  which 


they  were  charged.  . _ , 

I have  communicated  with  Major  Childs  on  the  subject,  but  as  yet 
have  been  able  to  make  no  definite  arrangements. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

SerVailt’  FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 


Richmond,  Va.,  February  4,  1863. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding , the.,  Fredericksburg , Va. : 

General  : The  President  desires  me  to  inform  you  in  regard  to 
affairs  on  our  southern  and  eastern  coast,  as  far  as  is  known  here. 

General  Beauregard  telegraphs  that,  on  the  30th  and  31st  ultimo, 
gunboats  and  transports,  laden  with  men,  munitions,  and  horses,  lett 
the  harbor  of  Beaufort,  N.  C.,  steering  south,  and  are  supposed  to  be 
destined  for  Charleston  or  Savannah.  General  Beauregard  thinks  their 
destination  is  Savannah,  from  recent  demonstrations  there. 


* Approved. — G.  T.  B. 


[Chap.  XXV] 


1020  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA. 

News  has  been  received  to-day  from  the  Governor  of  South  Carolina 
and  from  Charleston,  to  the  effect  that  the  Ironsides  and  other  iron-cladi 
are  off  the  port  of  Charleston ; that  the  British  war  steamer  Cadmui 
has  taken  on  board  the  English  consul  and  family,  and  that  the  block 
ading  vessels  are  all  outside  Charleston  bar.  Governor  Bonham  thinks 
from  these  indications,  that  an  attack  will  be  made  on  Charleston  witkii 
forty- eight  hours. 

General  Beauregard  wants  back  the  troops  which  he  sent  to  re-enfom 
Wilmington,  and  more.  General  Whiting  has  been  ordered  to  send  him 
one  brigade  and  to  have  a second  in  readiness  to  move  at  a moment’s 
notice,  and  General  French  has  been  directed  to  supply  from  his  com- 
mand troops  to  take  the  places  of  those  sent  from  Wilmington. 

General  French’s  remaining  force  will  not  be  adequate  to  guard  the 
southern  line  of  railroad  communication,  and,  as  he  can  only  be  re- 
enforced from  your  army,  the  President  wishes  you  to  consider  the 
subject  and  advise  him  thereon. 

The  Governor  of  South  Carolina  has  retained,  for  thirty  days,  the 
State  Beserve,  of  about  6,000  men. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

G.  W.  C.  LEE, 
Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  17.  f Hilton  Head , Port  Royal , S.  C.,  Mar.  6,  1863.* 

In  view  of  the  necessities  of  the  military  situation,  the  impossibility 
of  obtaining  from  Government  all  the  troops  required  for  service  in  this 
department,  and  the  paramount  importance  (in  view  of  existing  com- 
plications of  foreign  policy)  of  at  once  placing  strong  garrisons  of 
thoroughly  acclimated  troops  in  the  Southern  forts  and  posts  of  this 
department,  in  order  that  the  troops  now  there  may  be  used  in  the  more 
active  field  operations  for  which  they  are  better  suited  (such  forts  and 
posts  being  peculiarly  liable  to  the  ravages  of  climatic  and  epidemic 
diseases),  all  the  able-bodied  male  negroes  between  the  ages  of  eight- 
een and  fifty  within  the  military  lines  of  the  Department  of  the  South 
who  are  not,  on  the  day  of  the  date  of  this  order,  regularly  and  perma- 
nently employed  in  the  quartermaster  and  commissary  departments, 
or  as  the  private  servants  of  officers,  within  the  allowance  made  by  the 
Army  Begulations,  are  hereby  drafted  into  the  military  service  of  the 
United  States,  to  serve  as  non-commissioned  officers  and  soldiers  in  the 
various  regiments  and  brigades  now  organized,  and  in  process  of  being 
organized,  by  Brig.  Gen.  Bufus  Saxton,  specially  authorized  to  raise  such 
troops  by  orders  of  the  War  Department. 

Until  other  arrangements  can  be  made,  the  families  of  all  negroes 
thus  drafted  will  be  provided  for  by  orders  which  General  Saxton  has 
authority  to  issue;  but  it  is  hoped  and  confidently  believed  that,  in 
the  present  scarcity  of  labor  in  the  department,  few  such  families  will 
be  thrown  upon  the  Government  for  support. 

In  the  organization  of  this  garrison  force,  the  major-general  com- 
manding would  appeal  earnestly  to  the  patriotism  and  common  sense  of 
the  officers  and  men  of  this  command,  while  asking  that  every  facility 
be  afforded  to  the  raising  of  these  subordinate  troops,  who  will  be  of 
service  to  the  country,  not  merely  by  such  soldierly  proficiency  as  they 
may  themselves  attain  under  the  tutelage  of  white  officers  in  the  vari  I 
ous  details  of  garrison  duty,  but  who  will  also,  man  for  man  and  regi-  |j 


Chap.  XXVI.  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


1021 


ment  for  regiment,  have  the  practical  effect  of  doubling  the  white 
forces  at  the  command  of  Government  for  the  more  active  operations 
in  the  field,  by  releasing  an  equal  number  of  white  men  and  regiments 
from  the  weary  and  often  pestilential,  though  indispensable,  duty  of 
manning  the  works  along  the  Southern  sea-coast. 

Suddenly  released  from  the  cruel  restraints  of  chattel  slavery,  and 
still  pursued  into  freedom  by  the  curse  of  that  ignorance  which  slavery 
fostered  as  its  surest  weapon  and  most  effective  shield,  the  major- 
general  commanding  believes  that  the  discipline  of  military  life  will  be 
the  very  safest  and  quickest  school  in  which  these  enfranchised  bonds- 
men can  be  elevated  to  the  level  of  our  higher  intelligence  and  cultiva- 
tion, and  that  their  enrollment  in  regular  military  organizations,  and 
the  giving  them  in  this  manner  a legitimate  vent  to  their  natural  desire 
to  prove  themselves  worthy  of  freedom,  cannot  fail  to  have  the  further 
good  effect  of  rendering  less  likely  mere  servile  insurrection,  unre- 
strained by  the  comities  and  usages  of  civilized  warfare. 

To  all  officers  in  the  department  who  have  thoroughly  at  heart  the 
desire  of  suppressing  as  rapidly  as  possible  the  cruel  evils  of  civil  war, 
the  organization  of  this  garrison  J&rce  offers  an  opportunity  not  to  be 
lost  for  securing  the  promotion  to  commissions  of  all  such  non-commis- 
sioned officers  and  privates  as  they  consider  deserving.  All  recommen- 
dations for  such  promotions  will  be  carefully  considered  at  these  head- 
quarters: and  in  making  such  recommendations,  regimental  and  com- 
pany officers  will  take  into  serious  account  the  moral  character  of  the  per- 
son recommended,  assuring  themselves  that  he  is  one  who  can  bear  his 
sudden  promotion  without  giddiness,  and  that  his  conduct  will  be  such 
as  to  furnish  a steady,  earnest,  and  reliable  example  to  be  placed  before 
men  whose  characters,  in  the  novelty  of  freedom,  have  yet  to  be  formed. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter:  ______ 

^ CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  Tenth  Army  Corps , and  Dept,  of  the  South. 


Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  0.,  May  24,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : The  continued  occupation  and  activity  of  the  enemy  on 
Folly  Island  may  reasonably  lead  us  to  expect  an  attack  from  that  direc- 
tion sooner  or  later,  unless  we  are  thoroughly  prepared  to  receive  it. 
W hat  their  force  is  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining,  and  from  the  great 
reduction  in  our  numbers  it  is  impossible  to  employ  scouting  parties 
in  such  strength  as  to  furnish  an  approximation.  Steamers  are  seen  to 
communicate  with  them  from  time  to  time  ; but  whether  they  bring  or 
carry  away  troops,  or  whether  they  are  merely  supply  vessels,  are  matters 

of  doubt.  « , , , 

From  personal  observation,  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  the  prepa- 
rations which  are  going  on  under  the  engineer  department,  lor  commu- 
nication with,  and  the  defense  of,  Morris  Island,  are  dilatory,  and  will 
not  be  finished,  according  to  present  appearances,  for  a long  period.  The 
bridge  over  the  first  creek  south  of  Fort  Johnson  is  commenced ; the 
\ ferry  arrangements  over  Light-House  Creek  and  the  causeways  over 
i the  Soft  Marsh  are  only  started.  The  progress  on  the  battery  at  Vin- 
cent’s Creek,  which  was  ordered  some  six  weeks  since,  consisted  a few 


[Chap.  XXVI. 


1022  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA.,  AND  MID.  AND  EAST  FLA. 

days  ago  in  the  hulk  being  in  position,  and  the  collection  of  a few 
mounds  of  mud,  sand,  and  shells,  about  one-fourth  enough  to  fill  the  i 
hulk,  and  which  would  hardly  be  efficient  material  for  an  epaulement. 

The  northern  route  of  connection  will,  in  my  opinion,  be  of  little  use,  I 
and  especially  inconvenient  when  finished,  as  at  present  commenced.  I 
On  the  southern  route,  from  Millichamps7  house,  on  James  Island,  a : 
bridge  has  been  commenced,  and  the  uprights  of  a foot-way  placed  along  ; 
the  northern  shore  of  Light- House  Creek,  partially  floored  over.  Ma-  | 
terial  has  been  collected  at  different  points,  but  as  t his  route  is,  I under-  I 
stand,  to  go  to  Black  Island,  and  thence  to  Morris  Island,  there  will  be  I 
twice  as  much  to  do  as  has  been  accomplished  in  the  past  six  weeks,  in 
length,  even  if  the  parts  in  progress  were  finished,  which  they  are  not  1 
and  probably  will  not  be  for  three  weeks  to  come.  When  done,  the  route  ] 
will  be  a temporary  affair,  and  only  useful  in  extreme  cases. 

The  work  on  Fort  Sumter,  as  usual,  is  going  on  slowly.  No  work  is 
progres.(  i:g  at  Battery  Bee,  nor  on  Morris  Island,  except  a little  being 
done  by  tl  e troops. 

At  the  southern  extremity  of  Morris  Island  there  are  now  seven  guns,  s 
of  which  four  command  the  crossing  at  Light-House  Inlet.  Two  of 
these  are  of  long  range.  It  is  my  purpose  to  increase  this  armament 
by  one  30  pounder  Parrott. 

The  ga  is  are  in  detached  batteries  and  in  strong  position,  but  they 
are  unprovided  with  magazines.  The  communications  are  not  ar-  I 
ranged,  and  from  waiting  for  engineers  to  build  and  finish  up  maga-  | 
zines,  the  sickness  of  the  artillery  officer  in  command,  and  the  ineffi- 
cient supply  of  ordnance  material,  they  are  all  badly  prepared  for  | 
service. 

With  these  facts  before  me,  and  believing,  from  the  state  in  which 
work  on  which  the  engineer  department  is  employed  at  present,  that  i 
it  will  be  in  vain  to  expect  the  work  to  be  done  by  engineers,  I intend  | 
to  send  a strong  and  efficient  company  to  that  point,  under  a compe-  fi 
tent  officer,  to  cause  him  to  be  supplied  with  material,  and  to  have  the 
magazines  put  up,  fitted  and  supplied,  and  the  batteries  in  readiness  ^ 
for  service  as  quickly  as  possible  (employing  the  labor  of  the  soldiers),  1 
and,  so  soon  as  they  are  in  proper  condition,  to  increase  the  armament 
at  that  point  by  a 10-inch  mortar,  and  open  fire  upon  the  enemy,  to  pre-  j 
vent  the  advance  of  his  works  on  Little  Folly  Island,  and  the  possi-  j 
bility  of  his  attempting  a passage. 

After  several  ineffectual  efforts  to  have  some  arrangements  made  by  j 
winch  heavy  guns  can  be  rifled  and  banded  at  the  arsenal  (there  being  j 
nobody  at  that  establishment  capable  of  the  work),  I have  arranged 
with  Mr.  Cameron  to  put  up  a furnace  himself,  that  the  business  can  be  1 
proceeded  with,  and  have  ordered  the  iron  from  Atlanta. 

I propose,  if  our  heavy  guns  can  be  rifled  and  banded  properly,  and  1 
the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  be  strengthened,  so  that  it  can  be  held 
against  a strong  attack,  to  place  several  at  different  points  on  the  shore  \ 
to  command  the  whole  anchorage  from  inside  the  bar  to  Fort  Sumter, 
to  prevent  the  possibility  of  assistance  to  disabled  iron-clads  by  wooden 
vessels  inside.  This  occurred  after  the  action  of  the  7th  of  April  for 
five  days,  and  we  were  powerless  to  prevent  it  for  want  of  a few  guns 
of  respectable  caliber  and  range  in  such  positions. 

I have  to  request  that  the  chief  of  artillery  and  ordnance  be  ordered 
to  turn  over  twTo  of  the  carronades  now  in  Battery  Gadberry  to  the  j 
ordnance  officer  of  the  First  Military  District.  They  are  wanted  to  com- 
plete the  flank  defenses  of  Battery  Wagner.  There  are  two  42-pounder 
carronades  at  Secessionville,  on  navy  carriages,  which  can  replace  them, 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


1023 


but  it  will  take  long,  I fear,  to  supply  them  with  siege  carriages,  and, 
with  the  present  means,  they  are  inconvenient  and  almost  unservice- 
able in  the  position  required.  , , , 

I have  also  to  request  that  the  engineers  may  be  ordered  to  place 
suitable  Timber,  if  they  have  any,  for  the  magazines  on  Morris  Island 
at  my  disposal.  It  can  be  replaced  in  a short  time. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  RIPLEY 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Charleston,  May  27,  1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : I have  made  all  necessary  arrangements  lor  bending  and 
fitting  the  plates  for  torpedo  ram.  The  amount  furnished  by  the  State 
($50,000)  was  exhausted  some  time  since.  The  amount  due  for  work 
performed,  together  with  what  will  be  required  for  completing  the  boat, 
amounting  in  all  to,  say,  $40,000,  is  now  absolutely  required. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 


servant, 


FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 


[Indorsements.! 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Char'eston , S.  (7.,  June  13,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  War  Department.  i 

1 beg  to  suggest  that  as  this  marine  torpedo  ram  is  in  charge  ot  our 
Engineer  Department,  and  intended  for  the  defense  of  this  harbor,  in 
connection  with  its  fortifications,  it  is  just  and  proper  the  Engineer 
Department  should  furnish  the  necessary  means  for  its  completion.  I 
have,  in  consequence,  given  orders  to  that  effect. 

General , Commanding. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector-General’s  Office, 

June  18,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Colonel  Gilmer,  chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War. 

J H.  L.  CLAY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department, 


June  22,  1863. 


I do  not  see  how  the  engineer  fund  can  be  appropriately  charged  with 
rliis  demand.  No  specific  appropriation  was  made  by  Congress,  although 
this  subject  was  expressly  called  to  the  attention  of  the  Committee  ot 
Ways  and  Means.  The  many  contingent  charges  that  through  the 
casualties  of  war  have  been  necessarily  thrown  on  the  engineer  fund 
make  it  necessary  that  the  appropriation  for  it  should  be  husbanded 

and  strictly  applied.  j.  a.  8.  [SEDDON], 

Stp.o.r  atari!. 


1024  COASTS  OF  S.  C.,  GA,  AND  MID.  AND  EA.ST  FLA.  [Chap.  XXVI. 

Engineer  Bureau,  June  23, 1863. 
Respectfully  returned  to  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  whose 
attention  is  invited  to  the  foregoing  indorsement  of  the  honorable  See- 
re  tary  of  War. 

J.  E.  GILMER, 

Colonel  of  Engineers  and  Chief  of  Bureau . 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

June  24,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  commanding. 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War. 

H.  L.  CLAY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,June  6,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff : 

General  : I have  received  a paper  from  Captain  Cheves,  covered  by 
one  from  Lieutenant  Colonel  Harris,  in  reference  to  preparation  of  bat- 
teries on  Morris  Island.*  Referring  to  my  letter  of  May  24,  it  will  be 
seen  that  my  intention  was  then  announced  of  ordering  such  work,  and 
the  reasons  were  indicated. 

About  the  10th  of  March  last,  it  was  determined  by  the  commanding 
general  to  have  the  southern  end  of  Morris  Island  fortified  and  armed. 
This  was  before  the  occupation  of  Folly  Island  by  the  enemy.  Details 
were  furnished  from  Colonel  Graham’s  regiment ; the  armament  was 
sent  over  and  some  progress  was  made,  but  it  was  slow  in  the  extreme. 
One  reason,  I am  satisfied,  was  the  carelessness  and  inattention  of  the 
engineer  officers.  Who  was  first  in  charge  of  the  construction  of  the 
detached  batteries  I do  not  know,  but  I am  aware  that  several  times 
the  working  parties  were  at  their  posts,  and  no  engineer  officer  was 
present  to  direct  their  operations.  Colonel  Graham  reported  to  me  sev- 
eral times  that  the  engineer  officer  often  left  the  work  for  days  together. 
The  batteries  were,  after  some  weeks,  placed  under  Captain  Cheves, 
and  some  progress  was  made.  Meantime,  before  the  batteries  were  fin- 
ished, the  attack  of  the  7th  of  April  took  place,  and  the  enemy  occupied 
Folly  Island.  Soon  after  the  repulse  of  the  main  attack,  they  commenced 
fortifying  Folly  Island,  opposite  Schooner  Creek,  another  creek  empty- 
ing into  Folly  River  north  of  it,  and  across  the  neck  separating  the 
main  island  and  Little  Folly.  These  indications  of  a permanent  occu- 
pation, and  preparations  for  an  attack,  led  me  to  watch  the  progress  of 
our  own  works.  Repeated  visits  showed  but  little  progress,  and,  finally, 
finding  that  more  than  two  months  had  elapsed  while  the  works  had 
been  in  charge  of  the  engineers  and  the  batteries  not  prepared  for  serv- 
ice, while  the  enemy’s  works  were  steadily  progressing,  I determined  to 
have  the  works  which  the  engineers  would  not  or  could  not  do  accom- 
plished by  some  one  who  would  and  could.  After  sending  Captain  [John 
C.]  Mitchel  over  to  see  the  state  of  things,  and  to  prepare  for  doing  the 
work,  Colonel  Harris  and  Captain  Cheves  called  on  me  with  sugges- 
tions in  regard  to  the  matter.  Feeling  satisfied  that,  if  left  to  no  other 


See  pp.  956,  958,  970-972. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


1025 


superintendence  than  that  which  had  been' previously  exercised,  it  would 
progress  in  very  much  the  same  style,  I directed  Captain  Mitchel  to 
proceed.  He  proceeded  to  Morris  Island,  and,  although  the  weather  has 
interfered  to  a considerable  extent,  the  material  has  been  sent  over; 
the  main  magazine  is  far  advanced ; a mortar  battery  is  in  process  of 
construction,  and  a battery  for  a Parrott  gun  has  been  commenced.  I 
have  been  urging  the  business  forward,  and  I hope  to  have  the  work  in 
readiness  to  open  fire  by  Wednesday  next,  so  as  to  cover  Little  Folly, 
and  interfere  with  the  advancing  of  works  in  that  direction  by  the 
enemy,  if  indeed  they  have  not  already  got  them  in  readiness,  while  we 
were,  irom  some  cause  or  other,  to  be  explained  by  the  engineer  depart- 
ment, doing  next  to  nothing.  Having  noticed  frequently  that  when  de- 
tails have  been  furnished  for  engineers7  work  they  were  but  partially 
employed,  and  lying  idle  for  some  portion  of  their  time,  I have  directed 
commanding  officers  to  ascertain  and  report,  from  time  to  time,  what 
they  were  doing.  Colonel  Graham  furnished  a detail  some  time  ago  for 
the  bridge  to  Black  Island,  and  has  informed  me  that  several  days  they 
have,  from  some  cause  or  another,  done  little  or  nothing.  Colonel 
Simonton’s  command  furnished  another  detail  a few  days  since  for  the 
same  work.  I inclose  a copy  of  his  report  on  this  subject* 

I have  been  given  to  understand  that  one  difficulty  of  which  the  en- 
gineer department  complains,  is  the  want  of  transportation.  This  is 
undoubtedly  well  grounded,  but  I am  informed  by  the  quartermaster 
that  they  generally  have  from  four  to  six  of  the  nine  or  ten  boats  in  the 
harbor.  Whether  it  is  from  want  of  energy,  attention,  or  proper  com- 
bination of  their  resources,  they  get  on  slowly;  and  sometimes,  as  in  the 
last  case  on  Morris  Island,  material  which  has  been  lying  for  weeks  is 
transported  and  got  in  position  by  other  parties,  with  such  means  as 
remain  after  the  engineer  department  has  its  transportation. 

From  months  of  observation,  from  repeated  reports  of  commanding 
officers,  some  of  which  have  been  transmitted  to  the  headquarters  of 
the  department,  I am  satisfied  that  much  of  the  labor,  both  of  negroes 
and  soldiers,  which  has  been  from  time  to  time  furnished  the  engineer 
department,  has  not  been  fully  made  use  of;  and  from  the  manner  in 
which  it  has  been  managed,  I doubt  not,  much  of  the  difficulty  in  ob- 
taining labor  has  arisen. 

The  engineers  are  not  under  my  control,  even  in  my  own  command; 
but  when  I see  work,  which  is  absolutely  necessary,  lagging  and  re- 
maining unfinished  for  want  of  attention  or  other  cause,  I respectfully 
suggest  that  it  is  my  duty  to  have  it  forwarded  by  such  measures  as 
are  in  my  power.  In  this  case  I trust  it  will  soon  be  in  a proper  state. 
Meantime  the  enemy  have  got  their  guns  in  position  on  the  neck  of 
Folly  Island,  and  have  several  times  opened  fire.  We  have  been  be- 
hindhand, and  as  the  work  was  not  being  done  by  those  who  had  it 
in  charge,  I have  caused  it  to  progress  by  other  means. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 


65  R R— VOL  XIV 


See  p.  964. 


INDEX 


Brigades,  Divisions , Corps,  Armies,  and  improvised  organizations  are  “ Mentioned  ” under  name  of 
commanding  officer ; State  and  other  organizations  under  their  official  designation. 


Page. 

Abandoned  Lands  and  Captured  Property. 

Action  touching.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 378 

Hunter,  David , 394 

Saxton,  Rufus 374 

War  Department,  U.  S 377 

Saxton,  Rufus,  assigned  in  charge  of  all,  in  Department  of  the  South 1 

( See  also  Stanton  to  Saxton , p.  377.) 

Abbott,  Joseph  C. 

Mentioned 224, 434, 43f> 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  March  9,  1863 * 224 

Abbott,  Trevett.  Mentioned 207 

Abell,  Henry  F.  Mentioned 142,850,851,931 

Abney,  Joseph.  Mentioned 289,487,823,930 

Adams,  Charles  F.,  jr.  Mentioned 60 

Adams,  Horatio  N.  Mentioned 20 

Adams,  John,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 195-197 

Adams,  La  Rue  P.  Mentioned 152 

Adams,  Warren.  Mentioned _ 274 

Adger,  James,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 268 

Adger,  J.  E. 

Mentioned 103 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16, 1862.. 104 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 408 

Dix,  John  A 365 

Hunter,  David 365 

War  Department,  U.  S 403 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  98,  369;  No.  123,  380. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Alabama,  Governor  of 735 

Beauregard,  G.  T 200, 205, 206, 614,616, 619, 630, 633, 

636,639,642,  643,  652,  662,  688,  689,  691-693,697,704,709,710,715,726, 
728,748,  755,  757,  758,760,  765,768,771,  774,777,  778,783,797,801,811, 

846, 877, 884, 885, 887,  891, 900,  901,  906,  908, 946, 954, 956, 969, 975, 1024 

Campbell,  James  B , 1 570 

Cobb,  Howell 677, 696 

Davis,  Jefferson 569,784 


(1027) 


1028 


INDEX. 


Pag* 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 1023,1024 

Finegan,  Joseph 485, 488, 494, 511, 522, 553, 566, 614, 633 

Florida,  Governor  of - 687-689 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 969 

Maury,  Dabney  H 969 

Mercer,  H.  W 698,750 

Pemberton,  John  C 478.483, 

486, 491, 498,  522, 579,  581-585, 587, 589, 593, 600, 601, 603, 604, 607, 608 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 578 

War  Department,  C.  S 122, 310, 478, 499 

Orders,  General,  series  1862  : No.  33,  489  ; No.  60,  599. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  202,  601 ; No.  2 18,  603;  No.  234,630; 

No.  23  7,  635 ; No.  258,  665  ; No.  264,  677. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  43,  787 ; No.  50,  797 ; No.  52,809. 

Aiken,  H.  K.  Mentioned 603, 823,  930 

Aiken,  John.  Mentioned 517 

Akin,  R.  F.  Mentioned 487,744 

Alabama,  Commissioners  of.  Correspondence  with 

Boggs,  W.  R 545 

Columbus,  Ga.,  Mayor  of 544 

Alabama,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 735 

Davis,  Jefferson - - 717 

Forney,  J ohn  H 680 

War  Department,  C.  S 716 

Aldert,  Mr.  Mentioned - 209 

Aldrich,  N.  Mentioned 266 

Alexander,  George  W.  Mentioned 134,154,161,388 

Alexander,  James.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 919 

Allemong,  Alexander  A.  Mentioned - 89,97 

Allen,  Mr.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Georgia,  Citizens  of.) 

Allen,  David  A.  Mentioned 434,  435, 451,  453,  461, 462,  468 

Allston,  P.  Bacot.  Mentioned ^ 574 

Allston,  R.*F.  W.  Mentioned 589 

Alstead,  Abram.  Mentioned •» * 163 

Alston,  Charles,  jr.  Mentioned ....  201,  529,  701,  702,  714,  755,  783,  823,  828, 829,  929 

Alston,  J.  J.  Mentioned 265 

Amaker,  A.  P.  Mentioned 512 

Ammen,  Daniel.  Mentioned 218 

Anderson,  Major.  Mentioned 556 

Anderson,  Edward  C. 

Mentioned 576, 592,  608,  676, 824,  864,  865,  869, 930 

Statement  of.  Defenses  of  Savannah,  Ga - - 865 

Anderson,  Edward  C.,  jr.  Mentioned 592,  824,  939 

Anderson,  George  W.,  jr. 

Mentioned 213-215,  219,  220,  824 

Reports  of 

McAllister,  Fort,  Ga.  Naval  attacks  on. 

February  1,  1863 - 215 

February  28,  1863 217 

Nashville,  C.  S.  S.  Destruction  of,  February  28,  1863 217 

Anderson,  John  W.  Mentioned 576,  592 


INDEX. 


1029 


Page. 

Anderson,  Robert  H. 

Mentioned 213,  215,  216,  824,  930 

Report  of  naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Ga.,  February  1,  1863  213 

Andrew,  Henry,  XL  S.  S.  Mentioned 28 

Andrew,  John  A.  Mentioned 452,997 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Massachusetts , Governor  of.) 

Andrews,  F.  W.  Mentioned 90 

Apalachicola  River,  Fla.  Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 735 

Beauregard,  G.  T 735,  736 

Finegan,  Joseph 553,686,687 

Georgia,  Commissioners  of 731 

Arago,  Steamer.  Mentioned 365,393,465 

Archer,  Hugh.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Florida , Adjutant  and  Inspector 
General  of.) 

Arkansas,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 205 

Arms,  Ammunition,  etc.  Supplies  of.  (See  Munitions  of  War.) 

Armstrong,  James.  Mentioned 987 

Army  Corps,  10th. 

Constituted 380 

Mitchel,  O.  M.,  assigned  to  command 380 

(For  orders,  organization,  strength,  etc.,  see  South , Department  of  the.) 

Army  Corps,  18th. 

Naglee,  Henry  M.,  assigned  temporarily  to  command  detachment  of 395 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : February  7,  395. 

Stevenson,  Thomas  G.,  assigned  to  command  a brigade  in 413 

Army  Headquarters. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 408 

Benham,  H.W 990 

Brannan,  J.  M 378 

Foster,  John  G 400-403,408 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 459, 465 

Hunter,  David 374, 381, 390, 393, 394, 396, 397, 400, 401, 

404,  409-412,  417,  424,  425,  427,  428,  430-432,  436,  440, 441, 443, 453, 467 

Mitchel,  Ormsby  M 383 

War  Department,  U.  S 374,452,991 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  202,  376 ; No.  216,  380 ; No.  352,  389. 
Orders,  Special,  series  1863 : No.  249,  464. 

Arnold,  Lewis  G. 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter - 338 

Mentioned 344, 362, 363, 367, 370 

Arthur,  B.  F.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina , Executive  Council 
of.) 

Atlanta,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 427, 854 

Atlantic,  Steamer.  Mentioned 341,345 

Atwell,  Seager  S.  Mentioned 68, 69, 169 

Augusta,  Ga. 

Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 533 

Rains,  George  W 531, 562 

War  Department,  C.  S 531,561 

Martial  law  in 478, 479, 492, 533 

Augusta,  Ga.,  City  Council  of.  Resolution  of 479 


1030 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Augusta,  Ga.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 478 

Auyan,  Lionel.  Mentioned 154 

Axson,  J.  W.  Mentioned 90 

Baclie,  A.  D.  Mentioned . 983 

Bacon,  Francis.  Mentioned 66,69 

Bacon,  George.  Mentioned 199 

Bacon,  George  W. 

Mentioned 131, 132, 152, 161, 389 

Report  of  capture  of  steamer  Governor  Milton,  October  7,  1862  136 

Bacon,  Theodore.  Mentioned 154,168 

Badger,  Frederick  M.  Mentioned 7, 9 

Baggott,  James  M.  Mentioned 87,94 

Bailey,  D.  J.  Mentioned 576, 592 

Bailey,  E.  W.  Mentioned 153 

Bailey,  Theodorus.  Mentioned 395 

Baker,  Captain.  Mentioned 214,217 

Baker,  James  M.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 825 

Baker,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 260,269,273 

Baltzell,  Thomas.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 644 

Bankhead,  John  P.  Mentioned 328 

Bank  of  Louisiana.  Seizure  of  coin  of.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 639 

War  Department,  C.  S 640 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P. 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 393 

Mentioned 710, 714-716, 719, 720, 759 

Banks,  W.  H.  Mentioned J 576, 592 

Barker,  Engineer.  Mentioned 197 

Barker,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 169 

Barker,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 266,803,804 

Barnard,  John  G.  Mentioned 943 

Barnwell,  Ed.  H.  Mentioned 26,32,283,284 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  W.S.  Walker.) 

Barnwell,  R.  H.  Mentioned.. 298 

Barnwell,  Robert  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 891,896-900,919 

Pace,  George  R 897 

Mentioned - - 510,891,897,899,919 

Barnwell,  S.  E.  Mentioned 112,298 

Barrow,  James.  Mentioned 684 

Bartholomew,  Erasmus  S.  Mentioned 51,84 

Barton,  Tug.  Mentioned 694,719,1019 

Barton,  William  B. 

Correspondence  with 

Brannan,  J.  M 381 

Goodell,  A.  W 370,372 

Hunter,  David 370, 371, 378 

Mentioned 124, 146, 147, 149, 150, 152, 

155,  156,  178,  363,368,371,  388,  390,  424,434,  435,451,453,461,462,468 

Reports  of 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Octo- 
ber 22-23,  1862 175 

Kirk's  Bluff',  S.  C.  Affair  at,  October  18, 1862 143 


INDEX. 


1031 

Page. 


Ga.  Reconnaissances  on,  September  30- 


125 

122 

88,95 

487 

84 


Barton,  William  B.— Continued. 

Reports  of 

May  and  Savannah  Rivers 

October  3, 1862 

Skull  Creek,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  September  24, 1862 

Barton,  W.  S.  Mentioned  

Basinger,  W.  S.  Mentioned 

Batchelder,  J.  B.  Mentioned 

Bates,  Austin  D.  Mentioned 

Battery  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  near,  May  21, 1862.  Report  of  C.  H.  Stevens 18 

Baza,  Antonio.  Mentioned 860 ’ 881 

Mentioned - - 189, 191-193, 320-323, 325, 326, 328, 331, 386 

Reports  of 

Doboy  River,  Ga.  Expedition  to,  November  13-18, 1862  193 

East  Florida  and  Georgia.  Expedition  along  coast  of,  Nov.  3-10, 1862.  191 

Beaty,  James  G.  Mentioned - 90 

Beauregard,  A.  N.  Toutant.  Mentioned  64U,7^b 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard .) 

Beauregard,  G.  T. 

Assignments  to  command D ’ 

Conference  with  Ingraham.  Defense  of  Charleston,  S.  C 
Congratulatory  orders. 

McAllister,  Fort,  Ga.  Naval  attacks  on. 

February  1, 1863  

March  3, 1863  

Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla.  Affair  in,  March  20, 1863 . . 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 200, 205, 206, 614, 616, 

619,  630, 633, 636, 639, 642, 643, 652, 662, 688, 689, 691-693, 697, 704, 709, 710, 
715,  726,728, 748, 755, 757, 758, 760, 765, 768, 771, 774, 777, 778, 783, 797, 801, 
811,  846, 877, 884,885, 887, 891, 900, 901, 906, 908, 946, 954, 956, 969, 975, 1024 

Alexander,  James * 919 

Baker,  James  828 

Baltzell,  Thomas 644 

Barnwell,  Robert  891,896-900,919 

Bryan,  Henry 756>®^ 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  Mayor  of 642 

Cheves,  John  616,642,700,705,707,723 

Childs,  F.  690 

Chisolm,  A.  849 

Clingman,  T.  *9^8 

Cobb,  Howell 230, 684, 697, 702, 703, 707, 710, 728, 735, 7S7, 751 

Colcock,  C.  J 650’660 

Cunningham,  A.  T 999 

De  Lisle,  Ch.  948 

Echols,  William  H 614, 615, 617, 618, 629, 707, 722, 815 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 889 ’ 988 

Evans,  JohnW 


Minutes  of 621 


212 

218 

230 


788 

141, 


Finegan,  Joseph 

239, 638, 684, 686, 687, 702, 727, 773, 821, 837, 839, 846, 850, 861, 903, 945 

Florida,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 966 


1032 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Beauregard,  G.  T.— Continued. 

Correspondence  with  • 

Forney,  John  H 633,679 

Forsyth,  John 917 

French,  S.  G ' 765 

Georgia,  Citizens  of 669 

Georgia,  Governor  of 693,695,781,784 

Gist,  S.  R •_ 639, 741, 742, 815, 881 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  Jos6 718,745,811,828,851,946 

Guerin,  H.  C 779, 828, 887, 961 

H 770 

Hagood,  Johnson . . 649, 692, 711, 713, 745, 772, 795, 847, 849, 852, 878, 888, 927, 932 

Harris,  D.  B 695, 700, 701, 707, 722, 769, 834, 841, 846, 902, 904, 956, 970 

Harrison,  George  P.,  jr 777 

Heyliger,  L 926 

Hill,  D.  H 789, 798, 903, 906, 939 

Huger,  Benjamin 676 

Hunter,  David 464,  465 

Ingraham,  Duncan  N.., 205, 642, 664, 799, 821, 835 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 944 

Jordan,  Thomas 650, 651, 680, 780, 781, 785-787, 928, 955, 959, 968 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 963 

Lawton,  W.  J . 645 

Lay,  John  F _/ 307 

Leo,  Francis  D 648, 670, 

671,  680,  686,  694,  719, 767,  791, 820,  837, 843, 885,  965,  1017-1019, 1023 

Lee,  Hutson 767, 849, 852 

Longs  treet , J ames 810 

Magrath,  W.  J 799 

Manigault,  Joseph 668 

Maxwell,  Augustus  E 825 

Mercer,  H.  W 218, 315, 629, 636, 639, 

657,  670,  692,693,  711,713,  715,743,755-757,761,765-767,771,790,799- 
802, 812, 815,  821,  836,  842,  848, 852,  863,  881,  885,  890,  897, 905, 942,  947 

Miles,  W.  Porcher 618,676,772,825,919,923 

Miller, John  788 

Moncada,  Francisco  Munez  de 204,206 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 661, 736, 818 

Orr,  James  L 885,891,896-900,909,919 

Owens,  W.  J 788 

Page,  Richard  L 881 

Pemberton,  John  C 608, 609, 926 

Pickens,  Francis  W 901,947 

Pope,  J.  J 674,685 

Rains,  George  W 800 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 642-644, 649, 652, 655, 690, 692, 700, 744, 745, 749, 

756,758,759,769,  773,  780,788,790,813,  818,835,841,  847,853,  877,882, 
888,  890-894, 905, 918, 922, 938, 947, 960, 962, 963, 967, 969,  970, 1021, 1024 

Roman,  Alfred 802,817 

St.  Andre,  Baron  de 204 

Sass,  J.  K 636 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 1 588, 713, 71£,  720, 723 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of. 594 


INDEX. 


1033 


Page. 

Beauregard,  G.  T.— Continued. 

Correspondence  with  r 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of 573 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 613»  617> 631’ 

652, 665, 667,  672, 720,  743, 750,  751,  760, 768,  789,  815,  819,  839,  885, 911 

Thomas,  J.  P — 

Trapier,  James  H 681, 692, 718, 755, 762, 879, 880, 966 

Treasury  Department,  C.  S - 

Tucker  ,^John  **’**'%'% 

Villerd,  Charles  J j~5 

Walker,  W.  S 289, 293, 625,  632, 637, 651, 652, 694,  760,  771, 772, 778- 

780, 787,  791,  801,  821,  848,  852, 878,  889,  893,  894,  903,  925,  932,  945, 962 

War  Department,  C.  S 215, 310, 616, 617, 629, 633, 640, 642, 673, 

683, 711, 720, 721, 723,  759,  765, 786,  787,  797,  799,  800,  844, 846, 849, 850, 
878,  885,891,897-900,  904,  909,917,  919,  923-926,931-933,938,939,1023 

Webb,  W.  A 895 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 692,711,713-715,  718-721,723,736,739,742, 

748,749,762,764,  767,  768,  771,774,  787,800,  878,894,897,  904,906,  939 

Wilson,  C.  77^ 

Yancey,  William  

Yates,  Joseph  A 797 ’ 923 

Mentioned... -- 122,209,464,465, 

475,485,  487,516,534,560,561,567,568,  601,604,  605,  615,  621,  624,  629, 
630, 632,  635, 648,  652,  660,  665,  671,  672, 677,  682-684, 688,  690,  691, 711, 
730,740,746,750,757-759,764,  767,776,  778,783,784,  787,  798,  809,  814, 
817, 822, 836, 840, 866, 868,  870, 871,  876,  877,  886,  889,  899, 904,  909,  917, 
929,938,941,944,953,  956,964,972,976,977,1015,  1016,  1019,  1020,  1024 

Notes  of,  on  river  defenses 943 

Proclamations. 

Charleston,  S.  C.  Blockade  of,  declared  to  he  raised 205 

South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  Citizens  of * 781 

Reports  of 

Charleston,  S.  C. 

'Attack  on  blockading  squadron  off,  January  31, 1863 204 

Inspection  of  defenses  of 619  > 633 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  April  7, 1863 240 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  October 

22-23, 1862  179 


Capture  of,  January  30, 1863  199, 200 

Naval  attacks  on. 

* 198 

211 

218 

633, 645 


Isaac  Smith,  U.  S.  S. 

McAllister,  Fort,  Ga. 

January  27, 1863 
February  1, 1863 
March  3, 1863  . . . 

Savannah,  Ga.  Inspection  of  defensive  works 


South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  Department  of.  Inspection  of  defensive 

works  in,  September  16-24, 1862 610 

Staff.  Announcements  of 609,668,726,727 

Beaver,  James  A. 

Mentioned - ’ 

Report  of  affair  at  White  House,  near  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  June  13,  1862 39 

Beckham,  William  M.  Mentioned 89, 99, 102 

Bedel,  John.  Mentioned 79» 3*2 

Bee,  John  S.  Mentioned 2b5> 803 


1034 


INDEX. 


Page, 

Beers,  A.  B Mentioned. 154 

Beggs,  Charles.  Mentioned 850,851 

Belcher,  Horatio.  Mentioned 62,65-67,1006 

Bell,  Scout.  Mentioned 301 

Bell,  B.  B.  Mentioned 184 

Bell,  Louis. 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  Henry  W 333 

Hunter,  David 356 

Mentioned 166, 171, 338, 363, 368, 388, 390, 461 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23, 1862 159 

Bellinger,  John  A.  Mentioned 88,95,202 

Benbow,  H.  L.  Mentioned 529,538,575,929 

Ben  De  Ford,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47, 109, 129, 130 

134, 136, 145,  148,  150,  160,  175,  193-197,  238,  278,  279,  341,  345,  379, 465 
Benham,  Henry  W. 

Arrest  of . . . 43.45, 979-1013 

Character  and  conduct  of.  Testimonials  of 

Bache,  A.  D 933 

Morris,  Thomas  A 983 

Scott,  Winfield 982 

Totten,  Joseph  G- 933 

Wool,  John  E 982 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 999 

Bell,  Louis 333 

Drayton,  Percival 349,350,981,1001 

Du  Pont,  Samuel  F 334 

Ely,  A.  B 994 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 335 

Hawley,  Joseph  R 1004 

Hunter,  David 44, 46, 980, 983 

Lincoln,  A 991, 993, 995 

New  York  Times,  Editor  of 988 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 344 

Stevens,  Isaac  I 352, 986 

Terry,  Alfred  H 342, 343, 346 

War  Department,  U.  S 998 

Wright,  Horatio  G 335, 339, 349, 350, 352, 356 

Mentioned <. 4, 35, 42-44, 47-50, 53-55, 58, 61, 63, 338, 340, 341, 349, 

355,  358,  979-983,986,988,  991,  993,  996,  997,  999-1002, 1004, 1010-1013 

Reports  of 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16, 1862  51, 988 

Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga.  Skirmish  on,  April  16, 1862. 5 

Statement  of.  Engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16, 1862 999 

Bennett,  Horace  C.  Mentioned 148, 154, 164 

Bennett,  W.  S.  Mentioned 848 

Benseman,  Winfield.  Mentioned 164 

Beresford  Lake,  Fla.  Expedition  to,  October  6-9, 1862.  (See  reports  of  Bran- 
nan,  p.  131 ; Bacon , p.  137.) 

Berosa,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 196 

Berry,  N.  S.  Mentioned 997 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  Hampshire,  Governor  of.) 


INDEX. 


1035 


Page. 

_ „ 267,268,896 

Bibb,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 9Q8 

Bienville,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 2()g  g36 

Bier,  George  H.  Mentioned ’23g 

Billings,  Liberty.  Mentioned 3g2 

Birch,  B.  Mentioned 487*576  592 

Bird,  Edward.  Mentioned  ffio’.  85l',  825 

Bird,  Pickens  B.  Mentioned 

Black,  John  L.  583 

Correspondence  with  Jonathan  J.  Lncas 487*530  576  591 

Mentioned . ’ ’ 

Black  River,  S.  C.  Engagement  on,  Angnst  13,  1862.  Report  of  W.  P.  ^ 

Emanuel ^ 

Blair,  John  P.  Mentioned 3(jl 

Blake,  Mr.  Mentioned 2fi5 

Blake,  F.  D.  Mentioned 90 

Blake,  Julius  A.  Mentioned  

Blanding,  Christopher.  39 

Report  of  affair  at  White  House, near  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  June  13,11m...  39 

Blanding,  Jabez  B.  Mentioned - ^ 

Blanding,  Ormsby . Mentioned 257, 259, 2bU,  2b5,  aua 

Blocker,  Haley  T.  680.931 

Mentioned 

Report  of  affair  at  Crooked  River,  Fla.,  May  20,  1862 

Bluffton,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  June  4,  1863. 

Communications  from  319 

Beauregard,  G.  T 31 Q 

War  Department,  C.  

Reports  of  309 

Johnson,  Thomas  31(> 

Lay,  John  

Blum,  R.  A.  89, 103 

Mentioned * * '***’'  . n.> 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 ^ 

Boardman,  Mary,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Boards  of  Officers. 

Charleston,  S.  C.  Defense*  of.  g;)9 

Appointed  to  examine  ipto  and  report  on g3g 

Proceedings  and  report  of,  on 

Savannah,  Ga.  Defenses  of.  __  gfU 

Appointed  to  examine  into  and  report  on **  *865-877 

Proceedings  and  report  of,  on ° ‘ 

Boggs,  W.  R. 

Correspondence  with  ^ 

Alabama,  Commissioners  of ^ 

Columbus,  Ga.,  Mayor  of * 

Dillard,  - ™ 

Hunter  J.  M G 1 ! ! '.I  I ! ‘ ^6.'  5sl ' M2.' M6, 547 

Pemberton,  John  _ ’ 498  500>  507,  M8 

Mentioned ^75 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina , Governor  of.) 


1036 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Bonneau,  F.  N.  Mentioned 19, 89, 95,  £20, 823, 929 

Boston,  Steamer.  Mentioned 129, 

131, 134, 136, 145, 148, 165, 169, 170, 172, 173, 345, 386, 387 

Bou telle,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 132,986 

Bowie,  R.  T.  Mentioned 10, 12 

Boyce,  R.  Mentioned 487, 529, 575 

Boykin,  Captain.  Mentioned 287 

Boyleston,  S.  Cordes.  Mentioned 243, 245, 246, 266, 804, 926 

(For  correspondence  as  Adjutant,  see  Alfred  Rhett.) 

Boynton,  H.  Mentioned 233 

Boynton,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 433 

Bozeman,  James  F.  Mentioned 493,542,544,545,686,730 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Columbus,  Ga.,  Mayor  of , and  Georgia , Com- 
missioners of. ) 


Brackett,  Levi  C.  Mentioned 62, 65, 67 

Braddock,  O.  F.  Mentioned 235,236 

Bragg,  Braxton.  Mentioned 457, 560, 561, 667, 675, 681, 683, 763, 955 

Brailsford,  William.  Mentioned 192,576,592 

Brannan,  John  M. 

Assumes  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South 380, 387 

Congratulatory  orders.  Expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Rail- 
road, S.  C.,  October  22-23, 1862 389 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 378 

Barton,  William  B 381 

Hunter,  David 344 

Mercer,  H.  W 382 

Mitchel,  Ormsby  M 380 

Mentioned.  107, 125, 134-136, 146-150,155, 175-177, 338, 339, 361-363, 367, 376, 386-390 
Reports  of 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  October 

22-23,1862 150,153 

Saint  J ohn’s  Bluff,  Fla.  Expedition  to,  September  30-October  13, 1862.  127, 128 

Staff.  Announcements  of 380 

Brayton,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 84,462  463 

Breed,  J.  B.  Mentioned 42 

Breed,  T.  M.  Mentioned 42 

Breeden,  P.  L. 

Mentioned • 293, 294, 300-306 

Report  of  Union  raid  on  Combahee  River,  S.  C.,  June  2,  1863 295 

Breneman,  Christian  K.  Mentioned 454^  402 

Brenholtz,  Thomas  S.  Mentioned 23,24 

Brent,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 502 

Brevard,  T.  W.  Mentioned 139-141, 227, 229, 234, 235, 841, 845, 850, 851, 931 

Briggs,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 281,282 

Britton,  T.  G.  Mentioned 287 

Brockenborough,  G.  L.,  Sloop.  Mentioned 724 

Brodie,  Paul.  Mentioned 449 

Brodie,  R.  jj.  Mentioned 720 

Brooke,  John  M.  Mentioned 048 

Brooks,  J.  H.  Mentioned 482 

Broome,  Thomas.  Mentioned 851 

Brown,  George.  Mentioned 89, 90, 97 

Brown,  Jack.  Mentioned 592 


INDEX. 


1037 


200, 500,502, 530 

202 

150 

20,21 

40 


Page. 

Brown  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 472,479,497,498,506,545, 

558, 659, 667, 688, 704, 709,  716,  718, 731, 783, 784, 786, 787, 836, 869, 904 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Georgia , Governor  of.) 

Brown,  J.  Welsman. 

Mentioned * '* 

Report  of  capture  of  U.  S.  S.  Isaac  Smith,  January  30,1863. 

Brown,  Nathaniel  W.  Mentioned 

Brown,  William  A.  Mentioned 

Brown,  W.  W.  Mentioned 

Browning,  Acting  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Bruce,  C.  Mentioned - ROl 

Brunson,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Brunswick,  Ga.  Affair  near,  June  8,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  

Mercer,  H.W - jjjr 

Report  of  W.  M.  Hazzard 

Bryan,  Henry.  . 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard ° 

^ ^'oncd  ------  •••--  - - - 7 /wbj  • oo 

Report  of  naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Ga.,  February  1, 1863 ...  212, 213 

Bryan,  John.  Mentioned S24f  , ’ 

Buckhalter,  Mr.  Mentioned I"" 

Bucklin,  Stephen  R.  Mentioned - 66  * 

Buckman,  T.R  Mentioned 121, 234-236, 477, 841, 8 1 

Buckner,  Simon  B.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard * * ■ * 

Buckner,  Thaddeus  G.  Mentioned iqi'iqo  197 

Budd,  William.  Mentioned ’ ' * Q ft 

Buist,  George  L.  Mentioned 0 ^ 

Bull,  Simon  K.  Mentioned 7 “ ' 7 * ' ~ " 

Bull  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  January  31,  1863.  Report  of  Charles  T.  Has- 

1 • iCL\) 

K61I  ir  . 

Bunch,  Robert.  Mentioned 206,209,210,760,764,  850,1020 

Burdick,  Theodore.  Mentioned 

Burger,  Samuel  J.  Mentioned 

Burk,  James  A.  Mentioned 

Burke,  John.  Mentioned 

Burnet,  B.  S.  Mentioned 

Burnett,  Julian.  Mentioned 

Burney,  Alexander.  Mentioned 

Burns,  James  A.  Mentioned 

Burnside,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 

Burnside,  A.  B.  Mentioned..... ^ “l! 37o! 943 

Butler,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned ’ ’ ’ 

^Te’nro^ed”1: 244, 260, 269-271, 748, 823, 929, 1015 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 

Statement  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 ^ fg 

Butts,  Richard.  Mentioned ° 

Buzzell,  Andrew  J.  H.  Mentioned 

Byrd,  S.  D.  M. 

Correspondence  with  William  B.  Smith 

Mentioned 


169 
90 

. 424 

90 

. 273 

. 316 

315,316 
. 169 

t 386 


Cadmus,  British  Steamer.  Mentioned. 


174 

573 

. 529,575,643 
760, 764, 1020 


1038 


INDEX. 


Cahawba,  Steamer.  Mentioned o4r  40Q 

Calhoun,  D.  G.  Mentioned 

Calhoun,  W.  H.  -570,273 

Correspondence  with 

Fleming,  David  G 563 

Harleston,  F.  H r~. 

King,  J.  Gadsden 

Pemberton,  Jolm  C 562, M9, 580 

Peronneau,  William  H 

Yates,  Joseph  A 

,,  ,.  ’ * 564 

r n w i^ed 515>517>518.563,604,619 

Call,  Wilkinson.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Joseph  Finegan.') 

Callahan,  Dr.  Mentioned 

Calmut,  Steamer.  Mentioned 9(Jq 

Cameron,  A.  Mentioned 1022 

Cameron  & Co.  Mentioned 670, 671, 674, 690, 761, 1018, 1019 

Campbell, . Mentioned 282 

Campbell,  A.  L.  Mentioned 312,576,823,930 

Campbell,  James.  Mentioned 89  97 

Campbell,  James  B.  Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s 

Office,  C.  S.  A 57Q 

Campbell,  John  C.  Mentioned 

Campbell,  Nathaniel  J.  Mentioned 80  174 

Campbell,  W.  H.  Mentioned -.-I!.'."*!”.”.'. ’575 

Campbell,  W.  L.  Mentioned ' 181  282 

Canandaigua,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned ’ * 27s’ 279 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S.  Mentioned ’411 

Cannon,  Captain.  Mentioned 2^3 

Cannon,  John  S.  Mentioned 21  23  133 

Canova,  A.  A.  Mentioned.. 477  727 

Capers,  Ellison.  ’ 

Assignments  to  command g27 

Correspondence  with  William  Duncan  Smith 7 1014 

Mentioned  28,89,91,102,499,827 

Reports  of 

Cole’s  Island,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  May  20, 1862 16  17 

James  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  June  3, 1862 ’ 29 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16, 1862  1013 

Capers,  H.  D.  Mentioned 532  930 

Carlton,  Ralph.  Mentioned ’ ^ 

Carr,  H.  W.  Mentioned gg 

Carrero,  Mr.  Mentioned 225 

Carter,  Adam.  Mentioned 

Carter,  Charles.  Mentioned 20 

Cartright,  Alvah  G.  Mentioned ; gl 

Cash,  Colonel.  Mentioned n.  a 

, 008 

Caston  s Plantation,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  October  22, 1862.  (See  Charleston 

and  Savannah  Railroad , S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Oct.  22-23, 1862.) 

Catskill,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 041  043  »dd  9ar 

Cecile,  Steamer.  Mentioned ’ ’ ’ 484 

Chamberlain,  Charles  D.  Mentioned 149 

Chamberlain,  Valentine  B.  Mentioned 69  169 


INDEX. 


1039 


Page. 

Chambers,  James  M.  Mentioned - * - 730 

(For  correspondence  as  Commissioner,  see  Georgia,  Commissioners  of.) 

K QO/l  Qai 

Chambers,  J.  C.  Mentioned y 

Chambers,  William  E.  Mentioned 139-141, 229, 236, 824, 850, 863 

Charles,  William  E.  Mentioned 929 


Charleston,  S.  ®. 

Attack  on  blockading  squadron  off,  January  31, 1863. 
Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

Bier,  George  H 

Glassell,  W.  T - 

Moncada,  Francisco  Munez  de 

Shelby,  Benjamin  F 

Reports  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

Fundenburg,  W.  F - 

Ingraham,  Duncan  N 

Lechler,  Ambrose  A 

Newbury,  Taylor  C 

Tucker,  John  R 

Blockade  of,  declared  to  be  raised.  Proclamations  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

Ingraham,  Duncan  N - 

Commerce  of  the  port  of,  April  and  May,  1863 


204-206 
..  209 

..  209 

..  206 
. . 209 

..  204 

..  209 

..  206 
..  209 

..  209 

..  208 

..  205 

..  205 

..  961 


Defenses  of. 

Board  of  officers 

Appointed  to  examine  into  and  report  on 
Proceedings,  and  report  of 


829 

830 


Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 630, 1023, 1024 

Beauregard,  G.  T. . 588, 614-618, 629, 631, 633,636, 641, 642, 661, 664-666, 672, 
676,685,  689,  700,  701,  707,  723,  749,  769,  779,773,  774,  782,786,818,821, 
833,  835,  837,  841,  848,  853,  880,  887,  888,- 895, 900, 906-908, 917,  923, 1023 

Cheves,  John  - - 949>  705, 712 

Cheves,  Langdon 958> 972 

Davis,  Jefferson 934 

De  Lisle,  Charles  - - - * 948 

Echols,  William  H 722>  997  ’ 9J2 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 889> 1924 

Gist,  S.  * 499’956 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  694 

H - 770 

Harleston,  F.  593’ 564 

Harris, D.B  722,956,970 

Howard,  John 998 

Huger,  Benj  amin 976 

Ingraham,  D.  971 

Lee,  Francis  948’ 

670, 671, 680, 686, 694, 719, 761, 820, 837, 843, 1017-1019, 1023 

Lee,  Robert  503,504,523,524,528 

Magrath,  A.  5J3 

Mathewes,  J.  Fraser 959 

Miles,  W.  Porcher 513 

Pemberton,  John  499>  r)94» 

505, 509, 514, 526-528, 531, 533, 548, 565, 579, 589, 590, 600, 604 


1040 


INDEX. 


Charleston,  S.  C. — Continued. 

Defenses  of. 

Communications  from 

Ramsay,  William  M 522 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 493, 496, 500, 652, 655, 732, 776, 818,  $28, 1021, 1024 

Roman,  Alfred g47 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 594 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of 510  566 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 515,  5i6>  534|  667 

Trapier,  James  H g7g 

War  Department,  C.  S 632, 642, 673, 776, 1023 

Minutes  of  a conference  between  Beauregard  and  Ingraham,  Septem- 
ber 29,  1862 621 

Reports  of  G.  T.  Beauregard 619  633 

Resolutions  of  Executive  Council  of  South  Carolina 510,511 

Martial  law.... 490,491^570 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 642 

Pemberton,  John  C 49q 

War  Department,  C.  S *. 944 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  Collector  of  Port  of  Statement  of  Commerce  of  Charles- 
ton, S.  C.,  April  and  May,  1863 96i 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  October 
22-23,  1862. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Confederate  forces 4g9 

Union  forces 44g 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 649-652 

Ripley,  Roswell  S g54 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Brannan) 339 

Diagrams.  Engagements  at  Cast  on’s  and  Frampton’s  plantations,  Octo- 

ber22 - 170,171 

Reports  of 

Barton,  William  B 175 

Beauregard,  G.  T 179 

Bell,  Louis ^9 

Brannan,  John  M ’j50  153 

Colcock,  C.  J ...... ...... ...... ...... ........  185  187 

Eaton,  Samuel  C ’ 178 

Elliott,  W.  W .." . . ! . . . " _ ! _ . _ * * . . [ ’ . " ' " 184 

Good,  Tilghman  H 157  1GQ 

Hall,  J ames  F ’ 

Hawley,  Joseph  R _ 1G9 

Hill,  George  H 134 

Jackson,  John  H 473 

Jefferson,  E.  E 4gg 

Keenan,  Edward  J l4g 

Meeker,  Lorenzo 453 

Mitchel,  Ormsby  M * 144 

Serrell,  Edward  W ^55 

Strawbridge,  De  Witt  C 174 

Terry,  Alfred  H ' 1A4 


INDEX. 


1041 


Page. 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  etc. — Cont’d. 
Reports  of 

Walker,  W.  S 180 

White,  Richard 162 

Wilson,  C.  C 187 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

Engagement  in,  April  7,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Confederate  forces 263 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 244, 893 

Clingman,  T.  L 1016 

Du  Pont,  Samuel  F 267, 268, 279, 280, 437, 438,  442, 896 

Gist,  S.  R 277 

Hunter,  David 437 

Moore,  M.  S 267 

Rhett,  Alfred 267,268,895 

Rodgers,  John 267, 268, 896 

Trapier,  James  H 271 

Devil,  or  torpedo  searcher  (sketch),  carried  by  a monitor 254 

Plan  (sketch)  of  the  approach  and  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  by  the  United 

States  fleet 251 

Position  (sketch)  of  United  States  fleet  at  4.15  p.  m 262 

Reports  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T 240 

Butler,  William 272 

Dargan,  A.  T 275 

Echols,  William  H 246 

Frederick,  A.  D 276 

Glassell,  W.  T 277 

Harris,  D.  B 245 

Huger,  C.  K 276 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 271 

Raven  el,  E.  Prioleau 268 

Rhett,  Alfred 264 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 257 

Simkins,  J.  C 274 

Sitgreaves,  J.  A 275 

Tafft,  Henry  S 278 

Trapier,  James  H 268,271 

Resolutions  of  thanks  of  South  Carolina  Legislature 277 

Returns  of 

Ammunition  expended.  (Confederate) 263 

Guns  and  mortars  engaged.  (Confederate) 263 

Statements  of 

Butler,  William 1015 

Rhett,  Alfred 1016 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 1015 

Sumter,  Fort,  S.  C.  Sketches  of,  showing  effect  of  fire  from  United 

States  fleet 252,253 

Tables. 

Effect  of  projectiles  on  walls  of  Fort  Sumter 255,256 

Number  and  kind  of  guns  and  projectiles  used  against  United 
States  fleet 256 

66  R R — VOL  XIV 


INDEX. 


1042 


Page. 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. — Continued. 

Torpedoes  in.  Sketches 950, 951 

Works  in,  and  number  of  guns  bearing  on 605, 606 

Chatfield,  John  L. 

Mentioned 35, 

54, 55, 150, 152, 153, 157-159, 163, 165, 166,  170,  362, 367, 390, 461, 468, 469 

Reports  of 

James  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  June  10, 1862  36 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862  56 

Chattahoochee,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 395, 729, 731, 736, 737, 954 

Chattahoochee  River,  Ga.  Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 522,735 

Alabama,  Commissioners  of 544, 545 

Beauregard,  G.  T 645, 669 

Boggs,  W.  R 506,542-546 

Columbus,  Ga.,  Mayor  of 544 

Dillard,  F.  W 543 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 682 

Pemberton,  John  C 498,507,531,543,546,547 

War  Department,  C.  S 493,499,666 

Chesterfield,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 19,520,756,951 

Chesnut,  James,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 777 

Mentioned 595, 911 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina , Executive  Council  of.) 

Chestnut,  James.  Mentioned 236,851 

Cheves,  John  R. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 616,642,700,705,707,723 

Harris,  D.  B 712 

Mentioned  . . . . 496, 526, 549, 616, 617, 665, 667, 707, 722, 723, 949, 950, 952 

Cheves,  Langdon. 

Correspondence  with  D.  B.  Harris 958,972 

Mentioned 956, 957, 970, 972, 1024 

Chichester,  C.  E.  Mentioned 823, 929 

Chicora,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 204, 207-209, 243, 277, 667, 791, 818, 902, 906, 908 

Childs,  F.  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 690 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 758 

Pemberton,  John  C 555 

Mentioned 505, 541, 674, 685, 689-691, 746, 761, 1018, 1019 

Chilton,  R.  H.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
GeneraVs  Office , C.  S.  A.) 

Chisolm,  A.  R. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 640 

Mentioned 726, 820 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard.) 

Chisolm,  C.  A.  Mentioned 965, 966 

Choppin,  S.  Mentioned 727 

Christ,  Benjamin  C. 

Mentioned ; 21, 363, 367 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Pocotaligo,  S.  C.,  May  29,  1862  22 

Church,  Benjamin  B.  Mentioned 51,60,71 


INDEX. 


1043 


Page. 

84 

Churchill,  D.  B.  Mentioned - 

Cimarron,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned ■"''V  o 

Civilians  (white).  Draft  of  all  able-bodied,  in  the  Department  of  the  South 

ordered - ™ 

Claghorn,  Joseph  S.  Mentioned 

Clark,  Charles  G.  Mentioned g24 

Clark,  F.  J.  Mentioned - * " 

Clark,  Henry  T.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  North  Carolina , Governor  of.) 

Clark,  Rufus  F.  Mentioned 79’®? 

Clarkson,  William.  Mentioned a 

Clay,  H.  C.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen- 
erals Office , C.  S.  A.) 

Clendenin,  James  A.  Mentioned 716,718 

Clifton,  Captain.  Mentioned 195> 197 

Clinch,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned - * 508 

Clinch,  Dunean  L. 

Correspondence  with  W.  M.  Hazzard 727 

Mentioned 235, 487, 576, 592, 773, 812, 824, 838, 840, 841, 845, 850, 861, 930 

Clinch,  N.  B.  Mentioned 812 

Cline,  James  H.  Mentioned 21, 30 

Clingman,  T.  L. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 1U1D 

Mentioned ....  218, 778, 779, 781, 782, 786, 787, 801, 802, 815, 822, 832, 900, 901, 924, 934 
Clothing,  Camp  and  Garrison  Equipage.  Supplies  of.  (See  Munitions  of 
War.) 

Coan,  William  B.  Mentioned 126,371,372 

Cobb,  Howell. 

Assignments  to  command ij77>  7,  b 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 677,  696 

Beauregard,  G.  T 230, 684, 697, 702, 703, 707, 710, 728, 735. 737, 751 

Georgia,  Commissioners  of * 73* 

War  Department,  C.  737,842,920 

Williams,  Jos.  John 7^ 

Mentioned 234, 666, 677, 684, 687-689, 704, 716, 717, 735, 736, 741, 

783, 798, 809, 825, 838, 840, 845, 846, 860, 889, 909, 920, 931, 944, 953, 964 

Reports  of 

Ocklockonnee  Bay,  Fla.  Affair  in,  March  24,  1863 230 

Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla.  Affair  in,  March  20,  1863  230 

Cobb,  J.  B.  Mentioned - 89,98 

Cobb,  Lamar.  Mentioned - 705 

Cockspur  Island,  Ga.  Emancipation  of  slaves  on.  Order  of  Hunter 333 

Cody,  Walter.  Mentioned 80 

Coe,  George  S.  Mentioned 381 

Colcock,  C.  J. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  650-®®? 

Walker,  W.  

Mentioned 118, 183, 187, 313, 487, 530, 576, 823, 930 

Reports  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23, 1862 185> 187 

o*|  o 

Colcock,  T.  H.  Mentioned 

Colcock,  W.  F.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Charleston , S.  C.,  Collector  of.) 

Cole,  A.  H.  Mentioned 861 


1044 


INDEX. 


Paga 

Cole’s  Island,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  May  20,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Pemberton,  John  C 509 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 507 

Simkins,  W.  S 508 

Reports  of 

Capers,  Ellison 16,17 

Gist,  S.  R 16 

Colhouii,  E.  B.  Mentioned 203 

Collins,  William  R.  Mentioned 156 

Colorado  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments:  1st,  411. 

Colored  Troops.  Mentioned. 

(See  Massachusetts  Troops,  Fifty-fourth  Regiment;  also  South  Carolina  Troops 
(Union),  First  and  Second  Regiments .) 

Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  aud  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 599 

Beard, O.  T..  191,193 

Hunter,  D 447, 448, 451, 452, 460, 462, 465, 666 

Saxton,  Rufus 189, 192, 194, 226 

CSee  also  Hunter  to  Lincoln,  p.  455;  Stanton  to  Saxton,  p.  377.) 

Colquitt,  Peyton  H. 

Assignments  to  command 481 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 565 

Mentioned 92, 481, 487, 529, 571, 575, 591, 823 

Colter,  Cornelius.  Mentioned 279 

Columbus,  Ga.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Alabama,  Commissioners  of ... 544 

Boggs,  W.  R 544 

War  Department,  C.S 666 

Colwell,  Augustus  W.  Mentioned 6, 84 

Combahee  River,  S.  C.  Union  raid  on,  June  2, 1863. 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T r 293, 963 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 963 

Lay,  John  F 307 

Walker,  W.  S 291,292,306,307 

(See  also  Hunter  to  Andrew,  p.  462;  Hunter  to  Stanton,  p.  463.) 

Reports  of 

Breeden,  P.  L 295 

Emanuel,  W.  P. 293 

Gilchrist,  A.  E 296 

Godbold,  H 295 

Hewitt,  William  E 297 

Lay,  John  F 298 

Trenholm,  W.  L 297 

Walker,  W.  S 290 

Statement  of  William  C.  Heyward - 307 

Commodore  McDonough,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 445,447 

Comstock,  Joseph  J.,  jr.  Mentioned 150,166 

Conduct  of  the  War.  Communications  from 

Barton,  William  B 381 

Beauregard,  G.  T 464, 788, 809, 848 

Benham,  Henry  W 342 


INDEX. 


1045 


Page. 

Conduct  of  the  War— Continued.  Communications  from 

Evans,  N.  G 93 

Finegan,  Joseph 945 

Higginson,  T.  W 839 

Hunter,  David 356, 373, 447, 448, 465, 466 

McCormick,  A.  H 839 

Mercer,  H.  W 382 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 790 

Stevens,  Isaac  I - 92 

Turner,  T 787 

Walker,  W.  S 903,962 

(See  also  General  Lee , Steamer.  Capture  of,  August  10, 1862.) 

Conemaugh,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 145, 148 

Confederate  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Octo- 
ber 22-23, 1862  180 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  April  7, 1863 263 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16, 1862 90 

Distribution  of,  in  Third  Military  District,  April  1, 1863 862 

Mentioned.  (See  respective  States.) 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Middle  and  East  Florida,  Department  of .-.  488, 512, 530, 577, 593, 602, 615 

South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  Department  of 482, 

486, 487, 498, 529. 530, 571, 575, 576, 591, 592, 602, 615, 936 
South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  Department  of.  695,740,741,757,783,798, 
809,  810,  822-825,840',  860,  889,909,  922,  929-931, 936, 944, 945, 953,  964 
Organized  into  brigades  and  divisions  in  Department  of  South  Carolina 

and  Georgia 523 

Position  of,  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  Sept.  25,  1862  . . 624, 625 
Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 643, 665, 737, 749, 903 

Cobb,  Howell 703,920 

Lee,  Robert  E 471 

Manigault,  Joseph 668 

Pemberton,  John  C 603 

War  Department,  C.  S 608, 737 

(See  also  Pickens  to  Beauregard,  p.  667.) 

Connally,  E.  L.  Mentioned 10,12 

Connecticut  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries : 1st,  20, 23,  49, 52, 59, 62, 63, 65, 68,  71,  76,  82,  83, 

108, 129,131, 133, 362, 367, 388, 390, 435, 462, 469, 984, 1007, 1008. 

Infantry — Regiments : 6th,  36,37,54,  56,109,145,148,157-161,  163,  171,  233, 

236, 362, 367, 388, 390, 392, 435, 461, 469, 845, 846, 1005  ; 7th,  37,  49-52, 58, 60, 
62,63,65-69,74,76,82,  109,  129,131-133,  145,148,158,162,164-167,169-173, 

321, 322, 347, 362, 364, 367, 386, 388, 390,  424, 432, 435, 439, 443, 462, 469,  1004- 
1008  ; 10th,  434, 461, 469. 

Conover,  F.  S.  Mentioned 199,200 

Cook,  James.  Mentioned 171 

Cooke,  John  R.  Mentioned 787, 824, 862, 878, 893, 894, 901, 904, 906, 924, 934, 942 

Cooley,  Noah  S.  Mentioned 27S 

Cooley,  S.  A.  Mentioned - - 154,168 

Cooper,  R.  L.  Mentioned - * 


1046 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 471  434 

485, 568, 569, 572, 584, 648, 684, 704,  721,  737. 800, 876, 897, 976, 1016,*  1024 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 
Coosawhatchie,  S.  C.  Skirmish  at,  October  22,  1862. 

(See  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  October 

22-23, 1862.) 

Copp,  Elbridge  J.  Mentioned. 79 

Cordes,  T.  Mentioned 1 487,575,822,929 

Cornick,  W.  F.  Mentioned 334 

Cornubia,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 726 

Corrie,  Samuel  J.  Mentioned gg  92 

Coryell,  I.  Mentioned 132  152 

Cosmopolitan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 108, 109, 128, 129, 131, 132, 145, 386, 387, 1004 

Cossack,  Steamer.  Mentioned 209 

Cottrell,  Abraham.  Mentioned 60  71 

Couper,  William.  Mentioned 728 

Courts  of  Inquiry.  Case  of  Charles  F.  Hopkins 142, 143 

Cowan,  J.  A.  Mentioned 925 

C.  P.  Williams,  U.  S.  Schooner.  Mentioned 211 

Crabbe,  William.  Mentioned 154>  i67;  172 

Crafts,  G.  J.  Mentioned 676 

Crandel,  Captain.  Mentioned I94 

Crane,  Charles  H. 

Correspondence  with  Ormsby  M.  Mitchel 384 

Mentioned 361,392,413 

Crawford,  Mr.  Mentioned 683 

Crawford,  J.  T.  Mentioned 10-12 

Crawford,  R.  W.  Report  of  skirmish  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C.,  June  7, 1862 32 

Crawley,  W.  J.  Mentioned 929 

Crispell,  A.  Mentioned 449 

Croft,  Edward.  Mentioned 576, 592, 824, 930 

Crooked  River,  Fla.  Affair  on,  May  20,  1862.  Report  of  Haley  T.  Blocker..  17 

Cross,  C.  F.  Mentioned 135, 148, 149, 278, 279 

Cross,  J.  L.  Mentioned 477 

Crump,  A.  B.  (For  correspondence  as  Deputy  Clerk,  see  Augusta , Ga.y  City 
Council  of.) 

Crusader,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 1005 

Cruso,  Frederick  H.  Mentioned 388,390 

Cullum,  George  W.  (For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  Army  Head- 
quarters. ) 

Culpeper,  J.*F.  Mentioned 702 

Cunningham,  A.  T. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 660 

Mentioned 675, 758, 854, 867, 876 

Curtin,  Andrew  G.  Mentioned 149 

Curtis,  Edward  F.  Mentioned 462 

Curtis,  Greely  S.  Mentioned 367 

Cuthbert,  Messrs.  Mentioned 184 

Cuyler,  R.  M.  Mentioned 491,675 

Dahlgren,  John  A.  Mentioned 465 

Dalrymple,  Henry  M.  Mentioned 156 

Dalton,  J.  C.  Mentioned 384 

Dana.  Gustavus  S.  Mentioned 149, 278, 279 


INDEX. 


1047 


Page. 

Dandy,  George  B. 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter — 285 

Mentioned 443, 461 

Report  of  skirmish  on  Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  April  10, 1863  284 

Dandy,  James  H.  Mentioned 370-372 

Dantzler,  O.  M.  Mentioned 270-272 

Dargan,  A.  T. 

Mentioned 259, 847 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863  275 

Darien,  Ga.  Attack  on,  June  11, 1863. 

Communications  from  John  M.  Millen 317 

Reports  of 

Lane,  William  A 318 

Mercer,  H.  W . 317 

Thomson,  W.  G 318 

Darlington,  Mr.  Mentioned 55 

Darlington,  Steamer.  Mentioned 131, 145, 150, 189-191, 193, 194, 281, 522 

Darr,  Francis. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 417 

Mentioned 397,428 

Daufuskie  Island,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  January  29,1863.  Report  of  John 

H.  Mickler 198 

Davant,  F.  F.  Mentioned - 1®4 

Davenport,  A.  C.  Mentioned 576,592 

Davis,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 321,328 

Davis,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 278 

Davis,  Isaac.  Mentioned 487 

Davis,  Jefferson. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 569,784 

Alabama,  Governor  of 717 

Augusta,  Ga.,  Mayor  of 478 

Chesnut,  James,  jr - 777 

Georgia,  Governor  of - * — 718 

Hunter,  David 448 

Lee,  G.  W.  C 894,899 

Lee,  Robert  E 560,567,569,766,1019 

Pemberton,  John  C 534, 535, 539, 540, 549, 552, 593, 596, 598 

Roberts,  Hiram,  et  al 590 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of 566 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of  . . 480, 486, 540, 560, 567, 568, 572, 593, 597, 631, 666 

War  Department,  C.  S 560, 569, 765, 898, 976 

Mentioned 215, 448, 463, 475, 478, 483, 489, 492, 497, 498, 

504, 511,  541,  560,  566,  578,  582,  584, 585,  597-599,  675, 687, 704, 715, 718, 
738, 764, 765,  785,  786,  816,  877, 898, 903, 910, 911, 956, 976, 977, 1019, 1020 

Orders,  declaring  David  Hunter  and  John  W.  Phelps  outlaws 599 

Proclamation,  proclaiming  martial  law  in  South  Carolina,  between  Santee 

and  South  Edisrto  Rivers 489 

Davis,  William  G.  M. 

Correspondence  with  W.  S.  Dilworth 473 

Mentioned 472, 475 

Davis,  W.  W.  H.  Mentioned 278,434 

Dawn,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 211,217 

Dawson,  E.  G.  Mentioned 576,592,824,930 


1048 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Day,  Samuel  C.  Mentioned 461 

Dearborn,  O.  M.  Mentioned 61 

Dearing,  St.  Clair.  Mentioned 260, 266, 599 

De  Ford,  Ben,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47, 109, 129, 130, 

134, 136,  145,  148,  150,  160,  175,  193-197,  238,  278,279,341,345,379,465 

De  Forest,  J.  J.  Mentioned 278, 435 

De  La  Croix,  Mr.  Mentioned 364 

Delafield,  Richard.  Mentioned m. 465,943 

Delaware,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 109, 232, 233, 357, 383, 384, 980, 994, 1000, 1004 

De  Lisle,  Ch.  G.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 948 

Dempsey,  Robert.  Mentioned 68 

Dennis,  John  B.  Mentioned 169 

Dent,  Lieutenant.  Meutioned 372 

De  Saussure,  L.  D.  Mentioned 297, 298, 300, 306 

De  Saussure,  W.  D.  Mentioned 487,530,565,571,575 

De  Saussure,  Wilmot  G.  Mentioned 540,580 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina , Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of.) 

Deslonde,  E.  A.  Mentioned 726 

De  Treville,  Robert.  Mentioned 274 

Dexter,  J.  N.  Mentioned , 68 

Dibble,  Samuel.  Mentioned 953,968 

Dickison,  J.  J. 

Mentioned 140, 224, 225, 239, 661, 739, 824, 861 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Palatka,  Fla.,  March  27,  1863  237 

Dillard,  F.  W. 

Correspondence  with  W.  R.  Boggs 543 

Mentioned 542, 543, 545, 546 

Dilworth,  W.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  William  G.  M 473 

Pemberton,  John  C 472 

Mentioned 475 

Dimock,  Gordon  Z.  Mentioned 20 

Disher,  W.  L.  Mentioned 487,575 

Dix,  John  A.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 365 

War  Department,  U.  S 365 

Dixon,  W.  D.  Mentioned 214 

Dixon’s  and  James  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  between,  May  25,  1862.  Report  of 

S.  R.  Gist 19 

Doboy  River,  Ga.  Expedition  to  and  skirmish,  November  13-18, 1862.  Re- 
ports of 

Beard,  Oliver  T 193 

Saxton , Rufus 192 

Dodge,  John  A.  Mentioned 363,367 

Dodge,  John  C.,  jr.  Mentioned 462 

Dole,  William  R.  Mentioned 392 

Dolly,  George.  Mentioned , 197 

Donohoe,  Joseph  J.  Mentioned 80 

Donohoe,  Michael  T.  Mentioned 33,79 

Donohue,  James  S.  Mentioned 21,71 

Douglas,  Steamer.  Mentioned 778 

Douglass,  Marcellus. 

Mentioned 487 

Report  of  skirmish  on  Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga.,  April  16, 1862 9 


INDEX. 


1049 


Page. 

Dow,  Robert  C.  Mentioned 80 

Dowd,  H.  A.  Mentioned 824 

Downes,  John.  Mentioned 218 

Doyle,  Richard  N.  Mentioned 59, 60, 71 , 990 

Draft.  Regulations  and  orders  governing,  in  the  Department  of  the  South  . . 429, 

430, 400, 1020, 1021 

Drake,  A.  J.  Mentioned Ill 

Drayton,  Percival. 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  Henry  W 349, 350, 981, 1001 

Wright,  Horatio  G 352 

Mentioned 218, 981, 988, 991-993, 999-1001, 1004, 1010, 1012 

Drayton,  Thomas  F. 

Assignments  to  command 523 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 503, 525, 534, 536, 550, 552, 586 

Mentioned 25, 487, 523, 556-558, 575, 576, 585 

Drew,  Mr.  Mentioned 683 

Drew,  Jeremiah  D.  Mentioned 367,376,995 

Duane,  James  C. 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 450 

Mentioned 392, 394, 431, 434, 450 

Du  Barry,  F.  B.  Mentioned 260 

Duggan,  Hamilton.  Mentioned 81 

Dunham,  Joseph  L. 

Correspondence  with  C.  F.  Hopkins 139 

Mentioned 121, 139, 475, 825, 850, 851, 931 

Dunovant,  John.  Mentioned 515,551,591 

Dunwody,  John.  Mentioned 572 

Dupont,  C.,  Mrs.  Mentioned 861 

Du  Font,  Samuel  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  Henry  W - 334 

Green,  J.  F 267,268,896 

Hunter,  David 279, 361, 421, 437, 438, 442, 454, 455 

Lincoln,  Abraham 440,441 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 436 

Stroop,  George 280 

Town,  Franklin  E 280 

Mentioned 125, 

149,  199,204,218,278,279,320,365,366,  383,  390,  393,  404,417,423,424, 
426, 427, 436,  440,  441,  443, 446,  453,  455, 456, 465, 475,  642, 787,  833, 983 

Dyer,  Jerry.  Mentioned 276 

Dyke,  C.  E.  Mentioned 851 

Earle,  William  E.  Mentioned 284, 309, 702, 793, 824, 930 

Easley,  W.  K.  Mentioned 487 

Eason  & Bro.  Mentioned 690 

East  Florida.  Expedition  along  coast  of,  November  3-10,  1862.  Reports  of 

Beard,  Oliver  T 191 

Saxton,  Rufus 189 

East  Florida,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 630,665,736 

Finegan,  Joseph,  assigned  to  command H 665,736 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : March  11,  229;  No.  12,  850. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  1543,  739. 


1050 


INDEX. 


Hast  Florida,  District  of.  (Confederate) — Continued. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  180,  840;  No.  244,  239.  Brevard,  No. 


18,  863. 

Smith,  Caraway,  assigned  to  command  of  the  coast  defenses 699 

East  and  Middle  Florida,  Department  of.  (See  Middle  and  East  Florida.) 

Eaton,  B.  F.  Mentioned qq 

Eaton,  Samuel  C. 


Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23, 1862 17g 

E.  B.  Hale,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 28,62,129,280-282,331,340,348 

Echols,  William  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 614, 615, 617, 618, 629, 707, 722, 815 

Harris,  D.  B 957,972 

Howard,  John 958 

Mathewes,  J.  Fraser 959 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 827 

Smith,  William  Duncan 586 

Mentioned 241  243 

245,  552,  557,  565,  585,621,  646,  668,700,810,  833,911,956,966,970,971 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  April  7,  1863 246 

South  Carolina.  Works  in,  October  4,  1862  627,623 

Sketches  and  tables  submitted  by,  with  report  of  engagement  in  Charles- 
ton Harbor,  April  7,  1863 251-256 

Edens,  Allen.  Mentioned 294 

Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

Evacuation  of,  by  Union  forces.  Communications  from  David  Hunter 363 

Skirmish  on,  April  19,  1862 \ 

Edward,  John  J.  Mentioned 87  90 

Edwards,  J.  C.  Mentioned 183  813 

Edwards,  N.  M.  Mentioned 154}  155  157 

Edwards,  O.  E.  Mentioned 48i 

Elarbee,  E.  A.  Mentioned 220,221 

Eldridge,  Captain.  Mentioned 197 

Ellen,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 28, 62, 343 

Elliott,  George  P.  Mentioned 184 

Elliott,  R.  E.  Mentioned 88  92 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 120 


Reports  of 

George  Washington,  Steamer.  Destruction  of,  April  9,  1863  283 

Pinckney  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  August  21,  1862 118 

Elliott,  William  W. 

Mentioned 26, 32, 183, 184 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23,  1862  184 

Ellis,  D.  H.  Mentioned 530,576,633 

Ellis,  John  H.  Mentioned 931 

Elmendorf,  Anthony. 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 371 

Mentioned Q71 


INDEX. 


1051 


Tage. 

Elwell,  J.  J.  Mentioned 50, 61, 281, 394, 397 

^ A>  B‘  QQ  J 

Correspondence  with  H.  W.  Benh am yy4 

Mentioned 4900 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Henry  W.  Benham.) 

Ely,  Ralph.  Mentioned - 59,60 

Emanuel,  W.  P. 

Correspondence  with 

Pemberton,  John  512,541 

306 


287, 290, 291, 297-300, 303-307, 529, 575, 589, 591, 644, 823, 921 


Walker,  W.  S. 

Mentioned 

Reports  of 

Black  River,  S.  C.  Engagement  on,  August  13,  1862 114 

Combahee  River,  S.  C.  Union  raid  on,  June  2,  1863... 293 

Emery,  Sabine.  Mentioned 461 

Emma,  Steamer.  Destruction  of,  August  31,  1862. 

Communication  from  William  B.  Barton 378 


Mentioned . 


379,380 

Emmons,  George  W.  Mentioned 44^ 

Emory,  William  H.  Mentioned 391 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Adiutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 1023,  1024 

Beauregard,  G.  889,966 

° 886 

966 

’**”*”” 682 

1023 


Correspondence  with 


320 


Harris,  D.  B 

Lee,  Francis  D 

Moreno,  Theodore 

War  Department,  C.  S 

Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 

Hunter,  David 421,429,431,433 

McFarland,  Walter 42^ 

Ericsson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 381*  427  ’ 430  ’ 432 

Erwin,  E.  A.  Mentioned 269,273 

Erwin,  John.  Mentioned 

Erwin,  W.  E.  Mentioned 269,275 

Etowah,  Steamer.  Mentioned 15 

Evans,  James.  Mentioned  - — 88,  J2 

Evans,  John  W.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 788 

Evans,  Nathan  G. 

Assignments  to  command 323>  948 

Correspondence  with 

Pemberton,  John  C 105,  H4, 470, 474, 485, 509, 

511,  514,  526,  534,  536,  537,  549,  551,  553, 555,  558, 559, 569, 577, 583, 586 

Ripley,  Roswell  

Stevens,  Isaac  I • 

Mentioned 25, 87, 94, 96, 100, 102, 113, 114, 479, 487, 505, 508, 509, 

523,  536,  537,  556,  558,  561,  566,  567,  575,  576,  578, 585, 713, 715, 716, 897, 
900,  901,  904,  918,  926,  929,  931,  932,  934,937-939,942,944,945,956, 1014 

Reports  of 

John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Affairs  on,  June  8-9,  1862 

Expedition  to,  May  22,  1862 

Pineberry  Battery,  Willstown,  and  White  Point,  S.  C.  Engagements 

at,  April  29,  1862 

Secession ville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 — 


1052 


INDEX. 


Pago. 

Fannin,  O.  F.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Georgia , Citizens  of.) 

Farley,  Henry  S.  Mentioned 591,823,929 

Farnsworth,  Addison.  Mentioned 362,367 

Farquhar,  Francis  U.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 417 

Farr,  Thomas.  Mentioned 186 

Farragut,  David  G-.  Mentioned 338,339,944 

Farrand,  Hiram.  Mentioned 81,368,388,390 

Feilden,  H.  W.  Mentioned 826 

Feitch,  Mr.  Mentioned 463 

Fellows,  Enoch  Q. 

Mentioned 336 

Report  of  reconnaissance  on  Seabrook  Island,  S.  C.,  April  14, 1862  3 

Fenton,  Joseph  B.  Mentioned 62,66,67 

Fenton,  William  M. 

Mentioned 6, 7, 49, 58-64, 72, 73, 85, 109, 362, 367, 1003, 1006, 1007 

Reports  of 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862  64 

Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga.  Skirmish  on,  April  16,  1862 8 

Fenwick’s  Island,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  July  9,  1862. 

Communication  from  W.  S.  Walker. 112 

Report  of  R.  J.  Jeffords 113 

Ferguson,  S.  W.  Mentioned 632,644 

Ferguson,  T.  B.  Mentioned 529,823,952 

Ferry,  Albert.  Mentioned 726, 907 

Ferry,  Orris  S. 

Assignments  to  command 420 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 414 

Mentioned 278, 397-399, 409, 413, 420, 424, 434, 438, 461 

Fessenden,  James  D.  Mentioned 392,438 

Fickling,  E.  S.  Mentioned 265 

Filler,  John  H.  Mentioned .* 154,164 

Findley,  J.  R.  Mentioned 148, 149 

Finegan,  Joseph. 

Address  to  people  of  Florida 229 

Appeals  to  people  of  Florida 488, 494 

Assignments  to  command 477,665,736 

Congratulatory  orders. 

Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Operations  about,  March  23-31,  1863  850 

Reoccupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  March  11,  1863  229 

Palatka,  Fla.  Skirmish  at,  March  27,  1863  239 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 485, 

488, 494, 511, 522, 553, 566, 614, 633 

Beauregard,  G.  T 141, 

239, 638, 684, 686, 687, 702, 727, 773, 821, 837, 839, 846, 850, 861, 903, 945 

Hopkins,  Charles  F 138, 139, 142 

Lee,  Robert  E 477, 434 

Russell,  Thomas  P 860 

Saint  John’s  River,  Fla.  Commanding  officer  U.  S.  Navy 945 

Mentioned. . . 122, 141, 142, 230, 231, 233, 483, 488, 499, 506, 522, 530, 548, 577, 593, 602, 
615r»617, 629, 633, 665, 680, 684, 695, 703, 717, 724, 736, 740, 783, 798, 809, 


INDEX. 


1053 

rage. 


Finegan,  Joseph — Continued. 

Reports  of 

Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Operations  near,  March  23-31,  1863  - 234 

Reoccupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  March  10,  1863  226 


Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla. 

Engagements  at. 

September  11,  1862 - 120, 121 

September  17,  1862  122 

Expedition  to,  September  30-October  13,  1862 137,138 

Saint  Mark’s,  Fla.  Naval  descent  upon,  June  15,  1862 41 

Tampa,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  June  30-July  1,  1862 110 

Staff.  Announcements  of 477 

Fisher,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 154 

Fisher,  William. 

Correspondence  with 

Florida,  Governor  of 753 

Williams,  Jos.  John 753 

Mentioned 753 

Fitzgerald,  Amos.  Mentioned 276 

Fitzgerald,  Louis.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 417 

Flambeau,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 210, 437, 78S,  790, 809 

Fleming,  David  G. 

Correspondence  with  W.  R.  Calhoun 563 

Mentioned 265 

Fletcher,  John  W.  Mentioned 278 

Flora,  Steamer.  Mentioned 28, 145, 150, 165, 174, 281 

Florida. 

Address  to  people  of.  (Finegan) 229 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 677, 687-689, 704 

Alexander,  James - 919 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 338 

Beauregard,  G.  T 684^707,861,966 

Cobb,  Howell 702, 703, 920 

Finegan,  Joseph 485,488,494,511,614,702 

Florida,  Governor  of 474, 688 

Lee,  Robert  E 477,483 

War  Department,  C.  S 737 


(See  also  South  Atlantic  Coast.) 

Appeals  to  people  of.  (Finegan) 488,  494 

Emancipation  of  slaves  in.  Order  of  Hunter 341 

Martial  law  in.  (See  Bell  to  Benham,  pp.  333,  334  ; Lee  to  Milton , p.  483.) 

Military  Departments  embracing 369,  630,  665 

Militia 731 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 735 

Alabama,  Governor  of 680 

Beauregard,  G.  T 617,737,773,821,825,846,850 

Bryan,  Henry 844 

Cobb,  Howell 696,697,710,728,751 

Finegan , J oseph — 638, 739, 837 ,840, 846, 850 

Fisher,  William — 753 

Florida,  Governor  of 980 


1054 


INDEX. 


Florida — Continued. 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Forney,  John  H 079 

Higginson,  T.  W 339 

McCormick,  A.  H 339 

Moreno,  Theodore 954 

Navy  Department,  U.  S oqc 

titoc z 

War  Department,  C.  S 122,616,629,842 

Williams,  Jos.  John 75^ 

(See  also 

May  20,  1862.  Crooked  Hirer.  Affair  on. 

J une  15,  1862.  Saint  Mark’s.  Naval  descent  upon. 

30-July  1,  1862.  Tampa.  Bombardment  of. 

Sept.  11,  1862.  Saint  John’s  Bluff.  Engagement  at. 

17,1862.  Saint  John’s  Bluff.  Engagement  at. 

30-Oct.  13,  1862.  Saint  John’s  Bluff.  Expedition  from  Hilton  Heady. 
S.  C.ytO. 

Oct.  1,  1862.  Saint  John’s  Bluff.  Engagement  at. 

2,1862.  May  port  Mills  and  Saint  John’s  Bluff.  Skirmishes  between. 

3,  1862.  Saint  John’s  Bluff.  Capture  of. 

5,  1862.  Jacksonville.  Recapture  of. 

6-  9,  1862.  Lake  Beresford.  Expedition  to,  from  Jacksonville. 

7,  1862.  Governor  Milton  {steamer).  Capture  of. 

Nov.  3-10,  1862.  East  Florida,  coast  of.  Expedition  along. 

Jan.  23— Feb.  1,  1863.  Saint  Mary’s  River.  Expedition  up  the. 

26,  1863.  Township.  Skirmish  at. 

Mar.  9,  1863.  Saint  Augustine.  Skirmish  near. 

10,  1863.  Jacksonville.  Union  forces  reoccupy. 

20,  1863.  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay.  Affair  in. 

23-31,  1863.  Jacksonville.  Operations  near. 

24,  1863.  Ocklockonnee  Bay.  Affair  in. 

25,  1863.  Jacksonville.  Skirmish  at. 

27,  1863.  Palatka.  Skirmish  at. 

29,  1863.  Jacksonville.  Skirmish  at. 

31,  1863.  Jacksonville.  Evacuated  by  the  Union  forces.) 
Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Florida,  Governor  of J 039 

War  Department,  C.  S 6^9  549 

Union  sentiment  in 233  475  736 

Florida,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of  Correspondence  with  G.  T. 

Beauregard 9gg 

Florida,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 687-689 

Fisher,  William 753 

Forney,  John  H 08q 

Lee,  Robert  E 433 

War  Department,  C.  S 474,629,630,646 

Florida  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery—  Battalions : Milton  {Batteries),  A {Dunham),  121, 134, 475, 488, 566, 

695, 704, 825, 850, 851, 931 ; B {Abell),  850, 851, 931.  Batteries : Coast  Guard 
{Simmons'),  488;  Grayson  ( Baya ),  488;  Leon  {Gamble),  121,234,475,488, 

695, 741,  &25, 838, 850, 851, 860, 931 ; Marion  {Martin),  488. 


INDEX. 


1055 


Page, 

Florida  Troops.  Mentioned— Continued. 

Cavalry— Battalions  : 2d  Partisan  Rangers*,  121, 227, 229-231, 234, 235, 680, 

695, 697, 698,  740, 741, 825,  845,  850, 851, 860,  922,  931.  Companies : Block- 
er's,t 17,593,680;  Chambers’, t 139,  602,  695;  Dickison’s,!  615;  Harri- 
son’s,! 615;  Marianna  (Smith),  488  ; Owens’, t 488;  Rou’s,t615;  Saint 
John’s  Rangers,!  121,488,695;  Tallahassee  Guards,!  488 ; Thigpin’s,! 

680 ; Turner’s,  488.  Regiments : 1st,  472,  473, 475, 485 ; 2d,  224, 227,  229- 
231,  236-239,  724,  730,  739, 741, 824,  825,  850,  851,  860,  861, 863,  931. 

Infantry— Battalions : 1st  Special,  121,  488,  512,  530,  566,  577,593,602,615, 

695, 740, 741, 824,  825, 850, 851,  860,  922, 931.  Companies : Beggs’,  850, 851 ; 
Bryan’s,  824,850,851,931;  J.  C.  Chambers’,  110,  488,  824,  931;  Curry’s, 

860;  Gary’s,  931;  Hope’s,  824,850,851,931;  Hopkins’,  488;  McNeill’s, 

931;  Mootey’s,  850,  851,  931;  Ochus’,  931;  Parsons’,  488;  Pearson’s, 
110-112,  824,  931 ; Peek’s,  850,  851 ; A.  A.  Stewart’s,  227,  229, 850, 851, 

931 ; Tucker’s,  850, 851;  Underwood’s,  931.  Regiments:  1st  Rifles,  512; 

3d,  475,  485;  4th,  488,  512;  5th,  488,  512,  530,  577;  6th,  488,  512,  530; 

7th,  41, 488, 512, 566. 

Floyd,  J.  F.  Mentioned 139“ 

Floyd,  Richard  F.  Mentioned 474,483- 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  April  10,1863. 

Communications  from  David  Hunter 285 

Report  of  George  B.  Dandy 284 

Foote,  A.  H.  Mentioned 464,465 

Ford,  F.  C.  Mentioned 469 

Foreman,  A.  E.  Mentioned — 315, 316 

Forney,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Alabama,  Governor  of 680 

Beauregard,  G.  T - 633, 679 

Florida,  Governor  of 680 

Pemberton,  John  C - - - 628 

Mentioned 528, 533, 630, 638, 680, 709, 717 

Forsyth,  John.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 917 

Foster,  C.W.  Mentioned 55 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Horatio  G.  Wright.) 

Foster,  John  G. 

Controversy  with  Hunter.  (See  South,  Department  of  the.) 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 400-403, 408 

Naglee,  Henry  M 397,407,419,423,428 

Mentioned 35, 394-407, 409, 411, 415, 416, 418, 425-427^ 

440,  441,  443,  452,457,715,  716,719,  759,763,766,773,  774,  894,903,931 

Staff  Officers  of.  Ordered  to  quit  the  Department  of  the  South 409’ 

Foulkes,  Thomas,  Steamer.  Mentioned 370-373 

Fox,  D.  W.  Mentioned 154, 163 

Fox,  Gustavus  V.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S.) 

Fox,  H.  W.  Mentioned  154,163 

Frampton’s  Plantation,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  October  22, 1862.  (See  Charles - 
ion  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  October  22- 
23, 1862.) 

Fraser,  James  L.  Mentioned 367,388 

Fraser,  John  B.  Mentioned 699 


* Sometimes  called  the  1st  Partisan  Rangers.  Changed  to  infantry,  June  24, 1863. 
t Merged  into  2d  Regiment,  December  4,  1862. 


1056 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Fraser,  John,  & Co. 

Correspondence  with  Francis  D.  Lee 965 

Mentioned 966 

Frederick,  A.  D. 

Mentioned 822,929 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7, 1863 276 

Frederick,  E.  J.  Mentioned 89,95 

French,  Mansfield.  Mentioned 189,191 

French,  Samuel  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 765 

War  Department,  C.  S 573 

Mentioned 580, 759, 764, 765, 777, 1020 

Fripp,  Mr.  Mentioned 304 

Fripp,  J.  J.  Mentioned 184 

Fripp,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 186 

Frost,  Edward.  Mentioned 508 

Fry,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 123, 126 

Fuller,  Mr.  Mentioned 1010 

Fuller,  Sergeant-Major.  Mentioned 182 

Fuller,  Charles  E. 

Correspondence  with  Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 341 

Mentioned 344 

Fuller,  R.  M.  Mentioned 182, 184 

Fundenburg,  W.  F.  Report  of  attack  on  blockading  squadron  off  Charles- 
ton, S.  C.,  January  31, 1863 .j 209 

Gadberry,  J.  M.  Mentioned 487, 529, 575, 582 

Gadsden,  A.  E.  Mentioned 914 

Gaiilard,  A.  S.  Mentioned 265 

Gaiilard,  Chris.  Mentioned 574,823,929 

Gaiilard,  P.  C. 

Mentioned 29, 30, 87, 88, 90, 94-97, 487, 530, 575, 591, 823, 929 

Report  of  skirmish  on  James  Island,  S.  C.,  June  3, 1862  30 

Gallie,  John  B.  Mentioned 212-216, 757 

Galliland,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 73 

Galt,  E.  M.  Mentioned 930 

Gamble,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 851 

Gamble,  Lewis  M.  Mentioned 851 

Gamble,  R.  H.  Mentioned 234, 475, 825, 850, 851, 860, 931 

Gantt,  F.  H.  Mentioned 188, 198, 311, 312, 793, 823, 930 

Gardiner,  George  F.  Mentioned - 68,169,321,367 

Gardner,  William  M.  Mentioned 478,479,562,765 

Garfield,  James  A.  Mentioned 429 

Garland,  J.  M.  Mentioned 447 

Garlington,  A.  C.  Mentioned - 784,815,816 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generalof.) 

Garnett,  Robert  S.  Mentioned 992,996 

Gary,  John  H. 

Mentioned 200 

Report  of  capture  of  U.  S.  S.  Isaac  Smith,  January  30,  1863  203 

Gary,  S.  M.  G.  Mentioned 931 

Gay,  Mr.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Georgia,  Citizens  of.) 

Gee ty,  William  W.  Mentioned 154,162 

Gelston,  R.  F.  Mentioned 779 


INDEX, 


1057 


Page. 

General  Lee,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  August  10, 1862.  Communications  from 


Barton,  William  B 370-372 

Elmendorf,  Antliony 371 

Goodell,  A.  W ^ 372 

Hunter,.  David  371, 373 

Mentioned 370-373 

General  Meigs,  Steamer.  Mentioned 232 

George,  Frederick  M.  Mentioned 164 

George  Washington,  Steamer. 

Destruction  of,  April  9,  1863. 

Communications  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 891 

Reports  of 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 283 

Hawley,  Joseph  R - ’ 281 

Saxton,  Rufus 280 

Walker,  W.  S 282 

Meutioned : 145, 165, 179, 280-283, 380 

Georgia. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Mercer,  H.  W 836 

Wayne,  Henry  C 836 


(See  also  South  Atlantic  Coast.) 

Emancipation  of  slaves  in.  Order  of  Hunter 341 

Expedition  along  coast  of,  November  3-10,  1862.  Reports  of 

Beard,  Oliver  T 191 

Saxton,  Rufus 189 

Martial  law.  Communications  from  ’ 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 478 

Augusta,  Ga.,  City  Council  of 479 

Augusta,  Ga.,  Mayor  of 478 

Georgia,  Governor  of 492, 497 

Lee,  Robert  E 497 

Metcalf,  Thomas  S r 478 

Ordnance  Department,  C-  S.  A 533 

Pemberton,  John  C 478,  495-497 


(See  also  Pemberton  to  Taylor , p.  502.) 

Military  departments  embracing 

Militia  

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

695,  756-760,  765-768, 781,  784, 790, 

Finegan,  Joseph 

Georgia,  Governor  of 

Hazzard,  W.  M 

Lawton,  Alexander  R 

Pemberton,  John  C 

Terry,  Alfred  H 

War  Department,  C.  S 

(See  also 

April  16,1862.  Whitemarsli  Island.  Skirmish  on.  ^ A 

Aug.  10,  1862.  General  Lee,  Steamer.  Capture  of,  in  Savannah  River. 

Sept.  30-Oct.  3,  1862.  May  and  Savannah  Rivers.  Reconnaissances  on. 

Nov.  3 -10,  1862.  Georgia.  Expedition  along  coast  of. 

7,  1862.  Spaulding on  Sapello  River.  Skirmish  at. 

67  R R— VOL  XIY 


1058 


INDEX. 


Georgia — Continued.  ag6* * * § 

Operations  in. 

See  also 

Nov.  13-18, 1862.  Doboy  River.  Expedition  to,  from  Beaufort. 

18,  1862.  Doboy  River.  Skirmish  on. 

Jan.  23-Feb.  1,  1863.  Saint  Mary’s  River.  Expedition  up  the. 

27,  1863.  Fort  McAllister.  Naval  attack  on. 

Feb.  1,  1863.  Fort  McAllister.  Naval  attack  on. 

28,  1863.  Nashville , Steamer.  Destruction  of  the. 

Fort  McAllister.  Naval  attack  on. 

Mar.  3,  1863.  Fort  McAllister.  Naval  attack  on. 

9,  1863.  Fort  McAllister.  Affair  at. 

June  8,  1863.  Brunswick.  Affair  near. 

11,1863 .Darien.  Attack  on.) 

Proclamation  to  citizens  of.  (Beauregard) 781 

Georgia,  Citizens  of.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 669 

Georgia,  Commissioners  of.  Correspondence  with  Howell  Cobb 731 

Georgia,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 693, 695, 781,  784 

Davis,  J efferson 718 

Lee,  Robert  E „ 492 

Mercer,  H.  W 944 

Pemberton,  John  C 496  547 

War  Department,  C.  S 717 

Georgia,  Military  District  of  (Confederate.) 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 736 

Lawton,  Alexander  R. 

Assigned  to  command 523 

Relieved  from  command 552 

Mercer,  H.  W.,  assigned  to  command 552,736 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863 : No.  75,  865. 

Taliaferro,  W.  B.,  assigned  to  duty  in 814 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy— Battalions : 12th  ( Capers ),  532,  930;  22d,  214,  576,  592, 

824, 930. 

Artillery,  Light— Battalion : 9th  ( Leyden ),  592.  Batteries : Chatham  ( Claghorn 
and  Wheaton),  214, 487,  559, 625, 824, 930 ; Chestatee  ( Bomar ),  293, 294, 297, 

304, 576, 592,  625,  824,  862, 930 ; Columbus  ( Croft),  576,  592,  625, 
Echols  (Tiller),  592,  860;  Joe  Thompson  ( Hanleiter ),  576,  592, 
625^»30 ; Martin’s,  213,  216, 217, 576,  592,  625, 824, 931 ; Jacob  Read’s, 

487, 557%76, 592, 625,  824, 930 ; Terrell  (Dawson),  187, 487, 576, 592, 625, 824, 

930. 

Cavalry — Battalions : 2d,*  576,  591,  592, 624, 625,  744  ; 3dt  (Clinch),  487,576, 

592, 625;  20th,  317-319, 576, 592, 625,  824, 930;  21st,  625,  823, 929;  24th,  824, 

930.  Companies:  Anderson’s  Partisan  Rangers,  t 502,625;  B (Georgia 
Hussars),  487;  Banks’  Partisan  Rangers,  576,  592,625;  Chatham  Light 
Horse  § (Akin),  487,744;  Effingham  Hussars  v)  (Bird),  487;  Hardwick 
Mounted  Rifles,  120, 214, 221,  487,  576,  592, 625 ; Lamar  Rangers  ||  (Brails- 
forf  ' ^2, 576, 592, 625 ; Liberty  Guards  ||  ( Hughes ),  576, 592, 625 ; Liberty 
Inde^Adent  Troop  ||  ( Walthour),  576,  592, 625  ; McIntosh  ||  ( Hopkins), 
576,592^325.  Regiments:  2d,  645;  2d  State  Guards,  930;  4th  (Clinch), 

315, 316, 824, 838, 846,  850,  851, 930  ; 5th,  824, 930. 


* Merged  into  5th  Regiment,  January  20.  1863. 

t January  23,  1863,  increased  to  a regiment,  4th  Georgia, 

t Merged  into  24th  Battalion,  January  12,  1863. 

§ Merged  into  2d  Battalion,  May  17,  i862. 

||  Merged  into  5th  Regiment,  January  20,  1863. 


INDEX. 


1059 


Page. 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned— Continued. 

Infantry — Battalions:  1st  Sharpshooters,* 213, 576,  592,625,  824,931;  4th, 

7th,  487  ; 8th,  202,  487,  576,  592,  822,  925, 926, 931 ; 10th,  592, 600,  625  ; 

11th, 1 487  ; 13th, t 576,592,624;  18th  ( Savannah  Volunteer  Guards ),  487, 

576,  592,  625,  711,  824,  930.  Companies:  Cobb  Guards,  860;  Tatnall 
Guards,  576, 592, 625.  Regiments:  1st  Regulars,  825,  845,  851, 860  ; 1st 
State  Guards,  930 ; 1st  Volunteers,  487, 576, 592, 824, 930 ; 13th,  6, 8-13, 

487 ; 16th,  697 ; 25th,  187,  487,  576,  592,  625,  775,  824,  931 ; 26th,  487 ; 

29th,  487,  625,  635,  775,  824,  893,  925, 931 ; 30th,  187, 487,  576,  592,  625,  635, 

775,  824, 925,  931 ; 31st,  487  ; 32d,  187,  548,  550,  551,  556,  557,  576,  592,  625, 

777,  824,930;  38th,  487;  46th,  92,259,  481, 529,  537,  565,575,  582,  591,  624, 

736,  741,  742,  818,  823,  891,  926,  931 ; 47th,  35,  90, 91,  98,  102, 187,  360,  575, 

576,  592,  625,  777,  824,  863,  930,  936,  939,  945;  48th,  481,  519,  520 ; 50th, 

487,  576,  587,  588, 592;  51st,  19,  90,  91,  481,  529,  575,  582,  587  ; 54th,  576, 

592,  625,  824,  930  ; 59th,  592,  600,  625;  63d,  824,  930. 

Miscellaneous  : Phillips’  Legion,  26, 487, 530,  576, 586-588. 

Georgia,  State  of,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 427,454,455,572,853,854 

Georgiana,  Steamer. 

Destruction  of,  off  Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  22, 1863.  Report  of  Charles  T. 

Haskell,  jr 232 

Mentioned 232 

Germain,  Ira  V.  Mentioned 132, 152, 380 

Gerry,  J.  O.  A.  Mentioned 477 

Gettis,  James.  Mentioned Ill 

Gibbon,  L.  Mentioned 566 

Gibbs,  Joseph.  Mentioned 278 

Gilchrist,  A.  £. 

Mentioned 293, 295, 297, 300, 304 

Report  of  Union  raid  on  Combahee  River,  S.  C.,  June  2, 1863  296 

Giles,  Solomon.  Mentioned 440 

Gillis,  James  H.  Mentioned 340, 348 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A. 

Assignments  to  command 464 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 459,465 

Benham,  Henry  W 335 

Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A 320 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 464 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 323, 324, 326-333 

Mentioned 4,5, 325, 326, 334, 335, 338, 464 

Report  of  skirmish  on  Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga.,  April  16, 1862  5 

Gilmer,  J.  F.  Mentioned 648, 649, 673, 966, 1023 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  s Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A.) 

Gilmer,  John  A.,  jr.  Mentioned 824 

Giraffe,  Steamer.  Mentioned „ 923 

Gist,  S.  R. 

Assignments  to  command 476, 568, 581, 641, 714, 742, 925 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 639, 741, 742,  815, 881 

Pemberton.  John  C 499,535,537,550,556,604 

Ripley,  Roswell  S .. 277, 656, 804, 812 

Smith,  William  Duncan 581 


*De  Kalb  Rifles,  assigned  to,  July  23, 1862. 
t Merged  into  47th  Regiment,  May  12,  1862. 

J Merged  into  63d  Regiment,  December  23,  1862. 


1060 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Gist,  S.  R. — Continued. 

Mentioned 257, 259, 476, 493, 500-502, 507/520, 529, 

530, 534, 535, 538, 549, 559, 568, 571, 575, 578, 580, 581, 585, 586, 591, 592, 601, 
621,  624, 625, 641,  643, 6 19, 651, 652,  655, 667,  706,  713, 714, 716, 719, 720, 739, 
742,  748, 764, 776, 813, 815, 822, 829,  830, 832, 891, 894,  918,  925,  926,  934, 956 
Reporos  of 

Cole’s  Island,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  May  20,  1862 16 

James  Island,  S.  C. 

Inspection  of  defenses  of 804 

Skirmish  on,  June  3,  1862 28 

James  and  Dixon’s  Islands,  S.  C.  Affair  between,  May  25,  1862  19 

Gittings,  E.  Mentioned 150, 152, 154, 168, 367, 388 

Gladden,  Mr.  Mentioned 208 

Glassell,  William  T. 

Mentioned 243, 261, 837 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 277 

G.  L.  Brockenborough,  Sloop.  Mentioned 724 

Glover,  John  V.  Mentioned 289 

Gobin,  J.  P.  Shindel.  Mentioned 154 

Godbold,  Huger. 

Mentioned 293, 294, 296, 302, 304, 305 

Report  of  Union  raid  on  Combahee  River,  S.  C.,  June  2,  1863 295 

Godon,  S.  W.  Mentioned 145,147,348 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  Jose. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 718,745,811,828,851,946 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 604,745,746,754 

Pemberton,  John  C 561,565 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 834 

Smith,  L.  Jaquelin 810 

Mentioned 243, 548 

556, 561, 610-612,  619-621, 633,  634, 646, 673, 718, 727, 758, 953, 955, 963, 964 
Good,  Tilghman  H. 

Mentioned 129, 130, 152, 153, 163, 363, 367, 388, 390, 434, 435 

Reports  of 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Oc- 
tober 22-23,  1862  157, 160 

Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla.  Expedition  to,  September  30-October  13, 

1862  132,133 

Goodell,  A.  W. 

Correspondence  with  William  B.  Barton 370,  372 

Mentioned 126, 370-372 

Goodlett,  S.  D. 

Mentioned 87, 92, 101, 529, 575, 592, 929 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 97 

Goodrich,  Hiram  P.  Mentioned 55 

Goodwin.  Joseph.  Mentioned 233 

Gordon,  G.  A.  Mentioned 576, 592, 824, 930 

Gordon,  W.  W.  Mentioned 865-869,  871 

Gorgas,  Josiah.  Mentioned 541, 542,  562, 674, 679, 726, 745, 750, 755, 866, 876, 886 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Ordnance  Department , C.  S.  A.) 

Gould,  J ohn  H.  Mentioned 125, 126, 175-178, 368, 388, 390, 462 

Gourand,  George  E.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 417 


INDEX. 


1061 

Page. 


Governor  Milton,  C.  S.  S. 

Capture  of,  October  7,  1862.  Report  of  George  W.  Bacon 136 

(See  also  Beresford  Lake,  Fla.  Expedition  to,  October  6-9,  1862.) 

Mentioned 131> 

Graef,  Frederick  E.  Mentioned 281 

Graham,  B.  A.  Mentioned 9 

Graham,  Robert  F. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley ’ 

Mentioned »7.259.4^ 

487, 521, 522, 529, 575, 581, 591, 776, 823, 893, 929, 958, 974, 1024, 1025 

Grant,  H.F.  Mentioned 315,316 

Grant,  U.  S.  Mentioned yby> 

- w.,w 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 70 

Gray,  M.  M.  Mentioned 288 

Gray,  Sylvester  F.  Mentioned ‘ 69>  165>  169>  179>  1098 

Green,  James  M.  Mentioned 11  ‘ 

Green,  J.  F.  Correspondence  with  Samuel  F.  Du  Pont 267,  268,  896 

Green,  J.  S.  Mentioned ' ^ 

Greene,  A.  E.  Mentioned 

Greene,  Charles  J.  Mentioned by> 

Greene,  G.  W.  Mentioned ' 

Greene,  William.  Mentioned H7  Qft 

Greer,  Richard  W.  Mentioned 87>  yu 

Gregg,  Maxcy. 

Correspondence  with  J ohn  C.  Pemberton > 

m,  ,.  479,481,482,505 

Gregg,  Thomas  E.  Mentioned '~ 

Gregorie,  J.  W.  Mentioned ' 

Grenad,  B.  O.  Mentioned 

Grimball,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Grimball,  Arthur.  Mentioned 

Grimball,  W.  H.  Mentioned * 

Grogan,  Charles  H.  Mentioned “V 

Grundshig,  Charles  Paul.  Mentioned ^bb 

Guerin,  H.  C.  _.  a 

Charges  against.  Communications  from  War  Department,  C.  S 97b 

(See  also  Beauregard  to  Orr , p.  910.) 

Correspondence  with  G.  X.  Beauregard M7  91o!  976i!  977 

Mentioned ’ rvi  60  71 

Guild,  Simon  C.  Mentioned * VI ° ’ orQ 

Gulf,  Department  of  the.  (Union.)  West  Florida  annexed  to 369 

Gunter,  M.  Mentioned 

GUSMemionedR' 35, 36, 278, 362, 367, 386, 390, 461, 468, 469 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 ^56 

Guthrie,  John  J.  Mentioned. 

U . Correspondence  with'G.  T.  Beauregard - 

Ha Tstgnm“  command 568,587,736,936,939 

C°irBeauUregard,  G.  T . . 649, 692, 711, 713, 745, 772, 795, 847 , 849, 852, 878, 888, 927, 932 
Jenkins,  John * 


1062 


INDEX. 


Hagood,  Johnson — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Pemberton,  John  C 555  597 

Smith,  William  Duncan ^qq 

Mentioned 87, 91, 92, 100, 103, 104, 181,  487,  492,' 629,’  568^  575, 585*  587, 591, 

593, 602, 624,  625, 638, 651,  692, 701,  736, 740, 772, 780, 783, 792, 793  795  798 
. . 809, 823,  840, 889, 909, 926, 928, 930, 932, 934, 936, 937, 944, 953, 962-964,’ 1014 

Report  of  engagement  at  Seccssionville/S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 ’ 98 

Hale,  Christopher.  Mentioned 

Hale,  E.  B.,U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 28,62,129,280-282,331,340,348 

Hale,  John  P.  Mentioned 2023 

Hall,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned " 39  95 

Hall,  E.  D.  Mentioned g23  §24 

Hall,  James  F. 

Mentioned . . 150,  i55>  265, 168, 367, 390 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  S.  C 

October  22-23,  1862  _ ’’  J56 

Halleck,  Henry  W . Mentioned 374,  377, 397, 400, 403, 412, 413, 415, 416, 460, 979 

(For  correspondence  as  General-in-Chief,  see  Army  Headquarters.)  ’ 

Hallett,  Captain.  Mentioned 294  197 

Halpine,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 359, 379, 392, 399, 404, 406, 418,’  419 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  David  Hunter.) 

Hamilton,  Arthur.  Mentioned 248 

Hamilton,  J ohn.  Mentioned 35, 55, 322, 326-329, 331, 362, 390, 450, 453, 461  1003 

Hamiter,  H.  D.  Mentioned * ’ gg 

Hammond,  A.  J.  Mentioned 102 

Hammond,  William  A.  Mentioned * 430 

Hamner,  W.  H.  Mentioned 24g 

Hampton,  Frank.  Mentioned 575 

Hampton,  Wade.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 890 

Handerson,  H.  C.  Mentioned g0 

Hangen,  W.  H.  R.  Mentioned 254 

Hanleiter,  Cornelius  R.  Mentioned ... ...........  576  592  824  930 

Hanley,  Mrs.  Mentioned ’ 370  372 

Hardee,  William  J.  Mentioned 567 

Harden,  William  D.  Mentioned ggg  g7g 

Harleston,  F.  H. 

Correspondence  with  W.  R.  Calhoun gg3  ^4 

Mentioned 9ft/  oak 

Harllee,  William  W.  

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 518  521  578  580 

Mentioned 476.’  618,’  589 

Harold,  James  H.  Mentioned j,., 

^ „ 461 

Harris,  D.  B.  # 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 695, 700, 701, 707, 722, 769, 834, 841, 846, 902, 904, 956, 970 

Che ves,  John  R 

Cheves,  Langdon g5g  g72 

Echols,  William  H 957’ 972 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A * ’ ggg 

Lee,  Francis  D * ^ 

Moreno,  Theodore ^ 

Mentioned  ” "T.™  Ml,' 5^648, 668, 

700,  727  , 728,770,782,802,815,867,868,876,  894,949,950,973,974,1024 


INDEX. 


1063 


Page. 

Harris,  D.  B.— Continued. 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  April  7,  1863 245 

McAllister,  Forfc,  Ga.  Naval  attack  on,  March  3,  1863  219 

Harris,  Isham  G.  Mentioned 667 

Harrison,  George  P.,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 777 

Mentioned 179, 187, 188, 548, 551, 576, 592, 650, 742, 824, 930 

Harrison,  J.  J.  Mentioned 477>  1^6, 188 

Harrison,  Joseph.  Mentioned * 271,273 

Harrison,  Robert.  Mentioned... 235,825,850 

Hart,  Thompson  D.  Mentioned 462 

Hartridge,  Alfred  L.  Mentioned 213,576,592 

Hartstene,  H.  J.  Mentioned 184,207,694,1018,1019 

Haskell,  A.  M.  Mentioned 726 

Haskell,  Charles  T.,  jr.  • 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 747 

Reports  of 

Bull  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  January  31,  1863  210 

Georgiana,  Steamer.  Destruction  of,  off  Charleston,  S.  C.,  March  22, 

1863 232 

Stonewall  Jackson,  Steamer.  Destruction  of,  April  12, 1863  286 

Hatch,  L.  M.  Mentioned 487,500,501,588,596,894 

Hatfield,  T.  L.  Mentioned 148,278 

Hawkes,  H.  F.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Henry  W.  Benham.) 

Hawkins,  M.  P.  Mentioned 80 

Hawley,  Joseph  R. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Benham 1004 

Mentioned  33, 58, 65, 164, 167, 168, 196, 197, 362, 386, 388, 390, 424, 

434,  435,  451,  453,  461-463,  468,981,  1000,  1002,  1003,  1008,  1010,1011 

Reports  of 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Octo- 
ber 22-23,  1862 169 

George  Washington,  Steamer.  Destruction  of,  April  9,  1863 281 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 67 

Hay,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 392 

Hayden,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned ®5 

Hayes,  Patrick.  Mentioned 34 

Hayne,  Isaac  W.  Mentioned 588’ 751 

Hayne,  T.  B.  Mentioned 203,204 

Haynes,  Mr.  Mentioned - 140 

Haynes,  William  H.  Mentioned - ®8 

Haynsworth,  G.  E.  Mentioned * 265 

Hays,  R.  Mentioned 292 

Hazzard,  T.  E.  Mentioned 315,316 

Hazzard,  W.  M. 

Correspondence  with  Duncan  L.  Clinch 

Mentioned - 315,316 

Report  of  affair  near  Brunswick,  Ga.,  June  8,  1863  31o 

Head,  John  M.  Mentioned 169 

Heckman,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 278, 429, 434, 435, 440, 441, 443, 452 

Helper,  H.  H.  Mentioned * 

Hemingway,  John.  Mentioned - 

Hendricks,  W.  H.  Mentioned ---  — 89,97 


1064 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Hendrix,  John  C.  Mentioned i 293  304 

Henery,  W.  S.  Mentioned 820 

Henry, . Mentioned L 727  728 

Henry,  Andrew,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned^ , 28 

Henry,  Guy  V . Mentioned - 150, 152, 165, 461 

Hernandez,  Frank.  Mentioned 800 

Heron,  Mr.  Mentioned 190 

Herter,  Samuel.  Mentioned * 103 

Hewitt,  William  E. 

Mentioned 294, 299, 303-306 

Report  of  Union  raid  on  Combakee  River,  S.  C.,  June  2, 1863 297 

Heyliger,  L. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 920 

Mentioned 959 

Heyward,  James  B.  Mentioned 266 

Heyward,  J.  G.  Mentioned 266 

Heyward,  W.  H.  Mentioned 903 

Heyward,  William  C. 

Mentioned 300, 302, 487, 963 

Statement  of,  respecting  Union  raid  on  Combahee  River,  S.  C.,  June  2, 1863.  307 

Hibben,  Steamer.  Mentioned 958  900 

Hickok,  E.  H.  Mentioned 28  61*  278 

Hickox,  Volney.  Mentioned 392 

Hicks,  John  W.  Mentioned 107 

Higginson,  Henry  L.  Mentioned 23,24 

Higginson,  T.  W. 

Correspondence  with  A.  H.  McCormick 839 


Mentioned 194, 226, 233, 236, 421, 4^23, 838, 903 


Report  of  expedition  up  Saint  Mary’s  River,  January  23-February  1,  1863.  195 


Hill,  D.  H. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 789, 798, 903, 906, 939 

Mentioned 441,570,764 

Hill,  George  H. 

Mentioned  . . . .• 132, 136, 148, 149, 152 

Reports  of 


Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad;  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Octo- 
ber 22-23,  1862 I34 

Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla.  Expedition  to,  September  30-October  13,  1862.  134 


Hill,  L.  S.  Mentioned 89,98 

Hill,  Robert  C.  Mentioned 282,824 

Hills,  Francis  M. 

Mentioned 35 

Report  of  skirmish  on  James^ Island,  S.  C.,  Juue  10,  1862 37 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C.  Sanitary  condition  of.  Communication  from  Charles  H. 

Crane 384 

Hine,  Elmore  C.  Mentioned 109 

Hines,  T.  P.  Mentioned 570 

Hirsch,  Herman.  Mentioned 083 

Hitchcock,  Edwin  S.  Mentioned 51,67,68 

Hodge,  Patrick  F.  Mentioned 103 

Heffner,  Richard  J.  Mentioned 236 

Holabird,  Samuel  B.  Mentioned 393 

Holbrook,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 278 


Holbrook,  Frederick.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Vermont , Governor  of .) 


INDEX. 


1065 


Page. 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H.  Mentioned 541,677 

Holt,  Joseph.  Mentioned . - 993,998 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Judge- Advocate-General,  U.  S.  A.) 

Honduras,  Steamer.  Mentioned 5,6,346 

Hood,  John  B.  Mentioned 816 

Hook,  Cornelius.  Mentioned 419,461 

Hooker,  Joseph.  Mentioned 763,764,766,940,955 

Hoole,  T.  G.  Mentioned - 233 

Hooton,  Thomas.  Mentioned - - 51 , 68 

Hope,  Samuel  E.  Mentioned 824,850,851,931 

Hopkins,  Charles  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Dunham,  Joseph  439 

Finegan,  Joseph 138’  139  > 142 

Court  of  Inquiry  in  case  of.  Evacuation  of  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla.,  Octo- 
ber 2,  1862 142> 143 

Mentioned 138,141-143,860 

Report  of  expedition  to  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla.,  September  30-October  13, 

1862 138,141 

Hopkins,  O.  Mentioned 576,592 

Horn,  J.  N.  Mentioned 931 

Horsley,  J.  T.  Mentioned 12 

Houghton,  R.  W.  Mentioned 80 

Housatonic,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 210 

Howard,  John. 

Correspondence  with  William  H.  Echols 958 

Mentioned - 695,956,958,970-972 

Howard,  Ocran  H. 

Correspondence  with  E.  J.  Keenan 3 

Mentioned 61,62 

Report  of  skirmish  on  James  Island,  S.  C.,  June  3,  1862 _ 27 

Howell,  J.  B.  Mentioned 278,435,461 

Hubbell,  Henry  W.,  jr.  Mentioned -- 55 

Hudson,  J.  H.  Mentioned 88> 95 

Huger,  Benjamin. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  576 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 833 

Directed  to  make  an  inspection  of  artillery,  etc.,  at  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and 

Savannah,  797 

Mentioned 515,  524, 567-570, 572, 691, 797 

Report  on  defenses  of  Savannah,  853 

Huger,  C.  K. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 540,548 

Mentioned 260,487,530,575,891,973 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 276 

Hughes,  Mr.  Mentioned 300-302 

Hughes,  Aaron  K.  Mentioned 196, 197 

Hughes,  George  D.  Mentioned - 81 

Hughes,  William,  jr.  Mentioned 576,  o92 

Huguenin,  F.  A.  Mentioned 273 

Humbert,  J.  B.  Mentioned 88, 94, 95 

Hunt,  B.  F.  Mentioned ..... - — 822 


1066 


INDEX. 


Hunter,  David.  Page' 

Address  to  soldiers  of  the  Department  of  the  South 419 

Controversy  with  Foster.  (See  South,  Department  of  the.) 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 365 

Army  Headquarters 374, 381, 390, 393, 394, 306, 397’ 400  401 

404, 409-412,  417,  424,  425,  427,  428,  430-432,  436,  440,  441, 443, 453, 467 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 5 33g 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P . _ . . 393 

Barton,  William  B 370,371,378 

Beauregard,  6.  T 464,465 

Bell,  Louis ’ 3gg 

Benham,  Henry  W '44," 46,'980, 983 

Brannan,  John  M 344 

Dandy,  George  B 2g5 

Davis,  Jefferson 44g 

Duane,  James  C 

Du  Pont,  Samuel  F 279, 361, 421, 437, 438, 442, 454, 455 

Elmendorf,  Anthony 374 

Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A 421  429  431  433 

Ferry,  Orris  S _ ’414 

Lincoln,  Abraham 435,  441)  447>  455>  469>  47Q 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 452  452 

Mercer,  H.  W ’ 373 

Montgomery,  James 466 

Naglee,  Henry  M 396, 398, 405, 406, 412-415 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 428 

Seymour,  Truman 392 

Stevens,  Isaac  I . '44  48  980 

Stevenson,  Thomas  G 439i  440>  ^ 444 

Togdes,  Israel 442-446,450.451 

War  Department,  U.  S 4g 

337, 338, 347, 350, 353, 354, 363-366, 374, 432, 448, 451, 452, 463  979 

Wright,  Horatio  G 44, 47, 355, 357-361, 363 

Declared  an  outlaw  by  Jefferson  Davis 599 

Mentioned 42, 45, 58, 108, 123, 240, 278, 279, 334, 

338, 339, 344, 345,  349, 358,  362, 365,  367, 373, 376, 378, 380, 397-400, 402-404 
406-408, 412, 413,  415-417, 419, 428, 434, 436, 451, 452, 461, 464, 468, 469, 509’ 
599,757,833,  848,850,931,  934,969,  979-981,  986-995,999-1004,  1010-1013 

Orders. 

Emancipation  of  slaves 333  34^ 

Officers  of  Foster’s  staff  to  quit  the  Department  of  the  South 409 

Believed  from  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South 376  464 

Beports  of 

James  Island,  S.  C.  Evacuation  of,  June  28-July  7, 1862 107 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16, 1862 42  43 

Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga.  Skirmish  on,  April  16,  1862 ' 4 

Besumes  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South 391 

Staff.  Announcements  of 359,361,392,394,452,453,460 

Hunter,  J.  M.  G.  Correspondence  with  W.  B.  Boggs 545 

Hurlbut,  Surgeon.  Mentioned g3 

Huron,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned • 359 

Hutchings,  H.  W.  Mentioned 449 

Hutchinson,  John  J.  Mentioned 169 


INDEX. 


1067 


Page. 

Hutchinson’s  Island,  S,  C.  Reconnaissance  on,  June  12, 1862.  Report  of  R. 

J.  Jeffords 38 

Hutchison,  Robert  G.  Mentioned - 71 

Hutson,  Andrew.  Mentioned - 18 

Hutson,  B.  C.  Mentioned 18 

Ida,  Steamer.  Mentioned 323 

Illinois  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 39th,  435, 444, 461, 469. 

Inglesby,  Charles.  Mentioned, 201,266 

Ingraham,  Duncan  N.  * 

Conference  with  Beauregard.  Defense  of  Charleston,  S.  C.  Minutes  of. ..  621 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 205,642,664,799,821,835 

Lee,  Francis  D 671, 767 

Mentioned  . . . 204,  206, 209, 504, 621, 622, 642, 671, 767, 769, 818, 821, 837, 841, 843, 890 

Proclamation.  Blockade  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  declared  to  be  raised 205 

Report  of  attack  on  blockading  squadron  off  Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  31, 

1863 206 

Ironsides,  U.  S.  S.  (See  New  Ironsides,  U.  S.  S .) 

Isaac  Smith,  U.  S.  S.*  Capture  of,  January  30, 1863. 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 200 

Ripley,  Roswell  S - 756 

Yates,  Joseph  A 756 

Mentioned 199-204, 756, 758, 773 

Reports  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T - - - 199,200 

Brown,  J.  Welsman 202 

Gary,  John  H - 203 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 200 

Yates,  Joseph  A 201 

Island  City,  Steamer.  Mentioned - 288 

Iverson,  Alfred.  Mentioned — - 493,498,542,547 

Ives,  J.  C.  Mentioned 531 

Izard,  Allen  C.  Mentioned 25,793 

Jackson,  Andrew.  Mentioned 708 

Jackson,  Henry  R.  Mentioned - 916 

Jackson,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with  Horatio  G.  Wright 341 

Mentioned 164, 168, 362, 367, 388, 390, 461 

Reports  of 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Octo- 
ber 22-23,  1862 173 

Pinckney  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  August  21*  1862  115, 116 

Seeessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 78 

Jackson,  Stonewall,  Steamer.  (See  Stonewall  Jackson,  Steamer.) 

Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Evacuation  of,  by  Union  forces,  March  31,  1863.  (See  Beauregard  to  Sed- 
don,  p.  850  ; also  Operations  about  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  March  23-31, 

1863.) 

Operations  near,  March  23-31, 1863. 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Finegan) 850 


* After  capture  called  by  the  Confederates  “ Stono." 


1068 


INDEX. 


Jacksonville,  Fla. — Continued. 

Operations  near,  March  23-31,  1863. 

Reports  of 

Finegan,  Joseph 234 

Rust,  John  D 232 

Recapture  of,  October  5, 1862.  Report  of  Franklin  E.  Town 136 

(See  also  Brannan’s  report,  pp.  130, 131.) 

Reoccupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  March  10,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.-T. 339 

Hunter,  David 42i 

Saxton,  Rufus 423 

Orders.  (Finegan) 220 

Reports  of 

Finegan,  Joseph 226 

Saxton,  Rufus 226 

Skirmishes  at  and  near,  March  25  and  29.  (See  Jacksonville,  Fla.  Opera- 
tions near , March  23-31,  1863.) 

James  Adger,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 268 

James,  George  S.  Mentioned 487,505,529,575,582 

James  Island,  S.  C. 

Affair  on,  May  31,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 900 

Simonton,  Charles  H 960,961 

Report  of  Charles  H.  Simonton 280 

Armament  aiid  force  necessary  for  defense  of ....... 808 

Evacuation  of,  June  28-July  7, 1862. 

Communications  from 

Pemberton,  John  c 581 

Wright,  Horatio  G 361 

Reports  of 

Hunter,  David 167 

Wright,  Horatio  G 107-109 

Inspection  of  defenses  of.  Report  of  S.  R.  Gist 804 

Skirmishes  on. 

June  3, 1862.  Reports  of 

Capers,  Ellison 29 

Gaillard,  P.  C ' 39 

Gist,  S.  R 28 

Howard,  Ocran  H 27 

June  8, 1862.  Report  of  Isaac  I.  Stevens 33 

June  10, 1862.  Communications  from  Horatio  G.  Wright 352 

Reports  of 

Chat  field,  John  L 36 

Hills,  Francis  M 37 

Wright,  Horatio  G 35 

James  and  Dixon’s  Islands,  S.  C.  Affair  between,  May  25, 1862.  Report  of 

S.  R.  Gist ...........  19 

James,  Martin  S.  Mentioned I54  168 

James,  William.  Mentioned 197 

J ami  son,  J oshua.  Mentioned  .... .... .... ...... .... ...... . .... ......  87  89  98 

Jeffers,  W.  H.  (Corporal.)  Mentioned ’ 26 

Jeffers,  W.  H.  (Lieutenant.)  Mentioned.................................  297 


INDEX. 


1069 


Jefferson,  E.  E. 

Mentioned - 188 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23,  1862  * - - - 188 

Jefferson,  Thomas.  Mentioned 448 

Jeffords,  R.  J. 

Correspondence  with  W.  S.  Walker 602 

Mentioned 113,291,632,641,644,791,823,929 

Reports  of 

Fenwick’s  Island,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  July  9, 1862 11 J 

Hutchinson’s  Island,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  on,  June  12, 1862  38 

Jenkins,  C.  J.  Mentioned 931 

Jenkins,  John. 

Correspondence  with  Johnson  Hagood "5 

Mentioned . 34,487,530,576,591 

Jenney,  Edwin  S.  Mentioned 461 

Jeter,  B.  A.  Mentioned 929 

John . Mentioned 899 

John  Adams,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned - 195-197 

John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Affairs  on,  June  8-9, 1862.  Report  of  Nathan  G.  Evans 34 

Expedition  to,  May  22,  1862.  Report  of  Nathan  G.  Evans 48 

Skirmish  on,  June  7,  1862.  Report  of  R.  W.  Crawford 32 

Johnson,  George.  Mentioned 292 

Johnson,  John.  Mentioned 8 

Johnson,  L.  J.  Mentioned 575,592 

Johnson,  Thomas  H. 

Mentioned 483>  ^ 186>  31°-314’ 487 

Report  of  expedition  to  Bluffton,  S.  C.,  June  4,  1863  309 

Johnson,  William  H.  (Lieutenant.)  Mentioned 265 

Johnson,  William  H.  (Sergeant.)  Mentioned 154 

Johnson,  William  M.  Mentioned 88,95 

Johnston,  George  H.  Mentioned 419 

Johnston,  Joseph  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 99 

Beauregard,  G.  944 

Mentioned 524, 689, 944, 947, 953, 954, 959, 969 

Johnston,  L.  F.  Mentioned 

Jones,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned J* 

Jones,  Aaron.  Mentioned 

Jones,  Caleb.  Mentioned - 

Jones,  C.  Ap.  R.  Mentioned ‘ 

Jones,  F.  M.  Mentioned ® 

Jones,  Iredell.  Mentioned *'  ’ ^ 

Jones,  John.  Mentioned 

Jones,  J.  S.  (Captain.)  Mentioned - 

Jones,  J.  S.  (Sergeant.)  Mentioned 3 

Jones,  Paul,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned-  .129, 132, 134-136, 145, 148, 150, 169, 173-175, 196, 233 

Jones,  Samuel.  Mentioned ^ 

Jones,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned ’ ‘ 

Jordan,  D.  W.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 

Jordan,  John  V.  Mentioned 


1070 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Jordan,  Thomas. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard . 650, 

651, 680, 780, 781, 785-787, 928, 955, 959, 968 

Mentioned 609, 610, 619, 621. 676, 726, 816, 959 

(For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard.) 

Joseph,  Brig.  Mentioned 512 

Judge- Advocate-General,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Lincoln,  A 979 

Martin,  Benjamin  N 1010 

Junker,  George.  Mentioned 148, 154, 162 

Justice,  Jefferson.  Mentioned 61,73,74 

Kanapaux,  J.  T.  Mentioned  487, 529, 575, 824, 930 

Kane,  Pierre  C.  Mentioned 362 

Kate,  Mr.  Mentioned 951,952 

Kearney,  Edmund.  Mentioned 726 

Keating,  Schooner.  Mentioned 323,329 

Keck,  Coleman  A.  G.  Mentioned 128 

Keenan,  Edward  J. 

Correspondence  with  Ocran  H.  Howard 338 

Mentioned 28, 134-136 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23,  1862 148 

Keith,  Charles  C.  T.  Mentioned 278 

Keitt,  G.  D.  Mentioned 88,95 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 963 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 743,  893 

Mentioned 259, 269-271, 291, 487, 529, 575, 591, 745, 748, 776, 823,  929 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 271 

Kelton,  John  C.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Army  Headquarter 8.) 

Kemble,  George  S.  Mentioned 64,93 

Kemper,  K.  Mentioned 243,265,926 

Kennedy,  T.  J.  Mentioned 435 

Keokuk,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 241-247, 250, 257-259, 261, 264-266, 

272,  274,  275,  277, 430, 432, 438,  890, 893, 902, 905, 908, 909, 926, 1015-1017 

Kerr,  William  A.  Mentioned 892 

Keyes,  William.  Mentioned 356 

Keystone  State,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 208,209 

Key  West,  Fla.  Affairs  at,  generally.  Communications  from 

Brannan,  John  M 344 

Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A 422, 429 

Huufcer,  David 410,421,422,432 

Kilbourne,  J.  M.  Mentioned 57,58 

Kilkenny  River,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on  the,  September  10,  1862.  Communica- 
tions from  John  C.  Pemherton 120 

King,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 87,90 

King,  J.  Gadsden. 

. Correspondence  with  W.  R.  Calhoun 563 

Mentioned 265, 790 

King,  McMillan.  Mentioned 265 

King,  Mallory  P.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  S.  B.  Gist  and  William 
Duncan  Smith.) 

King,  Mitchell.  Mentioned 270, 273 


INDEX. 


1071 


Page. 

Kinloch,  K.  A.  Mentioned 7^7 

Kinnear,  James.  Mentioned * 54  ’ 'G 

Kinzie,  Arthur  M.  Mentioned 371,392,457 

Kirk,  M.  J.  Mentioned - 824, 9.>0 

Kirkland,  Mr.  Mentioned - - - - 30G’ 963 

Kirk’s  Bluff,  S.  C.  Affair  at,  October  18, 1862.  Eeport  of  William  B.  Barton. . 143 

Kitching,  J.  B.  Mentioned 

La  Coste,  Adolphus.  Mentioned 243>  ^bb>  y^b 

Lake,  Felix.  Mentioned 202 

Lamar,  T.  G. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 97 

Mentioned 29, 87, 88, 90-92, 101, 487, 530, 559, 575, 592, 598, 599 

Eeport  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 9o 

Lamb,  John  P.  Mentioned 315,316 

Lambert,  Louis  J.  Mentioned 432>  4r>2> 380 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  M.  JBrannan.) 

Lamkin,  J.  N.  Mentioned 282,284,824,930 

Lanahan,  J.  Mentioned 84 

Lancaster,  H.  C.  Mentioned 289 

Lancaster,  J.  W.  Mentioned 88,95 

Lane,  William  A. 

Correspondence  with  J ohn  W . Millen 317 

Mentioned 347 

Eeport  of  attack  on  Darien,  Ga.,  June  11,  1863 318 

Langdon,  L.  L.  Mentioned *-*  363,367,390,462 

Langley,  G.  W.  Mentioned 276 

Lantz,  Henry  A.  Mentioned - 23 

Larkins,  Michael.  Mentioned J54 

Lartigue,  G.  B.  Mentioned 555 

Latrobe,  C.  H.  Mentioned - * itat 

Latta,  Judge.  Mentioned 496 

Law,  Captain.  Mentioned 347 

Lawton,  Alexander  R. 

Assignments  to  command 523 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 472, 

479, 500, 503, 525, 534-538, 548, 550, 558, 566 

Mentioned 471, 478, 487, 520, 523, 526, 536, 539, 552, 558, 603, 765 

Believed  from  command  of  Military  District  of  Georgia 552 

Lawton,  B.  W.  Mentioned.. 487 

Lawton,  W.  J.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard  645 

Lay,  George  W.  Mentioned G49s  619-621 

Lay,  John  F.  * 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 307 

Mentioned 294>726 

Eeports  of 

Bluffton,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  June  4,  1863. . 310 

Combahee  Eiver,  S.  C.  Union  raid  on,  June'2,  1863 298 

Leadbetter,  D.  Mentioned - f69 

Leadbetter,  Thomas  D.  Mentioned 119,309 

Leake,  W.  D.  Mentioned 530,576 

Leasure,  Daniel. 

Correspondence  with  Horatio  G.  Wright 49 

Mentioned 53-64, 66, 75, 108, 109, 362, 367, 1006, 1008 

Eeports  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16, 1862  46, 71 


1072 


INDEX. 


Leasure,  S.  George.  Mentioned 62, 72-74  *77 

Le  Bleux,  L.  F.  Mentioned ’ ^ ^86 

Lechler,  Ambrose  A. 

Mentioned Anrt 

* 462 

Report  of  attack  on  blockading  squadron  off  Charleston,  S.  C.,  Jan.  31, 1863.  209 

Leckey,  David  A. 

Mentioned 59  72  73 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16, 1862  ’ 76 

Ledlie,  James  H.  Mentioned 424 

Lee,  Charles  H.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
GeneraVs  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 

Lee,  Francis  D. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

070, 671,  680, 686, 694,  719,  767, 791, 820,  837, 843^885, 1017-1019, 1023 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 966 

Fraser  & Co.,  John 96^ 

Harris,  D.  B „a\ 

Iugraham,  Duncan  N 671  767 

Detailed  to  superintend  construction  of  torpedo  rams  in  Europe 965  966 

Mentioned 496,526,531, 

579, 617,  621,  629,  631, 636,  637,  661,  672,  817, 821, 844,  917,  924,  935,  966 
Lee,  General,  Steamer.  (See  General  Lee,  Steamer.) 

Lee,  G.  W.  C.  Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 894,899 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  Jefferson  Davis.) 

Lee,  Hutson. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 767,849,852 

Pemberton,  John  C 661 

Mentioned - .* '.'.'.'.I'.  *726, 780 

Lee,  Robert  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 560,  567, 569, 766, 1019 

Finegan,  Joseph 477,484 

Florida,  Governor  of ’ 403 

Georgia,  Governor  of 492 

Magrath,  A.  G 504 

Miles,  W.  Porcher 504,560 

Pemberton,  John  C 471 f 480-482,  484, 

491,495,  497,  498,  502,  505,  506,  509,  518-520,  523,  526-528,533,536,541 

Porter,  W.  D 504 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 7H 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 503  515  524 

War  Department,  C.  S 632, 759,’ 762,’ 763 

Mentioned 471, 474, 475, 478, 480, 484, 498, 506, 519, 527, 528, 531, 534, 541, 

566, 594, 613,  629-631, 640, 668,  673,  711,  771,  816,  820,  825, 833, 940, 955 

Leech,  G.  E.  Mentioned ! 

Leesburg,  Steamer.  Mentioned 19 

Leightley,  Private.  Mentioned 301 

Leopard,  Steamer.  Mentioned 943  77g 

Le  Roy,  William  E.  Mentioned 204 

Lesesne,  Henry  R.  Mentioned 260  276 

Lesesne,  William.  Mentioned 26 


INDEX. 


1073 


Page. 

Lewis,  W.  Ely.  Mentioned 20, 21, 60, 71 

Leyden,  A.  Mentioned 592 

Libby,  Alvan  H Mentioned 79 

Libby,  Jonah.  Mentioned 80 

Lieber,  Francis.  Mentioned - 466 

7 4 

Lincoln,  Abraham. 

Correspondence  with 

BeDham,  H.  W 991,993,995 

Du  Pont,  Samuel  F 440,441 

Hunter,  David 435, 441, 447 , 455, 469, 470 

Judge- Advocate-General,  U.  S.  A 979 

Maine,  Governor  of 997 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 997 

New  Hampshire,  Governor  of 996 

Rhode  Island,  Governor  of 997 

Vermont,  Governor  of 997 

Mentioned 195, 

197. 240,  385, 401, 411,  415, 416, 436, 438, 440, 443, 460, 464, 466, 1010-1013 
Little  Folly  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  June  11-13,1863.  Report  of  Ros- 
well S.  Ripley 319 

Locke,  J.  L. 

Correspondence  with  H.  W.  Mercer 682 

Mentioned 683, 727 

Locust  Point,  Steamer.  Mentioned... 47,108 

Long,  A.  L. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 476 

Mentioned 502 

(For  correspondence  as  Military  Secretary,  see  Bobei't  E.  Lee.y  ■ 

Longstreet,  James. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 810 

Mentioned 567,568,570,816,897 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Battalions  : 4th,  87,  90, 91,94,  96,  98-101,  487,592,  625, 777,  824,  931. 

Lovell,  Mansfield.  Mentioned 490 

Lowndes,  Mr.  Mentioned • 963 

Lowndes,  Henry  D.  Mentioned 196 

Lowndes,  James.  Mentioned 903 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  W.  S.  Walker.) 

Lowndes,  T.  P.  Mentioned 266 

Lowry,  Mr.  Mentioned 303 

Lowry,  A.  M.  Mentioned - - 311-313 

Loyless,  E.  B.  Mentioned 31 

Lucas,  A.  H.  Mentioned 270, 271 

Lucas,  Jonathan  J. 

Correspondence  with  John  L.  Black 583 

Mentioned 203, 493, 500, 575, 592, 822, 929 

Lumpkin,  Private.  Mentioned * 301 

Lusby,  J S.  Mentioned 2/0,273 

Lusk,  William  T.  Mentioned 21,59,61,93,358 

Lynch,  F.  R.  Mentioned 90 

Lynch,  William  F. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 892 

Mentioned 243,259, 789, 798, 890 

Lyons,  Benjamin  R.  Mentioned 22, 24, 33, 59-61, 64, 71 

G8  R R— VOL  XIV 


1074 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Lyons,  Richard  B.  P.  Mentioned 788 

Lyons,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned * 163 

McAllister, . Mentioned . * 732 

McAllister,  Fort,  Ga. 

Affair  at,  March  9, 1863 3 

Naval  attacks  on. 

January  27,1863.  Report  of  G.  T.  Beauregard 198 

February  1,  1863. 

Communications  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 215,757 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Beauregard). 212 

Reports  of 

Anderson,  George  W.,  jr 215 

Anderson,  R.  H 213 

Beauregard,  G.  T 211 

Bryan,  Henry 212, 213 

Martin,  Robert 216 

February  28,  1863.  Report  of  George  W.  Anderson,  jr 217 

March  3,  1863. 

Communications  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 218,811 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Beauregard) 218 

Reports  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T 218 

Harris,  D.  B 219 

McCrady,  John 219,222,223 

(See  also  Hunter  to  Halleck,^).  417.) 


McAllister,  J.  L. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 120 

Mentioned 215,220,487,576,592 

McAlpin,  J.  W.  Mentioned 219-223 

Me Avoy,  R.  H.  Mentioned 312, 313 

Macbeth,  Charles.  Mentioned 502 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Charleston,  S.  C.,  Mayor  of.) 

Macbeth,  J.  R.  Mentioned 265 

McCallay,  James.  Mentioned 10-12 

Me  Car  dell,  W.  H.  Mentioned 237 

Me  Clary,  F.  L.  Mentioned 968 

McClellan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 327, 341, 345 

McClellan,  George  B.  Mentioned 337, 374 

McClenahan,  John  C.  Mentioned 261 

McCord,  L.  C.  Mentioned 487 

McCormick,  A.  H. 

Correspondence  with  T.  W.  Higginson 839 

Mentioned 227, 229, 235, 838, 841, 850, 931 

McCrady,  John. 

Mentioned ....  219,612, 634, 646, 662, 668, 694, 695, 864,  865, 867-870, 876, 886, 902, 904 

Report  of  naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Ga.,  March  3,  1863 219,222,223 

Statements  of.  Defenses  of  Savannah,  Ga 865, 867-869 

McCreery,  W.  W.  Mentioned 89,91,95,500,502,554,555 

McCullough,  James.  Mentioned 106,487,529,576,591,823 

McDonald,  Christopher  R.  Mentioned 35 

McDonald,  J.  C.  Mentioned 235, 850 

McDonald,  John.  Mentioned 285 

McDonough,  Commodore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 445, 447 

McDougal,  P.  D.  Mentioned 348 


INDEX. 


1075 


Pag©.  • 

McEaddv,  W.  J.  Mentioned 237 

McEnery,  John. 

Mentioned 87,91,94,97,592,824 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 100 

McFarland,  Walter. 

Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A 422 

Mentioned 285,421,422,429,433 

McGary,  Charles  P.  Mentioned 710 

McGuire,  Peter.  Mentioned 154 

McKean,  W.  W.  Mentioned 338 

McKenna,  Charles  P.  Mentioned 178 

McKethan,  Hector.  Mentioned 822 

McKewn,  J.  C.  Mentioned 575 

McKibbin,  D.  J.  Mentioned 168 

McLaughlin,  John.  Mentioned 279 

McLean,  Mr.  Mentioned 970,972 

McLeod,  R.  A.  Mentioned 968 

McMaster,  F.  W.  Mentioned 929 

McMichael,  P.  A.  Mentioned 272 

Me  Nab,  John.  Mentioned • 542,544 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Alabama , Commissioners  of.) 

McNeill,  John.  Mentioned 931 

McQueen,  A.  W.  Mentioned 200 

McRory,  J.  H.  Mentioned  . .* 121 

McTureous,  B.  W.  Mentioned 822 

Madgie,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned ' 193 

Magee,  J.  J. 

Correspondence  with  W.  S.  Walker 778 

Mentioned 199,297,298,778 

Magill,  William  J.  Mentioned 825  860 

Magrath,  A.  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Robert  E 504 

Pemberton,  John  C 513  544 

Mentioned.... 504^570 

Magrath,  W.  J.  Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 799 

Pemberton,  John  C 496,526,527,554 

Magruder,  John  B.  Mentioned 560,567,568,570 

Maine,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Abraham  Lincoln 997 

Maine  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 8th,  232,233,236,363,367,388,390,  392,  435,  461,  469, 

845,  846 ; 9th,  128, 130,  363,  368,  388,  390,  461,  469 ; 11th,  435, 462,  469. 

Mallory,  S.  R.  Mentioned 375, 568, 631, 648, 649, 673, 844, 966 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  C.  S.) 

Mandeville,  Theodore.  Mentioned 81 

Mangham,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 142, 824 

Manigault,  A.  M.  Mentioned 681 

Manigault,  Edward.  Mentioned 260,266,487 

Manigault,  James.  Mentioned 531 

Manigault,  Joseph. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 668 

Mentioned 726 

Manning,  J.  L.  Mentioned 726 


1076 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Manning,  W.  R.  Mentioned 487,576 

Mannon,  Michael.  Mentioned 154 

Marble,  William  S.  Mentioned . 169 

Marblehead,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 145, 148, 160, 161, 165, 168, 176 

Marion,  Steamer.  Mentioned 500,508,520,522 

Marlett,  Harry.  Mentioned 163 

Martial  Law. 

Augusta,  Ga 478,479,492,533 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla 334 

Savannah,  Ga 478,492,495-497,502 

South  Carolina 486.489-491,497,504,570,593,594,596-599 

Martin,  A.  M.  Mentioned 487 

Martin,  Benjamin  N. 

Correspondence  with  Judge-Advocate-General,  U.  S.  A 1010 

Mentioned 979 

Martin,  John  Campbell.  Mentioned 89,103,104 

Martin,  Mathew.  Mentioned 276 

Martin,  Robert. 

Mentioned 214, 215, 220, 576, 592, 824, 881 

Report/>f  naval  attack  on  Fort  McAllister,  Ga.,  February  1,  1863  216 

Martin,  William.  Mentioned 851 

Martin,  William  L.  Mentioned 163 

Martin,  W.  M.  Mentioned 184 

Marvin,  William.  Mentioned 4 432,433 

Mary  Boardman,  Steamer.  Mentioned 424 

Mason,  Granville  P.  Mentioned 225 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Hunter,  David 452,462 

Lincoln,  Abraham 997 

Massachusetts  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments  : 1st,  23, 33, 51, 54,  59, 62, 63,85, 129,145, 148, 150, 168, 336, 

348, 362, 367,  374, 381, 388-393, 428, 435,  461, 462, 467-469, 1005. 

Infantry— Regiments  : 23d,  434,440;  24th,  434, 461, 469;  28th,  29, 30, 49-52, 

58-63, 65-67, 69, 70, 74, 109, 362, 364,  367, 1006, 1007 ; 54th,  462, 463. 

Massie,  F.  T.  Mentioned 181, 183, 188 

Masters,  Bartols.  Mentioned 225 

Mathewes,  J.  Fraser. 

Correspondence  with  William  H.  Echols 959 

* Mentioned 956 

Mathewes,  J.  Raven.  Mentioned 276 

Mattano,  Steamer.  Mentioned 20, 994 

Matthews.  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 89,95 

Mauncy,  John.  Mentioned 225 

Maury,  Dabney  H. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 969 

Mentioned 969 

Maxwell,  Augustus  E.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 825 

Maxwell,  J.  A.  Mentioned 824,930 

Maxwell,  William  H.  Mentioned 79 

May,  Robert  H.  Mentioned  478,479,532 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Augusta , Ga .,  Mayor  of.) 

May  and  Savannah  Rivers,  Ga.  Reconnaissances  on,  September  30- 
October  3, 1832,  Reports  of 

Barton,  William  B 125 

Mitchel,  Ormsby  M 124 


INDEX. 


1077 


Page. 

Mayflower,  Steamer.  Mentioned 108, 109, 322, 329, 330, 333, 343, 1005 

Mayport  Mills  and  Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla.  Skirmishes  between,  Oct.  2, 1862. 

(See  reports  of  Brannan,  p.  129;  Hopkins,  pp.  139, 140.) 

Mays,  R.  G.  Mentioned 861 

Mays,  Samuel  W.  Mentioned 229, 235,  825, 850, 851, 863 

Mazyck,  A. 

Correspondence  with  South  Carolina,  Governor  of 914 

Mentioned 912 

Means,  John  H.  Mentioned 32,487,529,576 

Medders,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned 10, 12 

Meeker,  Lorenzo. 

Mentioned 233, 388 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23,  1862  158 

Mehles,  Henry.  Mentioned 154 

Meigs,  General,  Steamer.  Mentioned 232 

Meigs,  M.  C.  Mentioned 354,377,1013 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Qnartermaster-GeneraVs  Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Melchers,  F.  Mentioned 822,929 

Mellard,  Pettigrew.  Mentioned 204 

Memminger,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 593,640 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Treasury  Department,  C.  S.) 

Memminger,  R.  W.  (Foi  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Mercedita,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 204,207 

Mercer,  H.  W. 

Assignments  to  command 521, 523, 552, 736 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 698,750 

Beauregard,  G.  T 218,315,620,636,639, 

657,670,  692, 693, 711, 713.  715,  743,755-757,  761,765-767,  771,790,799- 

802,  812, 815, 821,  »36,  842,  848,  852,  863, 881,  885, 890,  897,  905, 942, 947 

Brannan,  John  M 382 

Georgia,  Governor  of 914 

Hunter,  David 373 

Locke,  J.  L 682 

Pembertou,  John  C 535,  537-539, 555-557, 605 

War  Department,  C.  S 572,608,750 

Wayne,  Henry  C 836 

Mentioned 29, 

181,  187, 211, 216-218, 315, 487, 520,  521, 523, 529, 530, 537, 550, 552, 575, 576, 
591,  592, 600, 602, 605, 6 1 2, 617, 625,  634, 635, 641, 643, 646, 692-694,  736,  740, 
757,  760, 768,  772, 780, 783, 7b7, 793,  797,  798. 801, 802, 809, 8. 1, 814, 821, 824, 
826,  840,  848,  849, 864-871, 876, 877,  889,  897, 902, 909, 925, 930, 944,953, 964 

Report  of  attack  on  Darien,  Ga.,  June  LI,  1863  3L7 

Meredith,  Surgeon.  Mentioned 227,229 

Meriam,  Frank  B.  Mentioned 194 

Merrimac,  Steamer.  Mentioned 364 

Merrimac,  U.  S.  Frigate.  (C.  S.  S.  Virginia.)  Mentioned 205 

Metcalf,  Edwin. 

Mentioned 78, 278, 362, 390, 439, 453, 461 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 83 

Metcalf,  George.  Mentioned... 83 

Metcalf,  Levi  W.  Mentioned 197 


1078 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Metcalf,  Thomas  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 478 

Mentioned 640 

Metzger,  James.  Mentioned 154,164 

Michigan  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 8th,  5,  6,  8,  9,  11,  20-22, 24,  26, 30,  49-52, 58-67, 70, 71, 

73-75, 82, 96, 109, 334, 335, 362, 364, 367, 990, 1003, 1006-1008. 

Mickler,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 120 

Mentioned 117-119, 309, 311, 313, 314, 779 

Reports  of 

Daufnskie  Island,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  January  29,  1863 198 

Skull  Creek,  S.  C.  Torpedo  operations  in,  May  18-21, 1863 288 

Mickler,  T.  M.  Mentioned 931 

Mickley,  Charles.  Mentioned 148, 154, 162 

Middle  Florida,  District  of. 

Cobb,  Howell,  assigned  to  command 677,736 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 630,  655,  735,  736 

Orders,  Special, 'series  1862:  No.  1256,  635  ; No.  1342,  661 ; No.  1489,  699. 
Middle  and  East  Florida,  Department  of. 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

April  30,  1862  488 

May  21,  1862  512 

May  31,  1862 530 

June  30,  1862  577 

July  31,  1862 593 

August  31, 1862 602 

September  30,  1862 615 

Finegan,  Joseph,  assigned  to,  ahd  assumes  command 477 

Merged  into  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia 630 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : October  8,  142 ; No.  17,  477. 

Middleton,  John.  Mentioned 265 

Middleton,  Motte.  Mentioned 220,  221 

Milan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 774,  850 

Miles,  F.  T.  Mentioned 88,  90,  95 

Miles,  W.  Forcher. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 618,  676,  772,  825,  919, 923 

Lee,  Robert  E 504,  560 

Pemberton,  John  C 513,514 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of 816 

War  Department,  C.  S 933,  938-940 

Mentioned 243,  504,  648,  649,  726, 816,  819, 919 

Militia. 

Florida 731 

Georgia 731,783,784 

South  Carolina 759,783-786,815-817,819,820 

Millen,  John  M. 

Correspondence  with  William  A.  Lane 317 

Mentioned 317, 576, 592, 824, 930 

Miller,  Albert  F.  Mentioned 123 

Miller,  J.  N.  Mentioned 218 

Miller,  John.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 788 


INDEX. 


1079 

Page. 


30 

154, 161 


Miller,  M.  B. 

Correspondence  with  Captain  Stow ^83 

Mentioned  ®83 

Mills,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 68,169 

Milton,  Governor,  Steamer.  (See  Governor  Milton , Steamer.) 

Milton,  John.  Mentioned 679» 

680,684,686-688,704,709,716,  718,731,  732,753,954,966 
(For  correspondence,  etc., see  Florida , Governor  of.) 

Milton,  W.  H.  Mentioned.  140,931 

Mims,  A.  J.  Mentioned 

Minnich,  Edwin  G.  Mentioned 

Mississippi,  Steamer.  Mentioned 344,364 

Mississippi.  Re -enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 954,969 

Beauregard,  G.  T 925, 926, 932, 933, 936, 938, 939, 947, 956, 975 

Miles,  W.  Porcher 933 

Ripley,  Roswell  944 

War  Department,  C.  S 923-925, 931, 933, 938-942 

Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 28th  ( Starve ),  644. 

Infantry — Regiments:  27th,  339. 

Mitchel,  E.  W.  Mentioned 

Mitchel,  F.  A.  Mentioned 

Mitchel,  John  C. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley - — 975 

Mentioned 

Mitchel,  Ormsby  M. 

Assignments  to  command * — 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 

Bran  nan,  John  M 

Crane,  Charles  - 384 

Terry,  Alfred  38^ 

War  Department,  U.  381,384 

Death  of,  announced 388 

Mentioned 148> 149’  175> 380’  388>  637> 638 


382 

382 


201, 265, 319, 958, 974, 1024, 1025 

380, 382 

..  383 

..  386 


Reports  of 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Octo- 


ber 22-23,  1862. 


144 


May  and  Savannah  Rivers,  Ga.  Reconnaissances  on,  September  30- 

October  3, 1862 424 

OQO 

Staff.  Announcements  of 

Mitchell,  William  D.  Mentioned 142,635 

Mobile,  Ala.  Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.S.  A. * - -- 

Beauregard,  G.  

Moffat,  Edward  S.  Mentioned 278 

Mohawk,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 

Moncada,  Francisco  Munez  de. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard — • - 

•Mentioned 

Montauk,  U.  S.  -S.  Mentioned..  211> 

217, 219-221, 241, 243, 244, 246, 390, 417, 427, 761, 762, 769, 772 


969 

975 


196 


204, 206 
205, 850 


1080 


INDEX. 


Montgomery,  James. 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 

Mentioned 226, 233, 236, 238, 239,  307, 423, *462 

Montieth,  "William.  Mentioned . 

Moore,  John  H.  Mentioned 

Moore,  John  L.  Mentioned • 

Moore,  John  V.  Mentioned _ 

Moore,  MacLelland. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 

Moore,  M.  S. 

Correspondence  with  Alfred  Rhett 

Mentioned 

Mootey,  Alfred  P.  Mentioned 

More,  John.  Mentioned 

Moreno,  Theodore. 

Correspondence  with 


Page. 


466 

,463,838,846, 861 

367 

281 

10,12 

....  487,519,529 


58, 66, 362 
69 


267 


....  266,803 
850, 851, 931 
24 


Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 6g2 

Harris,  D.  B *....**..!  954 

Thigpin,  Clinton 724 

Mentioned 687,  695>  697>  708-710,  729, 730, 737 

Morford,  William.  Mentioned 249 

Morgan,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 25,181  644 

Morgan,  Joseph  S.  Mentioned 363,368,388,  390,  435 

Morgan,  M.  R.  Mentioned 392  460 

Morris,  C.  W.  Mentioned _ 620 

Morris,  Thomas  A.  Mentioned 9g3 

Morrison,  David. 

Mentioned 58-61,  72j  73>  9g9>  1003 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862  75 

Morrison,  J.  H.  Mentioned 551 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Morrow,  J.  H.  Mentioned 33  45 

Morrow,  Samuel  J.  Mentioned 51  73’  77 

Moseley,  J.  W.  Mentioned..  . 88* 94' 95 

Moses,  Edward.  Mentioned jc)7 

Moulton,  Albert  A . Mentioned ’ ’ gG 

Moyers,  Colonel.  Mentioned 921 

Muller,  Samuel.  Mentioned 266  803 

Mulligan,  A.  B.  Mentioned 4g7 

Munitions  of  War.  Supplies  of,  etc.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.. 630,643,750 

Beauregard,  G.  T 614,616,618,633,642,6*4*3,676,689.690 

709, 724,  726,  727,  737,  801,  828,  833, 846, 909,  923,  926, 927,  946, 961  965 

Childs’F*  L 690,758 

Finegan,  Joseph 494 

Fisher,  W 7&v{ 

French,  S.  G ""  ^73 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  Josd 745  754  g2g  94(5 

Hunter,  David 353^  393>  42g 

Lee,  Robert  E 491,528 

Locke,  J.  L ’ 6g2 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 74g  759  753 

Pemberton,  John  C 479, 480, 484, 491, 527, 528, 533, 540, 541, 554, 567 

Pope,  J.  J 674 


INDEX. 


1081 


Page- 

Munitions  of  War.  Supplies  of,  etc.— Continued.  Communications  from 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 690 

Saxton,  Rufus 226, 423 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 534 

Stow,  Captain ®83 

Walker,  W.  945 

War  Department,  C.  S 917,976 

War  Department,  U.  S - - 3^4 

(See  also  Board  of  Officers,  Report  of,  pp.  830-833,  865-877 ; Cobb  to  Beaure- 
gard, pp.  728-731  ; Cobb  to  Seddon,  pp.  920, 921 ; Finegan  to  Jordan, 
pp.  837,  838;  Ripley  to  Jordan,  pp.  652-655;  Trapier  to  Jordan , p. 

681.) 

Murray’s  Inlet,  S.  C.  Affairs  at. 

April  27,  1863.  Report  of  Joseph  A.  Yates 286 

May  4,  1863.  Report  of  Joseph  A.  Yates 287 

Mushington,  John.  Mentioned 1018 

Mutiny.  Disaffection  in  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  (See  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C .) 

Myers,  A.  C.  Mentioned - 491,642,727 

Naglee,  Henry  M. 

Assignments  to  command 39^> 39? 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 397,407,419,423,428 

Hunter,  David - 396,398,405,406,412-415 

Mentioned 395-404, 408, 409, 411-413, 418, 420, 425-427, 748 

Relieved  from  command  in  Department  of  the  South 420 

Nahant,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 218,241,243,244,246,394,1017 

Nance,  William  F.  Mentioned 260, 790, 923 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Roswell  S.  Ripley.) 

Nantucket,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned - 241,243,244,246 

Nashville,  Steamer.* 

Destruction  of,  February  28,  1863.  Report  of  George  W.  Anderson,  jr 217 

(See  also  Hunter  to  Halleclc,  p.  417.) 

Mentioned - 214, 217, 218, 417, 487, 541, 766 

Naval  Vessels.  Construction  of.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson ^99 

Ingraham,  D.  N 

Lee,  Francis  

Pemberton,  John  C - -* 

War  Department,  C.  S ®73 

Navy,  C.  S. 

Co-operation  with  Army 3^8» 

605, 621-623, 642, 661, 664, 665, 670-672, 736, 799, 800, 818, 843, 844 
(See  also  Charleston,  S.  C.  Attack  on  blockading  squadron  off,  Jan.  31, 1863.) 
Transfers  from  Army  to.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 698 

Mercer,  H.  ..............  698 

Navy  U.  S.  Co-operation  with  Army 320-322,324,325,327-335, 

340,  348-350,  352,  353,  361,  395,  421,  436-438, 440-443, 453-457, 464,  465 

(See  also 

June  3, 1862.  James  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on. 

10, 1862.  James  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on. 

Sept.  30-Oct.  13,  1862.  Saint  John's  Bluff,  Fla.  Expedition  to. 


767 

767 

605 


Called  also  Rattlesnake. 


1082 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Navy,  U.  S.  Co-operation  with  Army — Continued. 

See  also 

Oct.  22-23,1862.  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against 
the. 

Nov.  3-10,  1862.  Georgia  and  East  Florida.  Expedition  along  the  coasts  of. 

13-18,  1862.  Dobog  River,  Ga.  Expedition  to. 

Jan.  23-Feb.  1,  1863.  Saint  Mary’s  River.  Expedition  up  the. 

April  9, 1863.  George  Washington , Steamer.  Destruction  of , near  Beaufort,  S.  C.) 


Navy  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 661, 736, 818 

Pemberton,  John  C 605 

War  Department,  C.  S 568, 844 

Navy  Department,  U.  S-  Correspondence  with 

Du  Pont,  Samuel  F 436 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 464 

War  Department,  U.  S 395 

Negroes. 

Draft  of  all  able-bodied,  in  Department  of  the  South  ordered.  429, 430,1020, 1021 
Employment  of,  as  laborers.  (See  Slaves  and  Slave  Property.) 

Nelson,  P.  H.  Mentioned 487,529,591,823,930 

Neptune,  Steamer.  Mentioned 129, 130, 387 

Newbury,  Taylor  C.  Report  of  attack  on  blockading  squadron  off  Charles- 
ton, S.  C.,  January  31,  1863 209 

New  Hampshire,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Abraham  Lincoln 996 

New  Hampshire  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Infantry — Regiments : 3d,  3,4,33,51,54,55,  78-80,  83,  84,  115-117,  119,  145, 

148, 153, 164-167, 169, 170, 172-174, 336, 362, 367, 388, 390, 435, 461, 1005, 1006 ; 

4th,  145,148,157-160,162,  165-167,  171,  334,  363,367,368,376,388,390,392, 

435, 461, 469, 995  ; 7th,  224, 225, 363, 367,  376, 384, 386, 388, 390, 424, 432, 434, 

435, 439, 443, 462, 469. 

New  Ironsides,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 241- 

244,  246-249,  257-259,  264,  267-269,272-275,278,279,390,437,  442, 
760-762, 777,  826,  836, 884,  885, 890-892, 894-899, 902, 908, 1017, 1020 


New  Jersey  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 9th,  434, 440. 

Newton,  H.  H.  Mentioned 299 

New  York  Times,  Editor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Benham,  H.  W 988 

Stevens,  I.  I 980, 987, 1001 

New  York  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Artillery,  Light— Regiments  : 3d,*  413,  434, 435, 439, 444, 461. 

Artillery,  Marine— Regiments:  1st,  285,286,434,435,439. 

Engineers — Regiments  : 1st,  51,54,55,57-59,62,63,80,  81,145,  147,  150,  155- 
157,164-166,176,178,179,320,322,325,331,344,  362,  367,  368,  388-390,  392, 
435, 439, 440,  444, 461, 462, 469. 

Infantry — Battalions  : Enfans  Perdus,  435,  462,  469.  Regiments:  6th,  363, 
367;  46th,  33, 49, 51,  59, 60, 63, 72-75, 108, 335, 347, 362, 364, 367, 1005, 1006 ; 
47th,  35-37,54-56,78,336,  362,  367,388,  390,  435,462,469;  48th,  122-126, 
143, 145-147,  149, 150,  156,  175-177,  320, 322, 325, 347,  363, 368,  388-390, 424, 
435,462,469;  49th,  30;  56th,  435,  461,469;  75th,  363,367;  79th,  20,21, 
23, 24, 49-52, 58-63, 71-73,  75-77, 96, 108, 362, 364,  367, 1003, 1006-1008 ; 81st, 
434,  440;  90th,  363,368,  388,390,392,435;  91st,  363,367,368;  98th,  434, 
440;  100th,  284-286,  435,439,444,446,461,469;  115th,  393,  435,461,469. 


Returns  indicate  Batteries  B and  F as  serving  in  Department  of  the  South. 


INDEX. 


1083 


Page. 

Nickols  [Nichols],  Mr.  Mentioned 306, 963 

Nicoll,  George  A.  Mentioned 214 

Nicoll,  William.  Mentioned 266 

Niernsee,  Mr.  Mentioned 673> 674 

No.  1.  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned ^29 

No.  2.  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 529 

North  Carolina. 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 


Gist,  S.  E. 741,742 

Longstreet,  James ®49 

Smith,  Gustavus  723 

War  Department,  C.  S 720,723,759 

Whiting,  W.  H.  720,721,739,748,749 

Ee-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T . . . - - 711, 713-715, 718, 719, 745, 906, 923, 924 

Hunter,  David 440,452 

Lee,  Eobert  711,762 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 713 

War  Department,  C.  S 744’ 7o3 

War  Department,  U.  4^2 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 713,715 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

War  Department,  C.  S ' 538,541 

Whiting,  W.  H.  713 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Northrop,  L.  B.  Mentioned 780,910,976,977 

Norwich,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 232 

Nyce,  John.  Mentioned 462 

O’Brien,  John  F.  Mentioned 726 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard.) 

Ochus,  A.  A.  Mentioned 931 

Ocklockonnee  Bay,  Fla.  Affair  in,  March  24,  18G3.  Eeports  of 

Cobb,  Howell 230 

Scott,  G.W 236 

Ocmulgee  River,  Ga.  Defenses  of.  Communication  from  G.  T.  Beauregard..  636 

O’Connell,  Patrick  A.  Mentioned ^ 

O’Connor,  David.  Mentioned 576,592 

O’Connor,  William. 

Affidavit  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 1000 

Mentioned....  . 982,1000 

O’Donnel,  Mr.  Mentioned - 970,973,974 

Ogier,  W.  G.  Mentioned - 203 

Ohio  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 62d,  67th,  435, 444, 461, 469. 

Old  Henry.  Mentioned 727,728 

Oliver,  T.  P.  Mentioned 88, 9o 

Olmstead,  C.  H.  Mentioned 824,930 

O’Neil,  James  B.  Mentioned 190 

O’Neill,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 196 

Onward,  Schooner.  Mentioned — ........ — 230,236 


1084 


INDEX. 


Pag®. 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Childs,  F.JL 758 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  Jos6 604,745, 746,  754 

Huger,  Benjamin _ 353 

Pemberton,  John  C 541 

Rains,  George  W 531,562 

War  Department,  C.  S 533,750,758 

Oriental,  Steamer.  Mentioned 345 

O’Rorke,  Patrick  H.  Mentioned 321-323, 325, 326, 328, 331, 343 

Orr,  James  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 885, 891, 896-900, 909, 919 

Pace,  George  R 397 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 345 

Mentioned 816, 885, 891, 897, 899, 91 9 

Osborn,  Francis  A.  Mentioned 454 

Osborn,  T.  O.  Mentioned 435  454 

Otey,  John  M.  Mentioned 726 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard .) 

Otis,  John  L.  Mentioned ‘ 454 

Overton,  Edward.  Mentioned 24 

Owen,  M T.  Mentioned 539 

Owens,  W.  J.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard  ......  788 

Pace,  George  R.  Correspondence  with 

Barnwell,  Robert  W 397 

Orr,  James  L . 397 

Page,  Richard  L.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 881 

Palatka,  Fla.  Skirmish  at,  March  27,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Finegan,  Joseph 239 

Russell,  Thomas  T 359 

Congratulatory  orders*  (Finegan) 239 

Report  of  J.  J.  Dickison 237 

Palmer,  Dr.  Mentioned 955 

Palmer,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 69 

Palmer,  Innis  N.  Mentioned 4Q3?  440  444 

Palmetto  State,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 204, 207, 208, 243, 818!  906 

Parker,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 22-24 

Parker,  C.  W.  Mentioned 265 

(For  correspondence  as  Adjutant,  see  W.  B.  Calhoun.) 

Parker,  Edward  L. 

Mentioned 105, 487, 517, 530, 576, 591, 823, 930 

Report  of  engagement  at  Simmons’  Bluff,  S.  C.,  June  21,  1862 105 

Parker,  Francis  S.  [L.]  Mentioned 54 4 533 

Parker,  John  H.  Mentioned 935 

Parry,  George.  Mentioned 454 

Passaic,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 218, 241-244, 246,  264, 269, 454, 761, 762,  772 

Patapsco,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 218, 241, 243, 244, 246, 394 

Patroon,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 129, 145, 165, 173, 176, 177 

Paul,  Mr.  Mentioned 953 

Paulding,  E.  E.  Mentioned 392 

Paul  Jones,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned  ..  129, 132, 134-136, 145, 148, 150, 169, 173-175, 196, 233 

Pawnee,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 289,580,905,969 

Payne,  Mr.  Mentioned 209 


INDEX. 


1085 


Page. 

Peace  Propositions * 

Peach,  George  S.  Mentioned 433 

Pearce,  A.  W.  Mentioned  12 

Pearson,  Frederick.  Mentioned 1&2 

Pearson,  J.  W. 

Mentioned - 824’ 931 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Tampa,  Fla.,  June  30-July  1,  1862 Ill 

Pease,  Mr.  Mentioned _ °J8 

Peek,  O.  F.  Mentioned 850’ 8^4 

Peeples,  "W.  B.  Mentioned 

Pemberton,  John  C. 

Congratulatory  orders. 

Kilkenny  River,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on  the,  September  10,  1862  120 

Secession ville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 89 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 478> 

483  486,  491,  498, 522, 579, 581-585, 587, 5e9, 593, 600, 601, 603, 604, 607, 608 

Beauregard,  G.  T 6W' B09’ 926 

Boggs,  W.  500,531,542,546,547 

Calhoun,  W.  El 562,569,580 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  Mayor  of * 499 

Childs,  F.^L ™ 

Colquitt,  Peyton  

Davis,  Jefferson 534, 535, 539, 540, 549, 552, 593, 596, 598 

Dil worth,  W„  * 4^ 

Drayton,  Thomas  F 503,525,534,536,550,552,586 

Elliott,  Stephen,  * 

Emanuel,  W.  

Evans,  Nathan  G1 !05,  H4, 470  474  48o,  509, 

511, 514, 526, 534, 536, 537, 549, 551, 553, 555, 558, 559, 569,  o/ / , 58o,  086 

Forney,  J.Jin  H * 

Georgia,  Governor  of ’ 

p.  P 499,535,537,550,550,604 

VjrlSI,  O.  rftl  r/?E 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  ’ Q 

Gregg,  Maxcy ’ 

®,  „T.,n.  xtt  518. 521,  o7^,  580 

Harllee,  William  ’ ’ ’ .Q 

Huger,  C.  593 

Jordan,  D.  ^ 

Lawton,  Alexander  E 472,479,500,503,525,534-538,548,000,558,566 

Lee,  Hutson  ' 47 1 480-482, 

Lee,  Robert  ’ 

484,  491,  495,  497, 498, 502, 505, 506, 509, 518-520, 523, 526-528, 533, 536,  o41 

Long,  A.  L 120 

McAllister,  J.  ' 3 ^ 

• Mugrath,  A.  G .'.V.'.'".'.'  49#,' '526,  527’,  554 

Magrath  W J 535,537-539,555-557,605 

Mercer,  II.  W.  a ’ 47g 

Metcalf,  Thomas  * 

Miekler,  J.  

Miles,  W.  Porcher 6Q5 

Navy  Department,  C.  S.... 541 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 


1086 


INDEX. 


Pemberton,  John  C. — Continued.  *** 

Correspondence  with 

Preston,  John  S 601 

Ramsay,  William  M 522 

Ravenel,  Alfred  F 600 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 479,  495,  500-503, 505, 507, 511, 518 

Savannah,  Ga.,  Mayor  of 501  557 

Smith,  William  Duncan 550,  553-555,  559,  572,  578,  580,  583,  585’  590 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of 476,  508,  517,  519,  588,  589 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 516,  518,  534,  540,  567,  573,  596,  598 

Treasury  Department,  C.  S 579 

Trenholm,  George  A 54g 

Tucker,  J.  H 

Waddy,  J.  R 525 

Wagner,  Thomas  M 561 

Walker,  W.  S 27,  112, 114,  525,  583,  584 

War  Department,  C.  S 493 

507, 531, 535, 536, 543, 558, 559, 561, 567, 568, 572, 604 

Werner,  D 

White,  J.  B 536 

Wightman,  John  T 4§9 

Mentioned 25, 96, 480, 486, 487, 489, 492, 498, 499, 

501,  504,  505,  511, 524, 526, 528, 529, 531, 537-539, 541, 543, 545-548, 557, 560, 
568-57  0, 575,  580, 581, 591, 593-595, 597, 598, 602, 603, 610-613, 618-621, 625, 
626, 633, 634, 771, 819, 826, 828, 830, 923-926,  928,  931-933,  937,  938, 940,  959 

Proclamation,  etc.  Martial  law  in  South  Carolina  491,497,504 

Relieved  from  command  of  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia..  603, 613 
Reports  of 

Pinckney  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  August  21,  1862 117 

Planter,  Steamer.  Abduction  of,  May  13,  1862 13 

Pocotaligo,  S.  C.  Demonstration  against,  July  9-10,  1862 114 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 85,86 

Staff.  Announcements  of 552  556 

Pembina,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 28  327  329 

Pennypacker,  Galusha.  Mentioned ’ . ’451 

Pennsylvania  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry  R egiments  : 45th,  35,  37-40,  51,  54, 55,  57,  58,  336,  346,  362,  367  ; 

47th,  128,  129, 131-134, 145, 148, 154, 157-163, 167, 168, 172, 363, 367, 388, 390, 

435;  50th,  20,  22-24,26,  363,  364,  367;  52d,  434,  462,  469;  55th,  37,  145, 

148, 154, 157-159, 161-164, 168,  336, 348, 363,  364,  367,  388,  390,  392,  435, 462, 

469  ; 76th,  37, 57, 58, 145, 148, 164-167, 170,  174,  175,  362,  367, 388,  390, 435, 

461,  469  ; 85th,  435, 444, 461,  469  ; 97th,  35-37,  51, 54-57,  61, 78, 83, 109,  336, 

362.  364, 367, 388,  390,  435, 461, 469  ; 100th,  21,  30, 47,  49, 51, 57, 59, 60, 62, 63, 

71-73,  76,  77,  108,  362,  364,  367, 1006,  1007;  104th,  434,  462,  469;  174th, 

435,  462, 469 ; 176th,  209,  210,  435, 462,  469. 

Peronneau,  William  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Calhoun,  W.  R 554 

Ripley,  Roswell  S $ 902 

Mentioned 265 

Perry,  E.  A.  Mentioned 629 

Perry,  Edward  S.  Mentioned 154, 167, 169, 172 

Perry,  James  H.  Mentioned 347 

Petrel,  H.  M.  S.  Mentioned 209,210,788,790 


INDEX. 


1087 


Page. 

Phelan,  James.  Mentioned - 910 

Phelps,  John  W. 

Declared  an  outlaw  by  Jefferson  Davis - 599 

Mentioned 599 

Phillips,  William.  Mentioned - 487, 530, 576 

Phillips,  William  E.  Mentioned 169,170 

Phoenix,  Lloyd.  Mentioned 144, 152, 166, 168 

Pickens,  Francis  W. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 901, 947 

Mentioned 476, 481, 486, 491, 508, 510, 513, 514, 519, 566, 569,  570,  588, 594, 595, 616 

(For  correspondence  as  Governor,  see  South  Carolina , Governor  of.) 

Pickett,  George  E.  Mentioned 816 

Pierce,  Elisha  N.  Mentioned 278 

Pilkinton,  James.  Mentioned - 12 

Pinckney,  B.  G.  Mentioned 270,271 

Pinckney,  C.  C Mentioned 260 

Pinckney,  Thomas.  Mentioned 573,574,823,902 

Pinckney  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  August  21,  1862. 

Communication  from  John  C.  Pemberton 120 

Reports  of 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 118 

Jackson,  John  H 115,116 

Pemberton,  John C.-.w 117 

Walker,  W.  S 117 


Pineberry  Battery,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  Apr.  29, 1862.  Report  of  N.  G.  Evans.  13 
(See  also  Wright  to  Ely,  p.  340.) 


Pipkin,  Mr.  Mentioned 302-304 

Pitcher,  Zerich.  Mentioned 14 

Place,  James  E.  Mentioned 368,388,390,461 

Plaisted,  H.  M.  Mentioned 462,468 

Planter,  Steamer. 

Abduction  of,  May  13,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Lee,  Robert  E 506 

Ripley,  Roswell  S - 502 

Reports  of 

Pemberton,  John  C - 13 

Ravenel,  F.  G 14 

Rhett,  Alfred 15 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 14 

Mentioned 13-15, 86, 105, 106, 123-125, 143, 

145-149,  175-179,  195,  197,  348,  381, 500,  502,  503,  506, 509, 522, 985, 1005 

Platt,  G.  Mentioned 154 

Plimpton,  Josiah  I.  Mentioned 79,116 

Plumb,  Mr.  Mentioned 479 

Pocahontas,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned . 3 

Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 

Demonstration  against,  July  9-10,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Evans,  Nathan  G 114 

Pemberton,  John  C 583 

Walker,  W.  S 114 

Report  of  John  C.  Pemberton 114 

Skirmish  at,  May  29,  1862. 

Communications  from  JohnC.  Pemberton 27,525 


1088 


INDEX. 


Pocotaligo,  S.  C. — Continued. 

Skirmish  at.  May  29,  1862. 

Reports  of 

Christ,  Benjamin  C 22 

Stevens,  Isaac  1 20 

Walker,  W.  S 24 

Pope,  J.  J.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 674,685 

Pope’s  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  at,  May  19,  1863.  (S ee  Skull  Creek,  S.  C.  Tor- 
pedo operations  in,  May  18-21,  1863.) 

Porcher,  Francis  J.  Mentioned 496,526,573 

Porter,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 21 

Porter,  Horace.  Mentioned 322,323  326 

Porter,  Horace  P.  Mentioned 66, 69, 169  173 

Porter,  John  L.  Mentioned 648  670 

Porter,  S.  E.  Mentioned 62  fc2  83 

Porter,  W.  D. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  E.  Lee 504 

Mentioned 504 

Port  Royal,  S.  C.  Quarantine  regulations  for 449 

Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.  Affairs  at. 

Jane  6,  1862.  Report  of  W.  S.  Walker 31 

July  4,  1862.  Report  of  W.  S.  Walker 112 

Postell,  John.  Mentioned 220  221 

Potomac,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47,108 

Potomska,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 191,192 

Potter,  Edward  E. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 417 

Mentioned 399, 409, 426 

Power,  John  M.  Mentioned 58,362 

Powers,  Virgil.  Mentioned 682 

Powhatan,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 207,267,892 

Pratt,  Gilbert  E.  Mentioned 6,8,60,71 

Pratt,  N.  Miner.  Mentioned : 7}9 

Prentice,  W.  P.  Mentioned .2 382 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Ormsby  M.  Mitcliel.) 

President  C.  S.  (See  Jefferson  Davis.) 

President  U.  S.  (See  Abraham  Lincoln.) 

Preston,  John  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 601 

Mentioned . 595,603 

Preston,  William  C.  Mentioned 1 575 

Prince  Henry.  Mentioned 403 

Prince,  Thomas.  Mentioned 276 

Princess  Royal,  Steamer.  Mentioned 209, 210 

Pringle,  Motte  A.  Mentioned 260 

Pringle,  William.  Mentioned 508 

Prisoners,  Political.  Arrest  and  treatment  of 356,357,386,838 

Prisoners  of  War.  Treatment,  exchange  of,  etc. 

Communications  from  Horatio  G.  Wright 358 

References  to 93, 307, 342, 343, 358, 448, 467, 502, 599 

Private  Property.  Action  touching.  Communications  from 

Fiuegan,  Joseph 488 

Hunter,  David 376,466 

Terry,  Alfred  H 368 


(See  also  Slaves  and  Slave  Property.) 


INDEX. 


1089 


Page. 

595 

Proctor,  James  T.  Mentioned 

Pulaski,  Fort,  Ga.  ooq 

Emancipation  of  slaves  in.  Order  of  Hunter 



O’Rorke,  Patrick  324 

Rodgers,  John  ------ 327,  329 

FUt Mo“tifn^d.imand  %8,  363, 367, 376, 386, 388, 390, 424,434, 435, 451, 453, 461, 462, 468 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  March  9,  1863 224 

Pyles,  R.  S.  Mentioned - *ftft*210  428 

Quaker  City,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned - 208>  210> 

Quarantine  Regulations.  Port  Royal,  S.  C - - - - 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  ^ 

Benham,  Henry  341 

Fuller,  Charles  42g 

Hunter,  David 354 

War  Department,  U.  S - 27f. 

Quillan,  Marion.  Mentioned 222 

Quinn,  D.  Mentioned 822 

Radcliffe,  James  D.  Mentioned 70Q 

Rains,  Gabriel  J.  Mentioned 

Rains,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with  ^ 

Beauregard,  G.  

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A * V"""  * - 

„ , 531,562,675,745 

Mentioned ^ 

Rambo,  Drury.  Mentioned 

Ramsay,  David.  • _ 87  88  95 

Mentioned Q7 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862... 

Ramsay,  William  M. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton - * ^ 

__  . ... oUU,  o4o 

Mentioned  ••---•  * • • • * * • ^ gQ 

Randlptt  James  F.  Mentioned „ 

Randolph,  George  W.  Mentioned . 137,477,494,498, 503, 507 , 511, 522, 533, 547, 560, 562, 
566,  569,  577,  593,  600,  603, 630, 642, 648, 665, 669, 683,  715, 716, 828,  866, 876 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S.) 

Randolph,  William  J.  Mentioned.... * ^ 

Ransom,  Dunbar  R.  Mentioned 7«7*«1fi*ftiq'826  878  897 

Ransom,  Robert,  jr.  Mentioned  787  ’ 816>  819> 826’ 8 8» 

Rattlesnake,  Steamer.  (See  Nashville,  Steamer.) 

Ravenel,  Alfred  F.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton > 

Ravfenel,  E.  Prioleau.  266 

Mentioned . 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,.  1863 ^ 

Ravenel,  F.  G.  14 

Mentioned 

Report  of  abduction  of  steamer  Planter,  May  13,  1862 14 

Ravenel,  S.  P.  Mentioned 2^’8^ 

Read,  Benjamin  H.  Mentioned 2 ’ 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Roswell  S.  Ripley.) 

69  R R— VOL  XIV 


1090 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Read,  Jacob.  Mentioned 487,576,592 

Red,  Samuel.  Mentioned 276 

Reed,  Samuel  J.  Mentioned 87,88,90,92,94 

Refugees.  Communications  from  Alfred  H.  Terry 386 

Reid,  J.  T.  Mentioned 576,592 

Relief,  Steamer.  Mentioned.. 145,170,371 

Relyea,  C.  J.  Mentioned 14 

Reynolds,  R.  O.  Mentioned 779 

Reynolds,  William.  (Captain.)  Mentioned 267,896 

Reynolds,  William.  (Lieutenants  Mentioned 278 

Rhett,  Alfred. 

Correspondence  with 

Moore,  M.  S 267 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 267, 268, 895, 908 

Mentioned 14, 244, 246, 257, 259, 260,  515, 590, 591, 776, 803, 823, 929, 960, 1015 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  April  7,  1863  264 

Plauter,  Steamer.  Abduction  of,  May  13, 1862 15 

Statement  of.  Engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 1016 

Rhett,  Julius  M.  Mentioned 243,265,926 

Rhett,  T.  S.  Mentioned 689,828 

Rhind,  Alexander  C. 

Correspondence  with  Horatio  G.  Wright 348 

Mentioned 105,340 

Rhode  Island,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Abraham  Lincoln 997 

Rhode  Island  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy—  Regiments : 3d,  6, 39-41, 51, 54, 55, 62, 63,  78,  79,  83,  84,  99, 

123, 125, 143, 145, 148-152, 164-168, 175, 176, 178, 320,  336,  348,  362,  367,  368, 

371,  3-8-390, 435, 439, 461-463, 469, 1005. 

Rice,  A.  G.  Mentioned 713,716,726 

Rice,  H.  W.  Mentioned 204 

Rice,  J.  M.  Mentioned 55 

Rich,  Rish worth. 

Correspondence  with  Alfred  H.  Terry 368 

Mentioned j 128, 130, 338r363, 368, 388,  390 

Richard,  John  C.  Mentioned 121,141,931 

Richardson,  Private.  Mentioned 602 

Richardson,  E.  R.  Mentioned 278 

Richmond,  L.  Mentioned 150 

Rinaldo,  Steamer.  Mentioned _ 900 

Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

Assignments  to  command 635, 641, 736 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 642-644, 649, 652, 655, 690, 692, 700, 744, 745, 749, 

756,  758, 759,  769,  773, 780, 788,  790, 813, 818, 835,  841,  847,  853,  877,  8*82, 
888,  890-894, 905, 918, 922, 938, 947,  960, 962,  963, 967, 969, 970, 1021, 1024 

Echols,  William  H 827 

Evans,  Nathafi  G 937 

Gist>  s-  R 277,656,804,812 

Gonzales,  Ambrosio  Jos<5 834 

Graham,  R.  F 890,948 

Haskell,  Charles T.,  jr 747 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 743  893 

Lynch,  William  F §92 


INDEX- 


1091 

Page. 


Ripley,  Roswell  S.— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Mitchel,  John  975 

Pemberton,  John  C 479,  495,  500-503, 505, 507, 511, 518 

Peronneau,  William  902 

Rhett,  Alfred  267,268,895,908 


Simkins,  W.  S. 


508 

Simonton,  Charles  H 933, 953, 960, 961, 964, 965, 968, 969, 975 

Stevens,  C.H.... 887>901 

Trapier,  James  H 271,902 

Whiting,  W.  H.  778 

Yates,  Joseph  A 756,890,892,921 

Mentioned 200, 201, 240, 242-244, 266, 470, 471, 

476,482,484-487,492,504,506,  514,  515,  517-521,524,616,618,  631-633, 

635, 641,  642,  650,  674-676,  689-691,  736,  740,  769,  770,  781-783,  788, 798, 
804,  809, 815, 818,  822, 826, 829,  830, 832, 834, 840,  889, 895,  898, 909, 918, 
923,929,  937,944,  949-953,  956-959,963,  964,967,968,970-974,983,  1015 

Relieved  from  command  of  Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina 521 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  April  7,  1863  257 

Isaac  Smith,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  January  30,  1863  - 200 

Little  Folly  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  June  11-13, 1863 319 

Planter,  Steamer.  Abduction  of,  May  13, 1862 14 

Returns  and  sketches  submitted  by,  with  report  of  engagement  in  Charles- 
ton Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 262,263 

Statement  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 1015 

River  Defenses.  Notes  of  G.  T.  Beauregard. 943 

Rivers,  C.  H Mentioned., - - - 273 

Rives,  Alfred  L.  (For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Chief  Engineer,  see  En- 
gineer Department , C.  S.  A.) 

Roberts,  Hiram,  et  al.  Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 590 

Robertson,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 76 

Robinson,  Captain.  Mentioned 902 

Robinson,  W.  J. 

Mentioned 231,232,  680,931 

Report  of  affair  in  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla.,  March  20, 1863 231 

Robinson,  W.  M.  Mentioned 184 

Robson,  W.  G.  Mentioned 216 

Rockwell,  Alfred  P. 

Mentioned 1 59, 62, 132, 362, 367, 388, 390,462 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16, 1862 82 

Rockwell,  W.  S.  Mentioned - - 487 

Rodgers,  Bazel.  Mentioned 444 

Rodgers,  John. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  W.  Sherman 324 

Mentioned 321, 322, 327, 329, 330, 438, 454 

Rodgers,  John  A.  Mentioned 24 

Rodman,  Daniel  C.  Mentioned 08, 169 

Roe,  Bill.  Mentioned 238 

Roebuck,  U.  S.  Bark.  Mentioned 230 

Rogers,  H.  H.  Mentioned 260 

Rogers,  Horatio,  jr.  Mentioned 84>  104, 168 

Rogers,  W.  H.  Mentioned 88, 92, 93 


1092 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Roman,  Alfred. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 802, 817 

Mentioned 726 

Report  of  inspection  of  Fort  Sumter,  January  28,  1863  802 

Roof,  S.  M.  Mentioned 201 

Rosa,  Rudolph. 

Mentioned  5, 8, 59,  72, 327,  362, 367 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16, 1862 74 

Rosecrans,  William  S.  Mentioned 457,955,998 


Ruby,  Steamer.  Mentioned 319  778 

Rush,  Henry  S.  Mentioned 24 

Rushby,  T.  P.  Mentioned 149}  370 

Russell,  Thomas  T. 

• Correspondence  with  Joseph  Finegan 860 

Mentioned 238, 239 

Rust,  John  D. 

Mentioned 363, 388, 390, 461 

Report  of  operations  near  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  March  23-31,  1863  232 

Rutledge,  B.  H.  Mentioned 183, 282, 644, 813, 824, 930 

Rutledge,  John.  Mentioned 207,208 

Ryan,  J.  J.  Mentioned 668 

Ryan,  John  S.  Mentioned 260,977 

Ryan,  William  H.  Mentioned i 30,89,97 

Rylander,  John  E.  Mentioned 592 

Sabine,  Charles.  Mentioned 285 

St.  Andre,  Baron  de. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 204 

Mentioned 206,850,900 

Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla.  Affair  in,  March  20,  1863. 

Communication  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 230 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Beauregard) 230 

Reports  of 

Cobb,  Howell 230 

Robinson,  W.  J 231 

Scott,  W.  W 231 

Saint  Andrew’s  Parish,  S.  C. 

Armament  and  force  necessary  for  defense  of 808 

Works  in.  (Confederate.)  Names  of 842,843 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communication  from  Louis  Bell 333 

Martial  law 334 

Skirmish  near,  March  9,  1863.  Reports  of 

Abbott,  Joseph  C 224 

Putnam,  Haldimand  S 224 

Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C. 

Affair  on,  October  24, 1862.  Report  of  Rufus  Saxton 189 

Ferry,  Orris  S.,  assigned  to  command  forces  on 420 

Naglee,  Henry  M.,  assigned  to  command  forces  on 397 

Saint  John,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  April  18,  1863.  Communication  from  James  H.  Trapier 902 

Mentioned 902 


INDEX. 


1093 

Page. 


Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla. 

Capture  of,  October  3, 1862. 

Communications  from  ^ 

Finegan,  Joseph 444 

Hopkins,  Charles  138’ 139’ 142 

(See  also  reports  of  Brannan,  pp.  127, 130;  Finegan , p.  138 ; Hopkins, 

p.  141.) 

Court  of  Inquiry. 

Convened.  Order 

Findings  and  opinion 

Engagements  at. 

September  11, 1862.  Report  of  Joseph  Finegan 1<iU>  ^ 

September  17, 1862.  Report  of  Joseph  Finegan 122 

October  1, 1862.  (See  reports  of  Brannan,  pp.  127, 129 ; Finegan,  p.  137  ; 
Hopkins,  p.  139.) 

Expedition  to,  September  30-October  13,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Brannan,  John  ' ’ 

Finegan,  Joseph ’ 

Reports  of 

Brannan,  John  ’ . 

Finegan,  Joseph ’’ 

Good,  Tilghman  1A4’ 166 

Hill,  George  * 

Hopkins,  Charles  ’ 

Town,  Franklin  4 

(See  also  report  of  0.  M.  Mitchel,  p.  125 ; Finegan  to  Jordan,  p.  638.) 

Skirmishes  between  Mayport  Mills,  Fla.,  and,  October  2,  1862.  (See  reports 
of  Brannan,  p.  129;  Hopkins,  pp.  139,140.) 

Saint  John’s  River,  Fla.,  Commanding  Officer  U.  S.  Navy.  Correspond- 
ence with  Joseph  Finegan 945 

Saint  Mark’s,  Fla.  Naval  descent  upon,  June  15, 1862. 

Communication  from  Joseph  Finegan 

Report  of  Joseph  Finegan 

Saint  Mary’s  River.  Expedition  up,  Jan.  23-Feb.  1,  1863.  Reports  ot 

Higginsmi,  T.  

Saxton,  Rufus 

Sally,  H.H.  Mentioned ° ’ * 

Salvo,  James.  Mentioned - 1 

Sammon,  Simeon.  Mentioned 461 

Sanchez,  Morris.  Mentioned 8®° 

Sanders,  John  D.  Mentioned 301 

Sands,  C.  J.  Mentioned 285>  286,  433 

Sanford,  Oliver  S.  Mentioned 169> 174 

Sanger,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 462 

Sanitary  Regulations.  South,  Department  of  the 457-459 

(See  also  Quarantine  Regulations.) 

Santee  River,  S.  C.  Defenses  of.  Communication  from  G.  T.  Beauregard  ..  6/3 

Sargent,  Horace  B.  Mentioned 1006 

Sargent,  Lucius  M.,  jr. 

Mentioned ^9 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 85 

Sass,  J.  K.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard - 636 

Saupp,  Frank  D.  Mentioned 493 


1094 


INDEX. 


Savage,  A.  L.  Mentioned 3U 

Savannah,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 354 

Savannah,  Ga. 

Defenses  of. 

Board  of  officers. 

Appointed  to  examine  into  and  report  on 864 

Proceedings  and  report  of.. 865-877 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 657, 662, 670, 905 

Cunningham,  A.  T 659,874 

Davis,  Jefferson 590 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 886 

Harden,  William  D 874 

Harris,  D.  B 902,  904 

Lee,  Robert  E 523 

Mercer,  H.  W 572,  863 

Pemberton,  John  C 472, 476, 491, 500, 501, 557 

Ordnance  for.  Tabular  statements 659, 660, 85C,  857, 872-877 

Reports  of  inspection  of. 

Beauregard,  G.  T .* 633,  645 

Huger,  Benjamin 853 

Sketches  of 

City  and  environs.  Diagram 855 

Interior  line  of  defenses.  Diagram  showing  relative  position  of 

guns  on 859 

River  defenses.  Diagram  showing  position  of  guns  on 858 

Statements  of 

Anderson,  Edward  C ' 865 

McCrady,  John 865, 867-869 

Martial  law * 478, 492, 495-497, 502 

Savannah,  Ga.,  Commanding  Officer  at.  (See  H.  W.  Mercer.) 

Savannah,  Ga.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 501,557 

Savannah  River,  Ga.  Reconnaissances  on,  September  30-October  3, 1862.  (See 
May  and  Savannah  Rivers,  Ga.) 

Sawyer,  F.  A.  Mentioned 55 

Sawyer,  George  D.  Mentioned 68 

Saxton,  Rufus. 

Assigned  to  special  duty  in  the  Department  of  the  South 1 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 374, 377, 423 

Mentioned 1, 281, 355, 376, 

378, 385, 386,  399, 424, 429, 430, 434, 435, 451, 453, 461, 462, 468, 469, 1020 

Reports  of 

Doboy  River,  Ga.  Expedition  to,  November  13-18,  1862 192 

East  Florida  and  Georgia,  coast  of.  Expedition  along,  November 

3-10,  1862 . 189 

George  Washington,  Steamer.  Destruction  of,  April  9,  1863  280 

Jacksonville,  Fla.  Reoccupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  Mrarc  ,1868..  226 

Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  October  24,  1862 189 

Saint  Mary’s  River.  Expedition  up,  January  23-February  1,  1863  194 

Scarlett,  J.  P.  Mentioned 316 

Schmitt,  M.  Mentioned 462 

Schenck,  Robert  C.  Mentioned 992 

Schnierle,  J.  M.  Mentioned 260 

Schouler,  James.  Mentioned 278 


INDEX. 


1095 


Page. 


230,231,931 
236 


Scott,  G.  W. 

Mentioned .am  * 

Report  of  affair  in  Ocklockonnee  Bay,  Fla.,  March  24,  1863 

Scott,  Winfield.  Mentioned - 982 

Scott,  Winfield,  Steamer.  Mentioned 329> 333 

Scott,  W.  W. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  affair  in  Saint  Andrew’s  Bay,  Fla.,  March  20,  1863 231 

Screven,  John.  Mentioned - 576,592,824,930 

Screven,  John  H.  Mentioned 484> 283 

Seabrook,  E.  M.  Mentioned 269 

Seabrook,  Joseph.  Mentioned 266 

Seabrook  Island,  S.  C.  Reconnaissance  on,  April  14, 1862.  Report  of  Enoch 

Q.  Fellows 3 

Sealy,  Israel  R.  Mentioned 382> 392 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Henry  W.  Benham.) 

Sears,  Alfred  F. 

Mentioned 59,62,196,322,330,331 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S. C.,  June  16,  1862... 

Sebago,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862. 

Affidavit  of  William  O’Connor 1009 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Confederate  troops 

Union  troops 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 

Benham,  Henry  W 44, 983, 987, 988, 990, 991, 993, 995, 998, 1008 

Drayton,  P 981> 1001 

Ely,  A.  994 

Evans,  Nathan  J 6 

Hawley,  Joseph  I"4 

Hunter,  David 46-48, 979, 980 

Judge-Advocate-General,  U.  S.  A 979 

Lamar,  T.  

• Lincoln,  A 

Maine,  Governor  of 997 

Martin,  Benjamin  - 4919 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 997 

New  Hampshire,  Governor  of 999 

Rhode  Island,  Governor  of 997 

Smith,  William  Duncan 499>  4944 

Stevens,  Isaac  I 44>  48>  92>  989>  989>  987> 4994 

Vermont,  Governor  of 997 

War  Department,  U.  994 

Wright,  Horatio  44,46 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Pemberton) 89 

Diagram  of  battle-field 4999 

Reports  of 

Adger,  J.  E - 494 

Benham,  Henry  94> 988 

Blum,  R.  A 493 

Capers,  Ellison 4943 

Chatfield,  John  L * 99 


80 

278 


90 

51 

991 


97 

979 


1096 


INDEX. 


Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862— Continued. 

Reports  of 

Evans,  Nathan  G q 

Fenton,  William  M ^ 

Goodlett,  S.  D * 97 

Graves,  Frank 

70 

Guss,  Henry  R ^ 

Hagood,  Johnson 9g 

Hawley,  Joseph  R 

Hunter,  David 42  43 

Jackson,  John  H ’ 

Lamar,  T.  G 93 

Leasure,  Daniel 46  71 

Leckey,  David  A * ’ 76 

McEnery,  J 100 

Metcalf,  Edwin g3 

Moore,  MacLell and 69 

Morrison,  David " 7& 

Pemberton,  John  C gg 

Ramsay,  David ’ 97 

Rockwell,  Alfred  P " “ g2 

Rosa,  Rudolph 74 1 

Sargent,  Lucius  M.,  jr _ gg 

Sears,  Alfred  F g9 

Simonton,  Charles  H 103 

Stevens,  C.  H 1Q2 

Stevens,  Isaac  I 

Welsh,  Thomas ^ 

Williams,  Robert 7g 

Wright,  Horatio  G 

Statement  of  H.  W.  Benham 999 

Secor,  Thomas  F.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 416 

Seddon,  James  A.  Mentioned 75Q  7gg  7^g 

766,  776, 777,  785, 816, 817, 825,  826, 897, 901, 904, 910, 911, 936, 954, 976, 1024 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S.) 

Sehrt,  Ferdinand.  Mentioned • 

Seneca,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 211  217 

Serrell,  Edward  W. 

Mentioned 55,  152>  153,  157>  164>  165>  178>  179>  362>  3gg>  m 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  S C 

October  22-23, 1862 ’ ’ 155 

Seward,  William  H.  Mentioned .**244, *1015, 1016 

Seward,  William  T.  Mentioned 82  83 

Seymour,  Truman. 

Assignments  to  command 389  392  451 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter ’ ’ 390 

Meutione<1 278, 279, 285, 389, 390, 392,  394,  419, 441, '443, "450,' 451  773 

Relieved  from  duty  as  chief  of  staff  and  artillery,  Department  of  the  South . . 451 

Report  of  effective  strength  of  command,  together  with  number,  kind,  and 

caliber  of  guns 392 

(For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  David  Hunter.) 

Shaaf,  Arthur.  Mentioned ' 213  824 

Shannon,  William  M. 

Correspondence  with  South  Carolina,  Governor  of.  912 

Mentioned  . """"  """  "'911,912 


INDEX. 


1097 


,704,716-718 

24 

29 

861 

803 


822 

Shaw,  H.  M.  Mentioned * ' 

Shaw,  Robert  G.  Mentioned 4 ’ 

Sherman,  Thomas  W. 

Correspondence  with  

Gillinore,  Quincy  A 323,324,326-333 

Rodgers,  J olm  . . . 

Mentioned 320, 321, 323-326, 333, 833 

Sherrill,  John.  Mentioned 

Ships  of  War.  (See  Torpedo  Rams  and  Naval  Vessels.) 

Shorter,  John  Gill.  Mentioned 339,545,679, 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Alabama , Governor  of.) 

Siemens,  Claus  J.  Mentioned 

Sigwald,  C.  B.  Mentioned 

Simkins,  E.  C.  Mentioned 

Simkins,  E J.  Mentioned 

Simkins,  J.  C. 

Mentioned - ; 260,209,270,272 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863  274 

Simkins,  W.  S. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 

Mentioned 265,507 

Simmons’  Bluff,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  21,  1862. 

Communication  from  Nathan  G.  Evans 

Report  of  Edward  L.  Parker 

Simmons,  H.  K.  Mentioned 236,237 

Simons,  Ion.  Mentioned 184 

Simons,  James  W.  Mentioned - 517 

Simons,  T.  Grange,  jr.  Mentioned 89,103,104 

Simons,  T.  Y.  Mentioned 94 

Simonton,  Charles  H. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 933, 953, 960, 961, 964, 965, 968, 969, 975 

Mentioned 87, 487, 500, 501, 530, 575, 592, 822, 929, 960, 970-972 

Reports  of 

James  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  May  31,  1863  289 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 103 

Simpkins,  Colonel.  Mentioned 475 

Sisson,  H.  T.  Mentioned 83, 84 

Sitgreaves,  Julius  A. 

Mentioned - - 260, 269, 270, 823, 929 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 275 

Sketches. 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  April  7,  1863. 

Devil  or  torpedo  searcher  carried  by  a monitor 254 

Plan  of  the  approach  and  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  by  the  United 

States  fleet 

Position  of  United  States  fleet  at  4.15  p.  262 

Sumter,  S.  C.,  Fort.  Effect  of  fire  from  United  States  fleet.. 252,253 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  October  22- 

23,1362 170,171 

Savannah,  Ga.  Defenses  of. 

City  and  environs.  Diagram  of 855 

Interior  line  of  defenses.  Diagram  showing  relative  position  of  guns 

on 859 

River  defenses.  Diagram  showing  relative  position  of  guns  on 858 


1098 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Sketches — Continued. 

Secessionville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1.862 4 1009 

Torpedoes.  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C 950, 951 

Skinner,  Benjamin  H.  Mentioned..  09  109 

Skinner,  Richard.  Mentioned 392 

Skinner,  R.  M.  Mentioned • 25,26,183,813 

Skull  Creek,  S.  C. 

Affair  on,  September  24,  1862.  Report  of  William  B.  Barton 122 

Torpedo  operations  in,  May  18-21,  1863. 

Communication  from  W.  S.  Walker 289 

Report  of  J.  H.  Mickler 288 

Slaght,  James  C. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 417 

Mentioned 4991 

Slaughter,  W.  M.  Mentioned 529, 575 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property. 

Employment  of  negroes  as  laborers.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 373 

Beauregard,  G.  T 695,782,842 

Brevard,  T.  W 353 

Cheves,  Langdon 972 

Echols,  William  H 327  972 

Finegan,  Joseph 051 

Georgia,  Governor  of 593^  914 

Harris,  D.  B 902, 904, 956, 970 

Hunter,  David 333, 341,  375,  429 

Mazyck,  A 944 

Mercer,  H.  W 335 

Moreno,  Theodore 954 

Pemberton,  John  C 573,589 

Saxton,  Rufus 374 

Shannon,  William  M 912 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 598, 007, 911 

Wayne,  H.  C 836 

War  Department,  U.  S 377 

References  to 19, 38, 116, 190- 

192,  194, 197, 198, 226, 228, 239, 290-308,333, 334, 341, 348, 374-376, 378, 447- 
449,  451, 452, 456, 457, 462, 463,  465-4C7, 489, 490, 541, 565, 589, 598, 599, 633, 
661,  693,  695, 744, 747, 782,  827,  860, 861, 863, 902, 904, 911-916, 956, 971, 974 

Sleeper,  Gilman  E.  Mentioned 160,376 

Sligh,  W.  H.  Mentioned 182, 183 

Smalls,  Robert.  Mentioned 13 

Smart,  H.  C.  Mentioned 309,312,487,530,576 

Smith,  A.  D.  Mentioned 87,88,94-96,487,575,823,930 

Smith,  Caraway. 

Assignments  to  command 099 

Mentioned 699,860 

Smith.  Charles  F.  Mentioned 71 

Smith,  Clifton  H.  Mentioned 726 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard.)  • 

Smith,  Edward  W.  Mentioned ' 392 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  David  Hunter.) 

Smith,  E.  Kirby.  Mentioned 526,683 


INDEX. 


1099 

Page. 


Smith,  Gustavus  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Adiutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 578 

Beauregard,  G.  T 588, 713, 719, 120, 723 

Lee,  Robert  

Whiting,  W.  H.  715 

Mentioned 582, 585, 597, 711, 715, 716, 719-721, 723, 742, 764 

Smith,  Isaac,  U.  S.  S.  (See  Isaac  Smith,  U.  S.  S .) 

Smith,  James  M.  Mentioned ^983 

Smith,  Joseph.  Mentioned - 

Smith,  L.  Jaquelin.  Correspondence  with  Ambrosio  Josd  Gonzales  ..  8iU 

Smith,  Norman  W.  Mentioned - ^ 

Smith,  Samuel  H.  Mentioned ' 

Smith,  Samuel  M.  Mentioned 153> 165, 170, 173, 1 

Smith,  S.  J.  Mentioned 

Smith,  W.  B.  Mentioned * 

Smith,  William  Duncan. 

Assignments  to  command ’ ’ ’ 

Correspondence  with 

™ 

Capers,  Ellison 

Echols,  William  ^86 

Gist,  S.  E - 581 

Hagood,  Johnson 10 

Pemberton,  John  C 550, 553-555, 559, 572, 578, 580, 583, 585, 590 

487,535,551,552,555,558,560,568,  571,  575,  580-582,  589,  591,  632,  641^ 

Smith,  Wilson.  Mentioned 309,311-314 

Snell,  A.  T.  Mentioned 

Snelling,  Frederick  G.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 41/ 

Snow,  George  W.  Mentioned ^ 

Snyder,  H.  Clay.  Mentioned - 2/8,279 

Soule,  Francis.  Mentioned 234,236,851 

Southard,  Henry  L.  Mentioned 462 

South  Atlantic  Coast.  Affairs  on,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 569,578,630 

Alabama,  Governor  of . 716,717 

Army  Headquarters 374  ’ 428 

Beauregard,  G.  T 608, 609, 630, 675-677, 692-694, 697, 710, 743, 748, 754, 755, 

758,  765,  767,  768,  771,  772,  777,  778,  783,  787,  788,  799,  819,  825,  955,  959 

777 

Chesnut,  James,  

Davis,  Jefferson 480,  560,  567-569,  572,  593,  597,  /65,  784, 1019 

Du  Pont,  Samuel  454> 455 

Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A 433 

Foster,  John  499 

French,  Samuel  ^ 7^° 

Georgia,  Governor  of 718 

Huger,  Benjamin - ®7^ 

Hunter,  David 337, 347, 365, 366,  374, 376, 

381,  390,  391,  394,  430,  431,  441,  447,  452-455,  457,  459, .462, 463,  467,  469 

Lee,  Robert  E 480, 484, 505, 560, 569, 762, 766 

Lincoln,  Abraham - 435,440,441,470 

Miles,  W.  Porcher 560,816 


1100 


INDEX. 


South  Atlantic  Coast.  Affairs  on,  generally — Cont’d.  Communications  from 

Mitchel,  Ormshy  M 3g3  ^ 

Navy  Department,  C.  S ’5g8 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 43g 

Orr,  James  L gig 

Pemberton,  John  C 482-484, 502, 558, 568, 600, 601, 609 

Saxton,  Rufus 3~4 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 567  613  815 

War  Department,  C.  S 568, 633, 763, 765^  78t>!  797 

War  Department,  U.  S 374  334  452 

Watts,  T.  H ’ ’71g 

whiting,  w.h.  c ” 771 

Wright,  Horatio  G 363 

South  Carolina. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 593, 768 

Beauregard,  G.  T 760, 768, 779, 850, 903, 909 

Pemberton,  John  C 567 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 667 

War  Department,  C.  S 759 

(See  also  South  Atlantic  Coast.) 

Emancipation  of  slaves  in.  Order  of  Hunter 341 

Martial  law. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 490 

Campbell,  James  B 570 

Davis,  Jefferson 486,593,598 

Pemberton , J ohn  C 486, 491 , 596, 599 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 593 

Wightman,  John  T 439 

Orders  of  Pemberton 497  594 

Proclamations. 

Davis,  J efferson 439 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 491 

Military  departments  embracing 630 

Militia 759, 783-786, 815-817, 819, 820 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 579, 582, 607, 877, 901 

Army  Headquarters • 449 

Barnwell,  Robert  W 896  397 

Beauregard,  G.  T 632,637-639,643,644,652,665,681,685,695, 

718,720,  736,  743,  745,  755,  760-762,764,  772,  778-782,786,787,  789,792, 
795,  797-799,  801,  810,  811,  813,  815,821,834,835,  839,841,846,849,851, 
852,  877,  878,  881,  882,  884,885,887-891,  893-895,897-901,904,908,909, 
917-919,  923-926, 928,  932,  933,  936,  938,  939,  946,  947,  955, 962,  968, 975 

Benham,  Henry  W 349  350 

Black,  John  L 533 

Byrd,  S.  D.  M 573 

Calhoun,  W.  R 569 

Chisolm,  A.  R 640 

Colcock*,  C.  J ‘ 660 

Davis,  J efferson 540}  936 

De  Lisle,  Ch.  G 948 

Duane,  James  C 450 

E *11018,  William  H gg6 


INDEX. 


1101 

Page. 


South  Carolina— Continued. 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Emanuel,  W.  P - 512 

Evans,  Nathan  G 470,511,551,569,937 

Gillmgre,  Quincy  A - 459,464,465 

Gist,  S.  R - 535,581,812 

Gonzales,  Amhrosio  Jos6  811,834,946 

Graham,  Robert  F 890 ’ 948 

Hagood,  Johnson 795>  796,  ®47,  878, 888, 927 

Harllee,  William  518,521,580 

Haskell,  Charles  T.,  jr 747 

Hill,  D.  789 

Howard,  Ocran  ^8 

Hunter,  David ^48> 

353,  355, 358,  361, 414, 419, 424, 427, 432, 436, 438, 440, 442-444, 446,  450 

Jeffords,  602 

Jenkins,  John 

Jordan,  Thomas 780,781,785 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 74^’ 89^ 

Lee,  G.  W.  C - 894,899 

Lee,  Robert  ^ 

Lynch,  William  892 

Magee,  J.  ™ 

Miles,  W.  Porcher 

Mitchel,  J.  - 9^ 

Orr,  James  «*>!£ 

Pace,  George  1 

Pemberton,  John  - 4'°» 

474,  476,  479,  480,  485',  490,  509,  511,  514,  518-520,  525-527,  534-541, 
548-559,’ 561,  566,  572,  577-580,  581,  583,  588,  589,  593,  597,  601,  604 

Peronneau,  W.  H 902 

Ramsay,  William  M - 522 

Rhett,  Alfred 908 

Ripley  Roswell  S.  744, 748, 813, 847, 890-893, 918, 922, 932, 938, 947, 967, 969, 970 

Simonton,  Charles  H 933, 953, 964, 965, 968, 969, 975 

Smith,  L.  Jaquelin - J-  819 

Smith,  William  Duncan 5/  8>  589>  582> 58;) 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 540>  666> 750’ 751  > 789 

Stevens,  C.  H 887,901 

Stevenson,  Thomas  

Trapier,  James  H 681,762.966 

Tucker,  J.  H - ^77^ 

Vogdes,  Israel 443,445,446,450,  451 

Walker  W.  S 584, 625, 771, 778, 791-794, 810, 813, 862, 945 

War  Department,  C.  S 538, 675, 878, 890, 898, 917, 933, 938-942 

War  Department,  U.  350, 354 

Whiting,  W.H.  778,787 

Wright  Horatio  G 335,339,341,346,348,349,352,356,357,359,360 

Yates,  Joseph  A 890,892,921 

.( See  also 

April  14,  1862.  Seabrook  Island.  Reconnaissance  on. 

19,  1862.  Edisto  Island.  Skirmish  on. 

29,  1862.  Pinebernj  Battery,  Willstown,  and  White  Point.  Engage- 
ments near. 


1102 


. INDEX. 


Page. 

South  Carolina — Continued. 

Operations  in 

See  also  • 

May  13,  1862.  Planter,  Steamer.  Abduction  of. 

20,  1862.  Cole's  Island.  Bombardment  of.  * 

21,  1862.  Battery  Island.  Affair  near. 

22,  1862.  John’s  Island.  Expedition  to. 

25,  1862.  James  and  Dixon’s  Islands.  Affair  between. 

29,  1862.  Pocotaligo.  SJcirmish  at. 

June  3,  1862.  James  Island.  Skirmish  on. 

6,  1862.  Port  Royal  Ferry.  Affair  at. 

7,1862.  John’s  Island.  Skirmish  on. 

8,  1862.  James  Island.  Skirmish  on. 

8-  9,  1862.  John’s  Island.  Affairs  on. 

10,  1862.  James  Island.  Skirmish  on. 

12,  1862.  Hutchinson’s  Island.  Reconnaissance  on. 

13,  1862.  White  House , near  Hilton  Head.  Affair  at. 

16,  1862.  Secessionville.  Engagement  at. 

21,  1862.  Simmons’  Bluff.  Engagement  at. 

28— July  7,  1862.  James  Island.  Evacuation  of . 

July  4,1862.  Port  Royal  Ferry . Affair  at. 

9,  1862.  Fenwick’s  Island.  Expedition  to. 

0-10,  1862.  Pocotaligo.  Demonstrations  against. 

Aug.  13,  1862.  Black  River.  Engagement  on. 

21, 1862.  Pinckney  Island.  Affair  on. 

Sept.  10,  1862.  Kilkenny  River.  Skirmish  on. 

24,  1862.  Skull  Creek.  Affair  on. 

Oct.  18,  1862.  Kirk’s  Bluff.  Affair  at. 

22-23,  1862.  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad.  Expedition  against. 

24,  1862.  Saint  Helena  Island.  Affair  on. 

Jan.  29,  1863.  Daufuskie  Island.  Expedition  to. 

30,  1863.  Isaac  Smith,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  in  Stono  River. 

31,  1863.  Charleston.  Attack  on  blockading  squadron  off. 

Bull  Island.  Affair  on. 

Mar.  22,  1863.  Georgiana,  Steamer.  Destruction  of,  off  Charleston. 

April  7,  1863.  Charleston  Harbor.  . Engagement  in. 

9,1863.  George  Washington,  Steamer.  Destruction  of , near  Beaufort. 

10,  1863.  Folly  Island.  Skirmish  on. 

12,  1863.  Stonewall  Jackson , Steamer.  Destruction  of. 

27,  1863.  Murray’s  Inlet.  Affair  at. 

May  4,  1863.  Murray’s  Inlet.  Affair  at. 

18-21,  1863.  Skull  Creek.  Torpedo  operations  in. 

19,  1863.  Pope’s  Island.  Skirmish  on. 

31,  1863.  James  Island.  Affair  on. 

June  2,1863.  C omb ah ee  River.  Union  raid  on  the. 

4,  1863.  Bluff  ton.  Expedition  to,  from  Fort  Pulaski. 

11-13,1863.  Little  Folly  Island.  Operations  on.) 

Proclamation  to  citizens  of.  (Beauregard) 781 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Jqrdan,  Thomas 737 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 737 

Works  in,  October  4,  1862.  Tabular  statement  of 627,  628 

South  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of.  Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 594 

Miles,  W.  Porcher 81$ 


INDEX. 


1103 

Pago. 


South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  ®7 

Davis,  Jefferson 566 

Pemberton,  John  C 476, 508, 517, 519, 588, 589 

War  Department,  C.  S - 

Resolutions  of.  Defenses  of  Charleston,  S.  C 510,511 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  613,617,631 

652, 665, 667, 672, 720, 743, 750, 751, 760, 768, 789, 815, 819, 839,  885,  911 

Davis,  Jefferson 480, 486, 540, 560, 567, 568, 572, 593, 597, 631, 666 

Lee,  Robert  503,515,524 

Mazyck,  A 

Orr,  James  L 

Pemberton,  John  C 516>  518> 534’  540> 567 ’ 573> 596’ 598 

Shannon,  William  M ^ 9^2 

War  Department,  C.  67o> 942 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : No.  10,  784 ; No.  11,  785. 

Proclamations. 

Martial  law  declared 

7 QA 

Militia  called  out 

South  Carolina,  Legislature  of.  Resolution  of  thanks.  Engagement  in 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 277 


South  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Heavy — Battalions : Alston’s,  201,  517,  529,  591,624,701,783,823, 
929,930;  15th  {Lucas),  203,  575,  592,  624,822,929.  Regiments:  1st,  201, 
265,266,269,275,487,529,562-565,575,  591,  624,  802,  804,823,910,929,958, 
1014  (see  also  Preston's  battery ) ; 2d,*  90-96,  98,202, 203, 276, 277, 493,  oOO, 
530, 537,  575, 592, 624, 762, 822, 823, 910, 929,  948  ; 3d  {1st  Regulars),  18, 269, 
272-275, 530, 551, 576, 591, 594, 823, 910, 929. 

Artillery,  Light—  Battalions : German  {Batteries),  A,  481,  529,575,591,823, 
929, 948 ; B,  822, 929 ; Palmetto,!  487, 529, 530, 575, 592, 624, 822, 929 ; {Bat- 
teries), A,  310,575,702,733,813,824,863,930;  B,  702,742,948,953;  C,  702, 

742.946,  948,  953;  D,  948;  F,  201, 946,963, 964;  G,  948.  Batteries  : Beau- 
fort, 25, 26, 31, 112, 118-120, 180-183, 186, 187, 282-284, 624, 626, 813, 824, 862, 
930, 946 ; Ferguson’s,  529, 591, 624, 823, 926, 931, 948, 953 ; Gist  Guard,  29, 
823, 929 ; La  Fayette,  180, 186, 187, 487, 529, 575, 592, 624, 701, 824, 863, 930 ; 
Macbeth,  99, 487, 517, 529, 575, 582, 586, 587, 929 ; Marion,  19, 105, 106, 487, 
517,530,576,591,624,823,  930;  Mathewes,  276,  591,  624,  823,  929;  Pres- 
ton’s,* 486,530,575,592,624,742,813,  862,  878,  932,933,948,963;  Santee, 

573.574.823.929.946,  948,  967;  Waccamaw,  114,  115,  476,  762,  823,  929, 
' 948;  Washington,  106,487,517,530,576,591,624,701,823,930. 

Cavalry — Battalion^ : 2d,  591,  624;  4th, § 16,  487,  529,  530,  575,  588  ; 8th  || 

(Colcock),  530,  575,  576;  10th, H 584,  643,  644;  12th, f 624,643,  644; 
14th,**  25-27, 180, 181, 183, 643, 644 ; 16th, tt  607 ; 17th,**  38, 112, 113, 180, 


* See  foot  note,  p.  93. 
t Batteries  designated  when  practicable. 

+ Company  A,  1st  Heavy  Artillery, 
o Sometimes  called  3d  Battalion. 
f|  Merged  into  3d  Regiment,  J uly  19,  1862. 

H Merged  into  4th  Regiment,  December  16,  1862.  . 

**  Sometimes  called  1st  Battalion.  Merged  into  5th  Regiment,  J auuary  18,  1863. 
ft  Merged  into  6th  Regiment,  January  19,  1863.  . 

+j  Sometimes  called  6th  Battalion.  Merged  into  5th  Regiment,  J anuary  18,  1863, 


1104 


INDEX, 


South  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued.  (Confederate.) 

Cavalry — Battalions : 17th  (cont’d),  487,529,575,584,624,  641,  643,  644,  701. 
Companies:  Ashley  Dragoons*  ( Colcock ),  487;  Barnwell  Dragoons* 
{Lawton),  487 ; Calhoun  Mounted  Men  t {Martin),  487 ; Charleston  Light 
Dragoons  $ {Rutledge),  180-183,  624, 644  ; German  Hussars  t {Cordes),  487, 
529,  575;  Kirk’s  Partisan  Rangers,  180-182,  624,  824,  862,  930;  Marion 
Men  of  Combahee  * {Heyward),  25  ; Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles,  § 25-27, 
31,  180-184,290,297,298,  525,624,  644,  813,  824,  930;  Rebel  Troop  t {Jen- 
kins), 487,  530,  576;  Saint  James  Mounted  Rifles,  ||  573,  574,  643,  744; 
Saint  Peter’s  Guards  t {Smart),  487, 530, 576 ; Savannah  River  Guards  * 
{Johnson),  487:  Stono  Scouts  {State),  34,  202,  624,  823,  930.  Tucker’s, 
823,  929.  Regiments  : 1st,  32, 33, 487, 530, 576, 591, 604, 624  ; 2d,  624 ; 3d, 
180,  181,  183,  185,  186,  309-314,  591,592,597,651,661,813,822,823,862,929, 
930 ; 4th,  282,  293-305,  307,  309,  793,  813,  823,  824, 863, 921-923, 930 ; 5th, 
813, 822,  823, 882,  863, 929  ; 6th,  823,  930. 

Infantry — Battalions:  1st  Sharpshooters,  180,  181,  185,  186,289,  624,  823, 
862,  928,  930,  932,  939,  967  ; 2d  Sharpshooters,  624  ; 3d,  487,  529,  575, 
582,  587  ; 6th,  H 487,  529,  573-575,  591,  624  ; 7th,  180, 182,  183,  487,  529, 530, 
576,  591,  608,  624,  711,  742,  823,  930  ; 9th,  If  87,  90,  92,  94-96,  476,  487,  529, 
575,  624 ; Charleston,  29-31,  34,  87,  90,  92,  94-97,  265,  487,  530,  575,  582, 
591,  624,  823,  929,  970;  Eutaw**  {Simonton),  29,  30,  87,  90,  98,  99,  103, 
104,  487,  530,  575,  582,  592.  Companies  : Boykin’s  {State),  287  ; Citadel . 
Cadets  {State),  537,  538,  835,  882  ; Combahee  Rangers  {State),  301,  305  ; 
McCord’s  Zouaves  {Hampton  Legion),  487,  530,  576;  Regiments:  1st 
Volunteers  {Hagood),  87,  90,  98-100,  102,  487,  529,  56fc,  575,  587,  624,  1014  ; 
1st  Provisional  ( Gregg),  910 ; 1st  Regulars  (see  3d  Heavy  Artillery) ; 1st 
Reserves,  750,  815,  817;  1st  Rifles,  482,  487,  505  ; 2d  Rifles, ft  487,  519, 
520,  529;  4th  Reserves,  750,  751,  815,  817  ; 7th  Reserves,  744  ; 10th,  487, 
681 ; 10th  Reserves,  750,  751,  785,  815,  817  ; 11th,  25,  31,  112,  119,176,  177, 
180, 181, 185-188,  198,  199,282,  283,  288-290,  297,  309,  311-314,  487,  530,  536, 
552, 558,  576,  624,  823,  862,  863,  930,  936 ; 11th  Reserves,  6C8 ; 12th,  13th, 
14th,  481, 482,  487 ; 14th  Reserves,  785  ; 15th,  487,  530,  534, 565,  575,  582, 
587  ; 15th  Reserves,  785 ; 16th,  105,  106,  487,  529,  576,  591,  624,  711,  742, 
823,  931,  945;  17th,  19,  25,  32,  34,  487,  529,  576,  586,  587,  929 ; 18th,  487, 
529,  575,  582,  586,  587,  929 ; 19th,  487 ; 20th,  201,  272,  291,  487,  529,  575, 
591,  624,  654,  818,  823,  925,  929,  932,  936,  967  ; 21st,  476,  521,  529,  550,  572, 
575,  591,  624,  653,  823,  929,  958,  971,  1024;  22d,  87,  90-92,  97,  98,  487,  529, 
575,  582,  592,  929  ; 23d,  487,  529,  572,  575,  582,  586,  587,  929  ; 24th,  18,  29, 
30,  87,  90,  98,  99,  102-104,  487,  499,  530,  575,  582,  592,  624,  742,  813,  823,  862, 
878,  926,  929,  931,  1013,  1014;  25th,  289,  624,  741,  742,  822,  929,  1014,  1025  ; 
26th,  162,  744,  823,  930,  936,  939 ; 39th  Reserves,  785 ; Brown’s  Re- 
serves, 720 ; Cash’s  Reserves,  668,  672,  674,  681. 

Miscellaneous : — Holcombe  Legion,  487,  529,  576,  586,  588,.  929. 

South  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  189-198,  226,  233,  236, 423, 466, 8$8,  845,  846, 903  ; 
2d,  226, 233, 236, 238, 423, 462,  463, 838. 

South  Carolina,  1st  Military  District  of.jt 

Mercer,  H.  W.,  assigned  to  command 


Page. 


523 


* Merged  into  8th  Battalion,  May  30,  1862. 
t Merged  iuto  3d  Regiment,  July  19,  1862. 

1 Merged  into  4th  Regiment,  December  16,  1862. 

\ Also  designated  Horse  Artillery. 

||  Originally  with  6th  Battalion.  Merged  into  4th  and  5th  Regiments, 
If  Merged  into  26th  Regiment,  September  9,  1862. 

**  Merged  into  25th  Regiment,  August  14,  1862. 
ft  Originally  called  1st  Battalion  Rifles. 

Of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 


INDEX. 


1103 

Page. 


South  Carolina,  1st  Military  District  of— Continued. 

Orders,  Special,  series- 1862:  No.  2,  582;  No.  5,  651;  No.  16,  585. 

Ripley,  Roswell  S.,  assigned  to  command 

Smith,  William  Duncan,  assigned  to  command 


South  Carolina,  1st  Military  District  of.* 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined - 

Evans,  Nathan  G.,  assigned  to  duty  in 

Hagood,  Johnson. 

Relieved  from  duty 

Revocation  of  order  relieving  from  duty 

Limits  extended.  Fourth  District  merged  into 

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1862:  December  26,  732. 

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1863:  March  27,  847. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : No.  6,  776  ; No.  10, 827;  No.  8 (Gist),  842. 
Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  13,  748;  No.  112,  828;  No.  141,  891; 
No.  168,  918;  No.  182,  925;  No.  187,  932;  No.  194  , 944. 

Ripley,  Roswell  S.,  assigned  to  command 

Sub- divisions  of,  announced - 


736 

918 


936 

939 

797 


736 

776 


Trapier,  J.  H. 

Assigned  to  duty  in,  and  command  of  Sub-Division  No.  2 818,827 

Ordered  to  command  of  2d  Military  District -- 937 

Orders  assigning  to  command  2d  Military  District  revoked 939 

Relieved  from  duty  in 966-968 

Yates,  Joseph  A.,  assigned  to  duty  in 797 

South  Carolina,  2d  Military  District  of.t 

Evans,  Nathan  G.,  assigned  to  command °23 

Gist,  S.  R.,  assigned  to  duty  in ^76 

Hagood,  Johnson,  assigned  to  command 587 

Mercer,  H.  W.,  assigned  to  command - 521 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  324,  493;  No.  335,  496;  No.  446,  520. 

Ripley,  Roswell  S.,  relieved  from  command 521 

South  Carolina,  2d  Military  District  of.* 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 736 

Hagood,  Johnson. 

Assigned  to  command 73 

Relieved  from  command 936 


Trapier,  James  H. 

Assigned  to  command 937 

Order  assigning  revoked 939 

South  Carolina,  3d  Military  District  of.t 

Limits  extended.  Fourth  District  merged  into 587 

Walker,  W.  S.,  assigned  to  command - 523,587 

South  Carolina,  3d  Military  District  of.* 

Capers,  Ellison,  assigned  to  duty  in 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined  

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1863:  March  27,  292;  May  29,  307. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  24,  793;  No.  50,  291,  /U4 ; No.  69,  827; 

No.  112  , 292. 

Walker,  W.  S.,  assigned  to  command 736 


827 

736 


* Of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 
t Of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 


70  R R— VOL  XIY 


1106 


INDEX 


South  Carolina,  4th  Military  District  of.* 

Colquitt,  P.  H.,  assigned  to  command 

Drayton,  Thomas  F.,  assigned  to  command 

Merged  into  3d  District 

Walker,  W.  S.,  assigned  to  command 

South  Carolina,  4th  Military  District  of.t 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 

Merged  into  1st  Military  District 

Trapier,  James  H.,  assigned  to  command 

South  Carolina,  5th  Military  District  of.* 

Colquitt,  P.  H.,  assigned  to  command 

Walker,  W.  S.,  assigned  to  command 

South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Beauregard,  G.  T.,  assigned  to  command 

Confederate  troops  in. 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 


Page. 

..  481 

..  523 

..  587  I 

..  493 

669. 736 
..  797 

670.736  • 

• - 481  j 

. . 493  i 

601, 608 


April  12,  1862 4g2 

April  30,  1862 486,  437 

May  11,  1862 498,936 

May  31,  1862 529,530 

June  23,  1862  571 

June  30,  1862  rn r, 

July  31,  1862.. 2 591,592 

August  31,  1862  602 

September  30,  1862 615 

Organized  into  brigades  and  divisions 523 

Position  of,  September  25,  1862  624, 625 

Evans,  Nathan  G.,  assigned  to  command  of  First  Division,  First  Military 

District,  South  Carolina 566 

Gist,  S.  R. 


Assigned  to  command  of  troops  on  James  Island,  S.  C 581 

Assigned  to  command  of  troops  east  of  James  Island  Creek,  S.  C 568 

Hagood,  Johnson,  assigned  to  command  of  troops  west  of  James  Island 

Creek,  S.  C 56g 

Merged  into  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida 630 


Orders,  Circulars,  series  1862 : November  10,  675. 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  11,  491 ; No.  15,  497;  No.  17,  504  ; No. 

21,523;  Nos.  24,25,552;  No.  26,556;  No.  30,89;  No.  37,587; 
No.  48,599;  No.  88,  665;  No.  89,668;  No.  95, 677;  No.  115,  698. 
Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  23,  476;  No.  27,  481 ; No.  40,  493;  No. 

57,  519;  No.  59,  521;  No.  63,  526;  No.  67,  538;  No.  69,  550; 
No.  70,  552;  No.  79,  566;  No.  82,  568;  No.  101,581;  No.  173, 
613;  No.  195,  641;  No.  2 13,  666;  No.  2 16,669;  No.  229,  684. 


Pemberton,  John  C.,  relieved  from  command  of 603  613 

Smith,  W.  D.,  assigned  to  command  of  troops  on  James  Island,  S.  C 568 

Works,  defensive,  in.  Inspection  of.  Report  of  G.  T.  Beauregard 610 

Lth  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 
Confederate  troops  in. 

Distribution  of,  in  Third  Military  District,  April  1,  1863 862 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

November  30,  1862  695 

December  30,  1862 749  741 


*Of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
t Of  the  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 


INDEX. 


1107 


Page. 


South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  Dept.  of.  (Confederate)— Continued. 


Confederate  troops  in. 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

January  31,  1863 - 757 

February  17,  1863 783 

February  28, 18G3 798 

March  4,  1863 809,810 

March  13,  1863 822-825 

March  21,  1863  840 

March  31,  1863 860 

April  7,  1863 889 

April  23,  1863  909 

April  30,  1863  922 

May  8,-1863 929-931 

May  11,  1863 936 

May  15,  1863 944,945 

May  25,  1863 953 

June  3,  1863  964 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 630 

Gist,  S.  R.,  relieved  from  duty  in 925 


Huger,  Benjamin,  directed  to  make  an  inspection  of  artillery,  etc.,  at 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  Savannah,  Ga 797 

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1862 : December  29,  737. 

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1863 : January  18,  754 ; February  17,  782  ; May 
6,  927. 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  122,  709;  No.  126,  724;  No.  127,  726; 


No.  132,  736. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : No.  7,  749  ; No.  23,  212 ; No.  53,  882. 
Orders,  Special,  series  1862  : No.  247,  701 ; No.  252,  714. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863  : No.  4,  742  ; No.  44,  782 ; No.  45, 786 ; No.  54, 
802;  No.  58,814;  No.  61,  818;  No.  62, £29  ; No.  64,  864  ; No.  85, 
901 ; No.  92,  918;  No.  98,  925  ; No.  105,  936;  No.  107,  939. 


Ripley,  Roswell  S.,  assigned  to  duty  in 635 

Statement  (approximate)  of  rifled  guns  in 917 

Taliaferro,  William  B.,  assigned  to  duty  in 787 

Walker,  W.  H.  T.,  assigned  to  duty  in 809 

South,  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

Address  to  soldiers  of.  (Hunter) 419 

Brannan,  J.  M.,  assumes  command  of 380, 387 

Controversy  between  Hunter  and  Foster.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 403 

Army  Headquarters  400-403, 408, 412, 427 

Darr,  Francis 417 

Farquhar,  Francis  U 417 

Fitzgerald,  Louis 417 

Foster,  John  G 400, 402, 407, 408 

Gourand,  George  E 417 

Hunter,  David 396,  397,  404,  405,  409,  411-413,  417,  420,  425,  431 


Potter,  Edward  E 417 

Slaght,  James  C * 417 

Snelling,  F.  G 417 

Strong,  James  H 417 

War  Department,  U.  S«.TTTT - 403 


1108 


INDEX. 


Page. 

South,  Department  of  the.  (Union)^— Continued. 

Districts  in,  abolished 359 

Draft.  Regulation  and  orders  governing  the 429,  430,  460,  1020^  1021 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A.,  assigned  to  command 464 

Hunter,  David. 

Relieved  from  command 376,  464 

Resumes  command  of 391 

Mitchel,  Ormsby  M.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of 380,  382 

Naglee,  Henry  M.,  relieved  from  command  in 420 

Officers  of  Foster’s  staff  ordered  to  quit  the 409 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  7,  333;  No.  11,  341;  No.  15,  359;  No. 

17,1020;  No.  19,361;  No.  27,  376;  No.  36,380;  No.  40,382; 

No.  46,  387  ; No.  47,  388 ; No.  51,  389;  (Benham),  No.  13,  987. 
Orders,  General,  series  1863  : No.  3,  391  ; Nos.  8,  9,  394  ; No.  13,  397  ; No. 

15,  412;  No.  16,  419;  No.  24,  429;  No.  34,  449;  No.  35,  452; 

No.  40,  457 ; No.  41,  459 ; No.  42,  460. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  97,  409;  No.  104,  422;  No.  116,  413; 

No.  127,  420;  No.  189,  438;  No.  190,  440. 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 374 

Hunter,  David 366, 393,  394 

Sanitary  regulations  of 457-459 

Saxton,  Rufus,  assigned  to  special  duty  in 1 

Seymour,  Truman. 

Announced  as  chief  of  staff  and  artillery 392 

Assigned  to  duty  in 389. 

Relieved  from  duty  as  chief  ol  staff  and  artillery 451 

Union  troops  in. 

Constituted  Tenth  Army  Corps 380 

• Organization,  strength,  etc. 

April  30,  1862  338 

June  30,  1862  362,  363 

July  31, 1862 367,368 

October  31,  1862  387,388 

December  31, 1862  389,390 

January  25,  1863  392 

March  31,  1863 434,435 

April  30,  1863  451 

May  10,  1863 453 

May  31,  1863 461,462 

June  10,  1863  468,469 

West  Florida,  detached  from 369 

Spaulding’s,  Ga.  Skirmish  at,  November  7,  1862.  (See  Georgia.  Expedition 
along  coast  of,  November  3-10,  1862.) 

Speidel,  John.  Mentioned 157-159,461 

Spence,  Gabriel.  Mentioned 57 

Sprague,  William.  Mentioned 84 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Rhode  Island,  Governor  of.) 

Spratt,  Mr.  Mentioned 902 

Stanton,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 358,  374, 378, 385, 397,  398,  400- 

402,  408,  412,  415,  420,  422,427,451,459,460,979,981,982,  991,1000,1010 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S .) 

Starkweather,  Mr.  Mentioned r 343 

Starlight,  Steamer.  Mentioned — 123-J.25, 379 


INDEX. 


1109 


Page. 

Star  of  the  South,  Steamer.  Mentioned 33’2,  108  109 

Staten  Islander,  Steamer.  Mentioned Yrk' 

State  of  Georgia,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 427, 454, 455,  o72, 853, 854 

Steadman,  W.  K.  Mentioned g20 

Stedman,  A.  J.  Mentioned ’ 

Steedman,  Charles.  Mentioned oqq  qq? 

131, 134, 136, 137, 144, 145, 147, 150, 152, 153, 175, 196, 197, 233, 387 

249  27  6 

Steedman,  G.  E.  Mentioned ’ 

Steele,  Clemens  F.  Mentioned ’ ^ 

Steger,  J.  C.  Mentioned * 2Q7 

Stellwagen,  Henry  S.  Mentioned ’8-0 

Stephens,  Winston.  Mentioned 140, 229, 236, 825,  ^ 

Steubenmeyer,  Mr.  Mentioned I”"  on! 

Stevens,  A.  H.,  jr.  Mentioned ’ 12/ 851 

Stevens,  Charles  F.  Mentioned * ’ 

Stevens,  C.  H.  HH7  qnl 

Correspondence  with  Eoswell  S.  Ripley ’ 

Mentioned  ....  19,87,91,92,98-100,103,487,499,530,575,582,592,714,813,823,929 

Reports  of 

Battery  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  near,  May  21,  1862 

Secession ville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 

Stevens,  Hazard.  Mentioned 21, 33, 61, 68, 73, 77, 85, 1003, 1007, 1008 

Stevens,  Isaac  I. 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  Henry  oo  l, 

Evans,  Nathan  ’ 

Hunter,  David ' “-f 

New  York  Times,  Editor  of 980’ 9o7’ 199* 

Wright,  Horatio  G 

Mentioned  - * 

en  lonei  72,73, 75,78,  80,  82,85,92,  108,109,338,350- 

352, 356-358, 362-364, 366-368, 553, 979-982, 984-995, 999-1004, 1006-1012 

Reports  of 

James  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  June  8,1862 

Pocotaligo,  S.  C.  Skirmish  at,  May  29,  1862  - 

Secession  ville,  S,  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862  

Stevens,  P.  F.  Mentioned  - - 487’ 529’ 

Stevens,  S.  S.  Mentioned - - 

Stevenson,  Thomas  G.  * ^ 

Assignments  to  command ‘ ‘ ' ... 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 439> 440’  442> 44 

Mentioned 278, 413, 429, 434, 439-441, 443, 451, 453, 461, 468, 469 

Stewart,  Asa  A.  Mentioned 229, 85°, J^4*93* 

Stewart,  James  F.  Mentioned JT'or'oAc  ocn  ati 

Stewart!  J.  Q.  Mentioned 229,235,825,850,851 

Stiles,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Stockdale,  William.  Mentioned 

Stockton,  Samuel  W.  Mentioned ‘’***  * 

Stokes,  William.  Mentioned 31U>  b44> 

Stonewall  Jackson,  Steamer. 

Destruction  of,  April  12,  1863.  Report  of  Charles  T.  Haskell - 

Stono,  C.  S.  S.*  Mentioned 800,836,841 


Formerly  U.  S.  S.  Isaao  Smith. 


1110 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Storey,  R.  L.  Mentioned 939 

Stow,  Captain. 

Correspondence  with  M.  B.  Miller 683 

Mentioned 683 

Strahan,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 62 

Strawbridge,  De  Witt  C. 

Mentioned 164, 167, 168, 367, 388, 390 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23, 1862 174 

Strickland,  A.  M.  Mentioned 237 

Strickland,  Dudley  W.  Mentioned 125, 126, 177 

Strobhar,  H.  J.  Mentioned 576, 592 

Strong,  James  H.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 417 

Strong,  J.  D.  Mentioned 195^  197 

Stroop,  George. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  F.  Du  Pont 280 

Mentioned 278,279 

Stuart,  H.  M.  (Lieutenant.)  Mentioned 119,180,186,282,284 

Stuart,  H.  M.  (Private.)  Mentioned 298 

Stuart,  Robert.  Mentioned 25 

Stuart,  Thomas  O.  Mentioned 141 

Styles,  C.  W.  Mentioned 437 

Subsistence.  Supplies  of.  (See  Munitions  of  War.) 

Sumter,  Steamer,  Mentioned 755 

Sumter,  Fort,  S.  C. 

Attack  on,  April  7,  1863.  (See  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in, 

April  7,  1863.) 

Disaffection  in.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 770 

Calhoun,  W.  R 562 

Fleming,  David  G 563 

H 770 

Harleston,  F.  H 563, 564 

King,  J.  Gadsden 1 563 

Pemberton,  John  C 517, 527 

Peronneau,  William  H 564 

South  Carolina.  Executive  Council  of • 508 

Yates,  Joseph  A 554 

(See  also  Pickens  to  Lee,  p.  515;  Pickens  to  Pemberton  p.  516;  Lee  to  Pem- 
berton, p.  523;  Lee  to  Pickens,  p.  524.) 

Inspection  of,  January  28, 1863.  Report  of  Alfred  Roman 802 

Suter,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 433  434 

Sutton,  Robert.  Mentioned 19g 

Tadini,  Madame.  Mentioned 298 

Tafft,  Henry  S. 

Mentioned 28, 61, 278, 280, 394 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  April  7, 1863 278 

Taliaferro,  William  B. 

Assignments  to  command 787,814 

Mentioned 787, 801, 814, 824, 864-869, 871, 930 

Tampa,  Fla.  Bombardment  of,  June  30-July  1,  1862.  Reports  of 

Finegan,  Joseph HO 

Pearson,  J.  W _ m 1 

Tardy,  John  A.  Mentioned 334 


INDEX. 


1111 


Page. 

Tatnall,  Isaac.  Mentioned 324 

Tatnall,  Josiah.  Mentioned - - 670, 848 

Tatom,  William  T.  Mentioned 274 

Taylor,  George  W.  Mentioned 223 

Taylor,  J.  C.  (For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Taylor,  John  F.  Mentioned 670 

Taylor,  Joseph  D.  Mentioned - 26 

Taylor.  J.  W.  Mentioned 315, 316 

Taylor,  Walter  H.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Robert  E.  Lee.) 

Taylor,  William  R.  Mentioned 2^4 

T.  D.  Wagner,  Steamer.  Mentioned 778,917 

Teasdale,  H.  R.  Mentioned - 477 

Tennent,  J.  Mentioned 89,97 

Tennessee.  Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Davis,  William  G.  M 473 

Dilworth,  W.  472 

Finegau,  Joseph 486 

Pemberton,  John  C 626 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments:  8th,  16th,  487. 

Terry,  Adrian.  Mentioned 68,154,168 

Terry,  Alfred  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  Henry  W 342,343,346 

Mitchel,  Ormsby  M - 386 

Rich,  Rish worth 368 

Mentioned - 134, 135, 146, 149, 150, 153, 156, 

169-173,  278,  279,  363,  368,  383,  384,  388-390,  424,  434,  435,  439,  451, 453 
Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23, 1862 164 

Thayer,  J.  G.  Mentioned 388, 390 

Thigpin,  Clinton. 

Correspondence  with  Theodore  Moreno 724 

Mentioned 680,730,732,931 

Thomas  Foulkes,  Steamer.  Mentioned 370-373 

Thomas  F.  Secor,  Steamer.  Mentioned 416 

Thomas,  J.  P. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 899 

Mentioned 835,  839 

Thomas,  Lorenzo.  Mentioned 354,420,426,447,448,457,464,990 

Thomas,  R.  B.  Mentioned 235, 841, 851 

Thompson,  John.  Mentioned 69, 169 

Thompson,  O.  A.  Mentioned 84 

Thompson,  R.  W.  Mentioned 392,406 

Thomson,  W.  G. 

Mentioned r 317 

Report  of  attack  on  Darien,  Ga.,  July  11,  1863 318 

Thornton,  T.  R.  Mentioned - 487,530,576 

Thornton,  William  H.  Mentioned 542,544 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Alabama,  Commissioners  of.) 

Tiller,  John  H.  Mentioned 692, 860 

Tinelli,  Louis  W.  Mentioned 368 

Todd,  John  W.  Mentioned 392,453 

Tompkins,  Daniel  D.  Mentioned 341 


1112 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Tompkins,  S.  S.  Mentioned 89, 102 

Toombs,  Robert.  Mentioned 826 

Torpedoes. 

Sketches  of,  in  Charleston  Harbor 950, 951 

Use  of,  as  means  of  warfare.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 757. 821, 837, 887, 895, 904, 907, 908, 917, 923 

De  Lisle,  Charles  G 948 

Lee,  Francis  D 791, 820, 837 

(See  also  Skull  Creek.  Torpedo  operations  in , May  18-21,  1863.) 

Torpedo  Rams.  Construction  of,  etc. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 1023, 1024 

Beauregard,  G.  T.‘ 631, 636, 661, 672, 844, 900, 906, 966, 1023 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A _ 966,1024 

Fraser  & Co.,  John  965 

Ingraham,  D.  N .. 671 

Lee,  Francis  D 648, 670, 671, 680, 686, 694, 719, 761, 843, 965, 1017-1019, 1023 

Roman,  Alfred 817 

War  Department,  C.  S 844, 1023 

Detail  of  Francis  D.  Lee  to  superintend  the,  in  Europe 965,966 

Tortugas,  Fla.  (See  Key  West,  Fla.) 

Totten,  Joseph  G.  Mentioned 393, 943, 983 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A.) 

Tourtellotte,  Jerome.  Mentioned 166,169,170 

Town,  Franklin  E.  Correspondence  with  Samuel  F.  Du  Font 280 

Mentioned 132, 134, 148, 278, 279,  460 

Reports  of 

Jacksonville,  Fla.*  Recapture  of,  October  5,  1862  136 

Saint  John’s  Bluff,  Fla.  Expedition  to,  September  30-October  13, 1862.  136 

Townsend,  E.  D.  Mentioned 402,412,427,991,995,996 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  as  A.  A.  G,  see  Adjutant- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Townsend,  Jeremiah.  Mentioned 69 

Township,  Fla.  Skirmish  at,  January  26,  1863.  (See  Saint  Mary’s  River . Ex- 
pedition up,  January  23-February  1,  1863.) 

Tracy,  Carlos.  Mentioned * 847 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  S.  R.  Gist.) 

Trade  and  Intercourse.  (See  Beauregard  to  Trapier,  p.  755;  Jordan  to  Hey- 
liger,  pp.  926,  927  ; also  Statement , p.  961.) 

Trans-Mississippi  Department.  John  G.  Walker  assigned  to  duty  in 677 

Transportation.  (Railroad  and  water.)  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 644, 799, 849 

Benham,  Henry  W 344, 

Gist,  S.  R . 741, 742 

Harrison,  George  P.,  jr 777 

Lee,  Robert  E 471 

Pemberton,  John  C •. 483,496,503,527,554 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 341 

War  Department,  U.  S 341 

Wilson,  C.  C 774 

Transportation.  Supplies  of.  (See  Munitions  of  War.) 

Trapier,  James  H. 

Assignments  to  command 669, 670, 736, 818, 827, 937, 939, 966-968 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 681,692,718,755,762,879,880,966 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 271,902 


INDEX. 


1113 


Page. 

Trapier,  James  H. — Continued. 

Mentioned 2*9, 272, 275, 472, 474, 499, 547, 665, 670, 674, 692, 

718, 736, 740, 783, 798,  809,  818,  823, 827, 829, 830, 893, 929, 937, 967, 968 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harhor,  S.  C.,  April  7,  1863 268,271 

Treasury  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 848 

Pemberton,  John  C 579 

Trenholm,  George  A.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 548 

Trenholm,  W.  L. 

Mentioned 25, 26, 181, 183, 184, 290, 291, 644, 824, 930 

Report  of  Union  raid  on  Combahee  River,  S.  C.,  June  2,  1863 297 

Trezevant,  J.  D.  Mentioned 576 

Trickey,  W.  H.  Mentioned 80 

Trowbridge,  Charles  T.  Mentioned 189, 191, 194, 197 

Tucker,  James.  Mentioned 235,850,851 

Tucker,  J.  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 577 

Mentioned 578,823,929 

Tucker,  John. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 341 


Mentioned 350 

Tucker,  John  R. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 887,898,904,908 

Mentioned 204, 207, 208, 243, 621, 892, 895, 906, 907, 924 

Report  of  attack  on  blockading  squadron  off  Charleston,  S.  C.,  Jan.  31, 1863.  208 

Tucker,  Jordan.  Mentioned 237 

Turner,  Thomas. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 787, 809 

Mentioned 790 

Twitchell,  Joseph  F.  Mentioned 233, 367 

Unadilla,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 28, 321, 327, 329 

Uncas,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 129,165,173 

Underwood,  John.  Mentioned 931 

Union  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Octo- 
ber 22-23,  1862 148 

* Secession ville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 51 

Mentioned.  (Regulars.) 


Artillery,  Light — Regiments:  1st  ( Batteries ),  A,  363,  367  ; B,  363,  367, 


390,461,469;  C,419,461,469;  D, 363, 367, 390, 435, 462,469 ; F,  L,  363, 
367  ; M,  145,  148,  150-152,  165,  166, 174, 175, 363, 367, 389, 390, 435, 462, 
469  ; 2d  ( Batteries ),  C,  K,  363, 367  ; 3d  { Batteries ),  E,  35,  37, 52, 54, 55, 
57, 145, 148, 150-152, 154, 164, 166,  362,  367,  369,  388-390,  435,  461,  469, 
984, 986, 1005. 


Cavalry — Regiments:  6th,  391. 

Engineers — Companies  : A,  368. 

Marines,  3. 

(For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States;  also  Colored  Troops.) 

Organization,  strength,  etc.  Department  of  the  South 338, 

362, 363, 367, 368, 387-390,  392, 434, 435, 451, 453, 461, 462, 468, 469 
Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 378 

Hunter  j David 363 

War  Department,  U.  S 377 


1114 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Upshaw,  Garland.  Mentioned 12 

Upshur,  John  H.  Mentioned 437, 78 8 

Upson,  Hiram,  jr.  Mentioned 68 

Valiandigham,  C.  L.  Mentioned  955 

Van  Brunt,  George.  Mentioned 390 

Vance,  Zebulon  B.  Mentioned 713 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  North  Carolina,  Governor  of.) 

Vanderbilt,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47,108,350,364,366 

Van  Dorn,  Earl.  Mentioned 567 

Van  Keuren,  John.  Mentioned 169 

Van  Wyck,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 461 

Van  Zandt,  Jacob.  Mentioned 363,367 

Vermont,  U.  S.  Ship  of  the  Line.  Mentioned 984 

Vermont,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Abraham  Lincoln 997 

Vessels.  (See  Torpedo  Bams  and  Naval  Vessels.) 

Vickers,  Mr.  Mentioned 683 

Vidal,  T.  C.  Mentioned 148,149,278,444 

Viele,  Egbert  L.  Mentioned 321-323, 326, 327, 330, 331, 335, 338 

Villepigue,  F.  L.  Mentioned 121,234,851 

Villere,  Charles  J.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 955 

Vincennes,  Sloop  of  War.  Mentioned 339 

Virginia.  Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-GeueraPs  Office,  U.  S.  A 365 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 585,587,608 

Davis,  Jefferson 480,534,539,540,549 

Dix,  John  A : 365 

Hunter,  David 363-365 

Lee,  Robert  E 480, 481, 498, 505, 518, 536 

Pemberton,  John  C 481, 482, 503, 519, 520, 539, 548-550, 559, 584, 586, 587 

War  Department,  C.  S 558 

Wright,  Horatio  G 368 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries  : Caroline  {Thornton),  487,  530,  576;  Nelson 
( Lamkin ),  180,181,188,  189,  282-284,529,  575,  591,  624,  813,  824,  862,  930; 
Stafford  (Cooper),  283,  824,  862;  Staunton  Hill  (Bruce), 487;  Turner 
(Leake),  481, 530, 576, 586, 587. 

Infantry — Reg/menfstO  Ih,  505. 

Vixen,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 145,165 

Vogdes,  Israel. 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 442-446, 450, 451 

Mentioned 439-441, 443, 451, 453, 461, 468, 469 

Voris,  Alvin  C.  Mentioned 461 

Wabash.  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 149, 329, 426 

Waddy,  J.  R.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 525 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Wagner,  T.  D.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 778,917 

Wagner,  Thomas  M. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton .* 561 

Mentioned 94, 260, 515, 538, 552, 565 

Wagner,  W.  H.  Mentioned 260 

Waldron,  M.  J.  Mentioned 770,948-952 

Walker,  Judge.  Mentioned 475 

Walker,  D.  L.  Mentioned 184 

Walker,  George  E.  Mentioned 590 


INDEX. 


1115 


Page. 

Walker,  Henry.  Mentioned 30,31 

Walker,  J.  H.  Mentioned 90 

Walker,  John  G. 

Assignments  to  command 677 

Mentioned 677 

Walker,  L.  J.  Mentioned 25,26,182,183 

Walker,  Leo  D.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Roswell  S.  Ripley.) 

Walker,  W.  H.  T. 

Assignments  to  command 809 

Mentioned 765, 778, 809, 824, 864-869, 871, 891, 901, 918, 926, 934, 939, 945, 956 

Walker,  W.  S. 

Assignments  to  command 493, 523, 587 , 736 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 289, 293, 625, 632, 637, 651, 652, 694, 760, 771, 772, 

778-780, 787, 791, 801, 821, 848, 852, 878, 889, 893, 894, 903, 925, 932, 945, 962 

Colcock,  C.J... 793 

Emanuel,  W.  P - , 306 

Jeffords,  R.  J 602 

Magee,  J.  J 778 

Pemberton,  John  C 27, 112, 114, 525, 583, 584 

Mentioned 114, 117, 179, 187, 218, 283, 298, 299, 306, 308, 464, 

493,  523, 525, 529, 530, 575, 576, 587, 591, 592, 594, 602, 624, 625, 639-641, 650, 
652,  660, 665, 672, 701, 702, 736, 740, 772, 781-783, 793, 795, 798, 799, 801, 809, 
810,  821, 823, 840, 849, 852, 889, 891, 909, 930, 932, 934, 944, 946,  953,  962-964 
Reports  of 

Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C.  Expedition  against,  Octo- 
ber 22-23,  1862  180 

Combahee  River,  S.  C.  Union  raid  on,  June  2,  1863 290 

George  Washington,  Steamer.  Destruction  of , April  9,  1863  282 

Pinckney  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  August  21,  1862  117 

Pocotaligo,  S.  C.  Skirmish  at,  May  29,  1862  24 

Port  Royal  Ferry,  S.  C.  Affairs  at. 

June  16, 1862 31 

July  4,  1862 112 

Wall,  W.  D.  Mentioned 299-302 

Wallace,  James.  Mentioned - 152,  167 

Wallace,  W.  H.  Mentioned 929’ 

Walpole,  John  B.  L.  Mentioned 202, 583, 823, 930 

Walsh,  Patrick.  Mentioned 154 

Walter,  George  H.  Mentioned 487,  517,  530,  576,  591, 823,  930 

Walthour,  W.  L.  Mentioned - 576,  592 

War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S,  A 122,  310, 478,  499 

Alabama,  Governor  of 716 

Beauregard,  G.  T 215,  310,  616,  617,  629,  633,  640,  642,  673, 

683,  711,  720,  721,  723,  759,  765,  786,  787,  797,  799,  800,  844,  846,  849,  850, 
878,  885,  891,  897-900,  904,  909,  917,  919, 923-926,  931-933,  938,  939, 1023 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  Mayor  of 941 

Cobb,  Howell 737,  842,  920 

Columbus,  Ga.,  Mayor  of - 666 

Davis,  Jefferson 560,  569,  765,  898,976 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A - 1023 

• Florida,  Governor  of 474,  629,  630,  640 

French,  Samuel  G 573 


1116 


INDEX. 


Page. 

War  Department,  C.  S.— Continued.  Correspondence  with 

Georgia,  Governor  of . 747 

Hampton,  Wade §90 

Lee,  Robert  E 632,  759,  762,  763 

Mercer,  H.  W 572,  608, 750 

Miles,  W.  Porcher 933,938-940 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 568, 844 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 538  541 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 533  750  753 

Pemberton,  John  C 493, 507, 531, 535, 536, 543, 558, 559, 561, 567, 568, 572^604 

South  Carolina,  Executive  Council  of • 540 

South  Carolina,  Governor  of 675  942 

Watts,  Thomas  H 718 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C ' 776 

War  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 403 

Army  Headquarters 374  452  994 

Benham,  H.  W.  998 

Darr,  Francis 447 

Dix,  John  A..1 365 

Farquhar,  Francis  IT 447 

Fitzgerald,  Louis 447 

Gourand,  George  E 447 

Hunter,  David 48 

337,  338,  347,  350,  353, 354,  363-366,  374,  432,  448, 451,  452,  463,  979 

Mitchel,  Ormsby  M 384  384 

. Navy  Department,  U.  S 395 

Potter,  Edward  E 447 

Quartermaster- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 354 

Saxton,  Rufus 374  377  423 

Slaght,  James  C 447 

Snelling,  Frederick  G 447 

Strong,  James  H 447 

Tucker,  John 344 

Wright,  Horatio  G 368 

Ward,  Joshua.  Mentioned  823  929 

Yfardlaw,  G.  A.  Mentioned 270  273 

Warley,  F.  F.  Mentioned 823 

Warley,  J.  H.  Mentioned 269  275 

Warley,  John  C.  Mentioned 34 

Washburn,  Israel,  jr.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Maine,  Governor  of.) 
Washington,  George,  Steamer;  (See  George  Washington,  Steamer.) 

Washington,  George  L.  Mentioned 283 

Washington,  Thornton  A (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Robert  E.  Lee; 
also  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Water  Witch,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 129, 130, 145, 148, 165, 167, 174, 175 

Waties,  John.  Mentioned 702 

Watmough,  P.  G.  Mentioned 204 

Watson,  Amasa  B.  Mentioned 70  71 

Watson,  Jeremiah.  Mentioned 683 

Watts,  Thomas  H. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 718  . 

Mentioned 205 

Way,  Charlton  H.  Mentioned 576,592,824,930 


INDEX. 


1117 


Page. 

Wayland,  H.  L.  Mentioned 169 

Wayne,  Henry.  Mentioned — 148 

Wayne,  Henry  C. 

Correspondence  with  H.  W.  Mercer 836 

Mentioned 757, 760, 765, 836, 842 

Wayne,  R.  A.  Mentioned 851 

Wayne,  Robert.  Mentioned 215 

Webb,  W.  A.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 895 

Weehawken,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned. . . 241, 2-43, 244, 246, 257, 258, 394, 437, 442, 454, 1017 

Weems,  Colonel.  Mentioned 920 

Welles,  Gideon.  Mentioned 13, 105, 144, 199, 204, 211, 217, 218, 230, 236, 240 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S.) 

Wells,  W.  B.  Mentioned 779 

Welsh,  Thomas. 

Correspondence  with  Horatio  G.  Wright.. 346 

Mentioned 54, 55, 362, 367 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 57 

Werner,  D. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 581 

Mentioned  575,823,929 

Wertz,  Corporal.  Mentioned... 341 

Wescoat,  J.  J.  Mentioned 119,297 

West,  Edwin.  Mentioned 235, 824, 850, 851, 931 

Westcott,  G.  W.  Mentioned 270,271 

Westcott,  John.  Mentioned 235,825,850,851 

West  Florida.  Detached  from  Department  of  the  South,  and  annexed  to  De- 
partment of  the  Gulf 369 

Wever,  L.  B.  Mentioned 102 

Wheaton,  John  F.  Mentioned 930 

Wheeler,  William,  jr.  Mentioned 84 

Whilden,  L.  A.  Mentioned 823 

White,  E.  B.  Mentioned 487, 493, 5G0, 530, 575, 592, 822, 922, 929 

White,  E.  J.  Mentioned 249, 266, 551, 956 

White,  J.  B. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton ' 536 

Mentioned.. 538,835 

White,  Richard. 

Mentioned 348, 363, 367, 388, 390, 462 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23, 1862 162 

White,  Samuel.  Mentioned 18 

White,  William  P.  Mentioned 823,929 

Whitehead,  George  A.  Mentioned 214 

White  House,  near  Hilton  Head,  S.  C.  Affair  at,  June  13,  1862.  Reports  of 

Beaver,  James  A 39 

Blauding,  Christopher 39 

Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga.  Skirmish  on,  April  16,  1862. 

Communication  from  Henry  W.  Benham 334,335 

Reports  of 

Benham,  Henry  W 5 

Douglass,  Marcellus 9 

Fenton,  William  M 8 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 5 

Hunter,  David 4 

Wilson,  James  If.. .......... .... 6,7 


1118 


INDEX, 


Page. 

White  Point,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  Apr.  29,  1862.  Report  of  N.  G.  Evans..  13 
(See  also  Wright  to  Ely , p.  340.) 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 692,711,713-715,718-721,723,736,739,742, 

748,  749,  762,  764,  767,  768,  771, 774,  787,  800,  878, 894, 897, 904, 906, 939 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of .- 713 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 778 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 715 

War  Department,  C.  S 776 

Mentioned 711, 714, 715, 719-721, 728, 

741, 742, 758, 759,  764,  768,  771,  777,  778, 826, 878,  897, 906, 939, 942, 1020 

Whitner,  Joseph  N.  Mentioned 851 

Wigfall,  Louis  T.  Mentioned 910,911 

Wigg,  William  H.  Mentioned 270,273 

Wiggin,  Joseph  C.  Mentioned 116,117 

Wightman,  John  T.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 489 

Wilbur,  John  E.  Mentioned 4 79,80 

Wildman,  Theodore  C.  Mentioned 169 

Wilkins,  Captain.  Mentioned 666 

Wilkinson,  W.  H.  Mentioned 561 

Williams,  C.  P.,  U.  S.  Schooner.  Mentioned 211 

Williams,  Edward  P.  Mentioned 131 

Williams,  George  W.  M.  Mentioned 487, 575, 592, 824, 930 

Williams,  J.  C.  Mentioned 382 

Williams,  Jos.  John. 

Correspondence  with 

Cobb,  Howell 751 

Fisher,  William 753 

Mentioned 751 

Williams,  M.  E.  (For  correspondence  as  Adjutant,  see  John  M.  Millen.) 

Williams,  Robert. 

Mentioned 34, 36, 43, 44, 46, 48-50, 52-56, 58, 60. 61, 335, 338, 

351,  362,  367,  467,  979,  980,  982,  984,  986-988,  995,  999,  1001,  1004, 1006 

Report  of  engagement  at  Secessionville,  S.  C.,  June  16,  1862 78 

Williams,  Thomas.  Mentioned 270,273 

Willis,  Francis  T.  Mentioned  . ..- 472 

Willis,  William.  Mentioned 233 

Willson,  S.  W.,  jr.  Mentioned 201 

Willstown,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  Apr.  29,  1862.  Report  of  N.  G.  Evans...  13 
(See  also  Wright  to  Ely , p.  340.) 

Wilmington,  N.  C.  Defenses  of.  Communication  from  Samuel  G.  French..  573 

Wilson,  Mr.  Mentioned 1010 

Wilson,  Calvin.  Mentioned  18 

Wilson,  C.  C. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 774 

Mentioned 487, 576, 592, 742, 824 

Report  of  expedition  against  Charleston  aud  Savannah  Railroad,  S.  C., 

October  22-23,  1862  187 

Wilson,  James  C.  Mentioned 66,71 

Wilson,  James  H. 

Mentioned 4, 5, 8, 9, 34, 322, 323, 326, 334, 335, 392 

Report  of  skirmish  on  Whitemarsh  Island,  Ga.,  April  16,  1862  6,7 

Wilson,  John  H.  Mentioned  -... 169 


INDEX 


1119 


Page. 

Wilson,  R.  Mentioned 154 

Wilson,  William.  Mentioned. 363,367 

Winfield  Scott,  Steamer.  Mentioned 329, 333 

Wise,  Henry  A.  Mentioned. 763,766 

Wissahickon,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 145,211,217 

Wolcott,  C.  P.  Mentioned 1013 

(For  correspondence  as  Asst.  Sec’y  of  War,  see  War  Department,  U.  S .) 

Woods,  David.  Mentioned 313 

Wool,  John  E.  Mentioned 982 

Worden,  John  L.  Mentioned 211,217 

Worthington,  George  S.  Mentioned 903 

Wright,  Edward.  Mentioned 392 

Wright,  Horatio  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Benham,  Henry  W 335, 339, 349, 350, 352, 356 

Drayton,  Percival 352 

Hunter,  David 44, 47, 355, 357-361, 363 

Jackson,  John  H 341 

Leasure,  Daniel 46 

Rliind,  Alexander  C 348 

Stevens,  Isaac  1 358 

War  Department,  U.  S ■ 368 

Welsh,  Thomas 346 

Mentioned 37, 43-45, 48, 49, 51-53, 57, 58, 61, 73, 321, 

338,  350,  351,362,  364,366,367,553,979-982,984-989,  99^-995, 999-1005 


Reports  of 

James  Island,  S.  C. 

Evacuation  of,  June  28-July  7,  1862  107-109 

Skirmish  on,  June  10,  1862  35 

Secession ville,  S.  C.  Engagement  at,  June  16,  1862 53 

Wright,  M.  H.  Mentioned 745 

Wunkoin  [?],  Steamer.  Mentioned 267 

Wyman,  B.  F.  Mentioned 25 

Yancey,  William  L.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard.. 907 

Yard,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 131 

Yates,  Joseph  A. 

Assignments  to  command 797 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 797,923 

Calhoun,  W.  R t 564 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 756, 890, 892, 921 

Mentioned 199-201, 

242,  245,  257,  259,  260,  265, 319,  320,  756, 773, 803, 823, 922, 929, 967, 968 

Reports  of 

Isaac  Smith,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  January  30,  1863 201 

Murray’s  Inlet,  S.  C.  Affairs  at. 

April  27,  1863  286 

May  4,  1863 287 

Young,  Steamer.  Mentioned 954 

Young,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 949 

Young,  W.  H.  Mentioned 639 

Young,  William  J.  Mentioned 487,824 


o 


