# George E. Pond, The Shenandoah Valley in 1864: New Market and the Lynchburg campaign passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a Lincoln Financial Foundation Collection scan (Internet Archive shenandoahvalley00pond); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers, footnotes interleaved with the text and map captions. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; the Appendix B tables are largely garbled in OCR.

## new-market

In the twofold campaign assigned to Sigel, the portion set apart for the Kanawha column had been obviously the more definite as well as the more important ; in fact, after guard- ing even scantily the supply depots of the lower Valley and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, Sigel, for a movement co- operating with Crook, would have a field force at most of six or seven thousand men. However, toward the end of April, he gathered the available troops from his garrisons, and the 30th started up the Valley. The next day he notified General Grant that he was occupying "Winchester with all his available forces, " consisting of about four thousand in- fantry, one thousand cavalry and three batteries, and would push his advance toward Cedar Creek." The following day he asked for more specific instructions. " I would very much like to know what your expectations are. I under- stand that I am to occupy the line at Cedar Creek, and to advance up the Shenandoah Valley if circumstances will allow me to do so. To advance beyond Strasburg with my present force is hardly possible, if I cannot at the same time have a pretty strong force opposite Front Royal to prevent the enemy from marching into my rear or cutting off my line of communication with cavalry. I have only a very vague idea about the position of the Army of the Potomac, and do not know whether there is any force of ours at or near Luray. If I am expected to make energetic and decisive movements, I should have at least five thousand more of good infantry, with which I could march up the Shenandoah Valley. The few troops I have here are excellent, with the exception of the cav- 16 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. airy." It was certainly clear that, with so small a number oi men at command, in order to reach Staunton, if the march were seriously resisted, there needed to be a co-operative movement from the Kanawha forces upon the same point — yet Crook was starting for Newbern. " I do not want you," replied Grant, the nest day, " to move farther south than Cedar River, to watch any movement the enemy may attempt by way of the Shenandoah Valley. The Army of the Potomac occupies nothing between the Blue Ridge and Orange and Alexandria Railroad. It is to be hoped that efforts making for raising troops will enable us to send any reinforcements you may require, should the enemy move down the Valley." It chanced that, a few days later, May 5th, a hundred of McNeil's horsemen rode to the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad at Piedmont, in West Virginia, captured the guard, and there and at Bloomington burned a few loaded cars and engines. Secretary Stanton called upon Governor Brough, of Ohio, to send some troops to defend the railroad. " Sigel's ad- vance has exposed the Baltimore and Ohio Road," he said. Governor Brough promptly furnished four hundred-days regiments for Charleston, three for Parkersburg, three for New Creek, three for Harper's Ferry, and two for Cumber- land, so that the railroad was reasonably guarded ; and Gen- eral Kelley took command at Cumberland, with orders to watch the road west of the Monocacy, while Sigel sent five hundred cavalry to Moorefield to try to cut off the retreat of the raiders. This force was quickly defeated, with a loss of fifty men, near Wardensville, and driven to Romney ; but meanwhile the railroad had been put in running order. The chief importance of the incident was in calling to the railroad and the Potomac line the Ohio hundred-days men. On the 9th Sigel, with Sullivan's division of infantry and Stahel's cavalry, moved up the Valley pike to Cedar Creek, CLOYD'S MOUNTAIN AND NEW MARKET. 17 and the 11th pushed through Strasburg to Woodstock, whence the cavalry advanced to Mount Pleasant or Jackson. At Woodstock he sent to the Adjutant-General this mes- sage: "My principal object in advancing up the Shenan- doah Valley was to threaten Staunton, to divide the forces of Breckenridge, and to assist by these means General Crook, whose object is to destroy New River bridge. My forces are insufficient for offensive operations in this coun- try, where the cavalry is continually on my flank and rear. My intention, therefore, is not to advance farther than this place with my main force, but have sent out strong parties in every direction. Skirmishing is going on every day. If Breckenridge should advance against us, I will resist him at some convenient position." On the 14th he moved Colonel Moor with infantry to Mount Jackson ; and there Boyd's First New York Cavalry, which had been prudently sent three days before to scout through Luray Valley, so as to guard the left flank, under orders to rejoin the main body through Massanutten Gap at New Market, reported the enemy to be in force at the latter point. On Moor advancing thither from Bude's Hill, which is a few miles beyond Mount Jackson, east of the North Fork, the roar of hostile guns confirmed the tidings that the unchallenged stage of Sigel's march was over. The Confederate presence thus disclosed was the advance of General Breckenridge, who, having been intrusted with the command of the Valley, and observing Sigel's arrival at Strasburg, was marching rapidly from his post at Staun- ton to oppose him, with a force of nearly 5,000 men. Moor had, besides cavalry and artillery, two regiments of his own brigade and two of the other, Thoburn's. General Stahel came up next morning and took command. New Market is on the Valley pike, about eight miles 18 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. above Mount Jackson. At the latter point, the road, aftei having followed the left bank of the North Fork all the way up from Strasburg, crosses the river and passes about half- way between its right bank and a nearly parallel little stream known as Smith's Creek. At New Market the Valley pike is joined by the turnpike which comes up from Front Koyal to Luray, and thence traverses the Massanutten Mountains by Massanutten Gap ; hence this was one of the points in the Valley possessing a certain degree of military importance, The Battle of New Market. and as good a place as any for Breckenridge to execute his purpose of attacking Sigel. It is obvious that the Union general was not prepared for battle, his forces being scattered along the pike. But Moor, having established himself on an elevation north- west of New Market, remained there through the stormy night of the 14th, and sent out his skirmishers at day- light; and, a few hours later, Sigel came up with the remainder of his small army to accept battle. The ar- CLOYD'S MOUNTAIN AND NEW MARKET. 19 rangement of tlie line under these hurried circumstances gave some of the troops an exhausting tramp back and forth through the sticky mud of fields of young wheat. Moor was left in advance to break the enemy's onset, drawn back, however, a considerable distance to the rear of the position he had at first reached. His troops consisted of the Eighteenth Connecticut and One Hundred and Twenty-third Ohio infantry, with a small body of cavalry, the two regiments which had reinforced him being re- turned to their proper brigade, Thoburn's. This latter was formed as the main line of battle, under Sigel's per- sonal direction. The artillery was carefully disposed. On the left of the guns at the right was the Thirty-fourth Massachusetts, except one company, detached and thrown out as skirmishers in the woods of the river bank ; then came the First Virginia and Fifty-fourth Pennsylvania. A few companies of the Twelfth "West Virginia supported the artillery on the right, the others being formed in double column in rear of the Thirty -fourth. The cavalry was behind the centre, and on the left flank. The line ex- tended across the pike on rising ground, while another slope in front was held by Moor. Breckenridge moved to the attack with the veteran bri- gades of Echols and Wharton and some local forces, while McLaughlin's artillery went into action on a sharp ridge that ran parallel with the pike. Overlapping Moor, Breck- enridge drove him in confusion to the rear, and, with hardly a pause, came in excellent order across the interven- ing depression, against Thoburn. The shouts of his attack were answered by a handsome charge from the Union right that promptly checked him. But the left was already in difficulty. Imboden, who commanded Breckenridge's cav- alry, galloping down Smith's Creek, along the eastern bank, to 20 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. the bridge on the Luray road, had there recrossed, and come up on the west side, the manoeuvre being such as to bring him upon Sigel's left flank. He had taken two guns with him, and running these up to short range, opened on the cavalry there and routed it. Pressing his advantage, be se- cured a flank and almost rear fire against Sigel's left, while Breckenridge, charging heavily in front, compelled the en- tire force to retreat. Yet the Union troops contested the ground ; and one of Sigel's batteries was ill rewarded for its good service and reluctant withdrawal by falling into the enemy's hands.1 At Eude's Hill a new line was formed, Moor's troops having rallied, and the Twenty-eighth and One Hundred and Sixteenth Ohio being brought up from the charge of the wagons. But after a brief halt Sigel resumed his re- treat along the turnpike, bringing off all his train. He crossed the Shenandoah to Mount Jackson on the narrow bridge, which he burned behind him. Breckenridge followed only to Kude's Hill, but Sigel inarched on till he had en- camped his forces behind Cedar Creek. His losses in this engagement were as follows : killed, 93 ; wounded, 482 ; missing, 256 — total, 831. The Confederate loss was also severe : killed, 34 ; wounded, 484 ; missing, 13 — total, 531. 2 Sigel's dead and his badly wounded were left in the enemy's hands. 1 Imboden's official report employs the following language : " Sigel's entire line retired slowly. His artillery was especially damaging, and he (Breckenridge) de- termined to silence at least one, and the most mischievous, battery, directly in front of the centre of his line; and Colonel Smith, of the Sixty-second Virginia, and Colonel Skip, with his Cadets, were ordered to charge and take it. . . . The battery was taken, but with fearful loss on both sides." Sigel's despatches speak of losing five guns ; other accounts give the number as six. He made no official report of the battle. • 2 " The Sixty-second Regiment alone," says Imboden, " reported 241 killed and wounded, including seven of the ten captains, three of whom were killed in CLOYD'S MOUNTAIN AND NEW MARKET. 21 The reason assigned by General Sigel for his defeat was that the Confederate forces outnumbered him, and that in consequence of the long trains he had to guard, " he could not bring more than six regiments into the fight, besides the artillery and cavalry, ^.nd the enemy had about seven thou- sand infantry, besides other arms." In a previous despatch he said that " the battle was fought on our side by 5,500 in all, against 8,000 to 9,000 of the enemy." But even if we deduct from Sigel's 5,500 the two regiments that did not participate in the battle, there was little disparity in num- bers.1 While his force, almost wholly composed of troops taken from garrison, was much too small, yet it is palpable that the battle was fought hurriedly, and that Moor's line was too weak to check the enemy, yet too important a frac- tion of the command to be left where it could be made use- less by an overwhelming attack. The indefinite character of Sigel's task seems to have left him without a clear objec- tive, and, as a consequence, without a precise idea of what he might be called upon to meet. But it is due to him to say that he spared no personal exertions to redeem the day. the charge of the captured battery. The corps of Cadets lost 8 killed and 4 offi- cers and 57 privates wounded, out of a total force of 250 engaged. General Echols's casualties were nearly 300, including the Cadets, mostly wounded. The artillery did not lose over eight or ten killed and wounded." 1 In the Appendix will be found the documents of the War Records office on this subject. In addition, General W. S. Lincoln, in "The Thirty fourth Massachusetts Infantry in the War of the Rebellion," has made a special study of the rosters, from which it appears that the official report of Breckenridge's strength the day after the battle shows the following aggregate then present: Wharton's brigade, 1,309; Echols's, 1,488 ; Northwest, 983 ; Cadet battalion, 221 ; Engineer Corps, 46 ; McLaughlin's artillery, 235 — total of infantry and artillery, 4,282. Imboden, in his report, gives the cavalry at 800, which would make the total of the three arms over 5,000. He also puts the infantry actually engaged at 3,440 and the artillery at 350, with 18 guns, making a total of 4,590 men. The report after the battle presumably excludes the killed and missing ; and we may, therefore, safely set down the Confederate strength in the engagement at from 4,600 to 5,000 men. 22 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Sigel telegraphed to Washington, the day after the battle, that the troops were in good spirits, and would make a good fight if the enemy should advance ; and sending his cavalry to Woodstock, he moved his infantry across the creek through Strasburg, and with his advance occupied Fisher's Hill. But Grant, not regarding Sigel's operations as satisfactory, had asked for his removal immediately on hearing of his defeat ; for he had so little expected this event that an hour before receiving news of it he had asked Halleck if Sigel could not go up to Staunton, and destroy the road there. Halleck answered that " the Secretary of War directs me to say that the President will appoint General Hunter to command the Department of West Virginia if you desire it." Grant accordingly welcomed the opportunity of placing Hunter in command, in Sigel's stead.

## hunter-advance-and-piedmont

CHAPTER III. GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. The Virginia and Tennessee road being broken at New Eiver, the Shenandoah problem was narrowed and simpli- fied. The 20th of May, the day before Hunter took command in the Valley, the Lieutenant-General expressed through Halleck his opinion of what should be done next, inclin- ing to pursue the plan for which Sigel had already given instructions. " In regard to the operations," he said, " it is better for General Hunter to engage in, with the dispos- able forces at his command, I am a little in doubt. It is evident that he can move South, covering the road he has to guard, with a larger force than he can spare to be re- moved to reinforce armies elsewhere. Then, too, under the instructions of General Sigel,1 Crook was to get through to the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad, at New Eiver Bridge, and move eastward to Lynchburg, if he could ; if not, to Fincastle, Staunton, and down the Shenandoah Valley. Sigel was to collect what force he could spare from the rail- road, and move up the Valley with a supply-train, to meet him. The enemy are evidently relying for supplies greatly on such as are brought over the branch road running through 1 " On my arrival at Meadow Bluffs, May 19th, from the New River expedition, I received a despatch from Major-G-eneral Sigel, then commanding the Depart- ment, to make a demonstration on Staunton as soon as possible " (General Crook's Report, July 7th). 21 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Staunton. On the whole, therefore, I think it would be bet- ter for General Hunter to move in that direction, and reach Staunton and Gordonsville or Charlottesville, if he does not meet with too much opposition. If he can hold at bay a force equal to his own, he will be doing good service." Hunter, therefore, vigorously pushed his preparations for a very long march. He left Sigel in charge of the reserve troops and the railroad, Kelley and Weber reporting to him. The 26th of May Hunter broke camp at Cedar Creek and marched up the pike to Woodstock. He had with him Sigel's former troops, reinforced so that they now amounted to 8,500 men of all arms, with twenty-one guns, the infantry under Sullivan and the cavalry under Stahel. At Woodstock he halted for shoes to come up, and wrote Halleck that he should " depend entirely on the country [for food] and hope to form a junction with Crook at Staunton, and then move immediately on Lynchburg." Halleck that same day had sent him word where Grant was, adding, " he wishes you to push on, if jjossible, to Charlottesville and Lynchburg, and destroy the railroad and canal beyond possibility of repair for weeks ; then, either return to your original base or join Grant, via Gordonsville. In your movements live as much as possible on the country." Grant had, in fact, just given to Halleck these instructions. From Woodstock Hunter marched past Mount Jackson and Bude's Hill to New Mar- ket, the scene of Sigel's defeat, there remaining a few days, while sending out his foragers for beeves, sheep, grain, and flour, under the following orders : III. Brigade and all other Commanders will be held strictly responsi- ble that their commands are supplied from the country. Cattle, sheep, and hogs, and, if necessary, horses and mules must be taken, and slaughtered. These supplies will be seized under the direction of officers duly authorized, and upon a system which will hereafter be GENERAL HUNTERS LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 25 regulated. No straggling or pillaging will be allowed. Brigade and other commanders will be held responsible that there is no waste ; and that there is a proper and orderly division amongst their men, of the supplies taksn for our use. At Woodstock lie had ordered Stahel to send out foraging parties, "under command of reliable and just officers, who will collect such subsistence and forage as the army needs, allowing no waste nor pillage, and giving such of the resi- dents as claim to be and are commonly reputed to be loyal, certificates of the amount of stores taken for the use of the United States Government. You will charge the officers detailed for this duty to hold their men well in hand, and to allow no plundering or oppression of the inhabitants ; nothing being seized except by order of the officers in charge of such party." Three days later, at Bucle's Hill, he called Stahel's attention to " the numerous and grave com- plaints against soldiers of this command for unauthorized pillaging," and insisted that they should cease. " Many of the residents of this neighborhood," he said, ' ' have been very kind to our wounded, and it is neither just nor politic to allow wanton outrage and injuries to be inflicted upon any people." Hunter's foraging soon proved useful, as a supply train moving to him from Martinsburg was seized and burned by Gilmor's horsemen at Newtown. Its escort consisted of 83 men of the Fifteenth and Twenty-first New York cavalry, under Lieutenant-Colonel Root, of the former, who in the engagement lost 10 killed and wounded and 9 prisoners. From New Market Hunter proceeded to Harrisonburg, where, June 2d, he found Imboden posted about seven miles ahead on the pike, at Mount Crawford, his right at Rockland Mills and his left at Bridgewater, the line of defence being the North River. After examining this XI.— 2 26 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. position, he moved by a side road southeastward to Port Republic, where he crossed the South Fork of the Shenan- doah, flanking the Mount Crawford position. A large sup- ply train was overhauled and in part captured by Stahel's cavalry. The morning of the 5th he advanced toward Staunton, and found that the enemy, under General W. E. Jones, had brought up his forces from Lynchburg to Piedmont, to re- sist the Union march. This little village is four miles east The Battle-field of Piedmont. of the Valley pike, and seven southwest of Port Republic, on a road which farther south forks to Staunton and Waynes- boro. Stahel having driven back Jones's pickets, Hunter drew up in front of the Piedmont line, Moor's brigade on the right and Thoburn's on the left, Wynkoop's brigade of Stahel's cavalry massed in rear of Moor. After an artillery fire of two hours, the enemy's guns slackened. GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 27 Soon after noon, Moor attacked the Confederate left. The Eighteenth Connecticut held his extreme right, with the Fifth New York Heavy Artillery on its left. An advance across the open drove the enemy through the woods to his main works, which were on a curving range of thickly timbered hills ; but these Moor could not carry, and he fell back. The enemy then attempted in turn to crush Hunter's right, but was checked by Moor, aided by Von Kleyser's battery, with a cross-fire from Morton's and Carlin's on the left. While Jones was concentrating for this attack, Tho- burn had been moved across a ravine to gain the enemy's weakened right flank. There he made a very gallant charge on the woods and heights, and Moor and Wynkoop promptly co-operating, the enemy abandoned the entire position, a portion of his men rushing over the steep bank into the river which covered his left. Over one thousand of the enemy, including sixty officers, were captured on the field, and among the killed was the Con- federate commander. The next day Hunter captured 400 sick and wounded. The total number of prisoners was about 1,500, and to these losses of the enemy must be added his killed and stragglers.1 Three guns and many small arms fell into the hands of Hunter, whose loss was but 420. Secretary Stanton sent thanks for this victory, expressing the hope that, " led on by the courage and guided by the experienced skill of its commander, the Army of the Shenandoah will rival our other gallant armies in the suc- cessful blows against the rebels." The remnant of Jones's troops, under Vaughan, fled to Waynesboro, abandoning Staunton, where Hunter estab- 1 "Went in the fight yesterday with an aggregate of 5,600. I have not over 3,000 effectives, including Imboden's cavalry, 800." (Vaughan to Bragg, June 6th.) 28 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. lislied himself the next day. Here, the 8th, he was joined by the troops of Crook and Averell, who had marched from West Virginia, by way of Callaghan's, Warm Springs, and Goshen. Crook, on returning to Meadow Bluff, had found Sigel's orders to proceed to Staunton, but had been delayed, " owing to the miserable transportation," and was at last compelled " to leave on the 30th with many of my men bare- foot and scantily supplied with rations." During his march Crook burned the Virginia Central Eailroad bridge over Calf Pasture River at Goshen Springs, and destroyed several miles of the track. Averell had skirmished most of the way with the cavalry of McCausland and Jackson, who, however, rapidly retreated when they learned the fate that had be- fallen Jones. Averell brought with him 4,400 men, and these with Crook's infantry made a total of about 10,000, with two batteries. Hunter was now about 18,000 strong, with thirty guns, and well able to make his way to Lynchburg ; meanwhile he de- stroyed at Staunton the enemy's factories and completed stocks of saddles, harness, military clothing, and shoes. The Virginia Central Railroad, which runs through the town, was well broken for several miles, east and west, the stations, repair shops, and warehouses being burned, the culverts blown up and trestle-work demolished. Perhaps the most conclusive testimony to the thoroughness of Hunter's work is a despatch of June 17th from Colonel E. G. Lee, com- manding the post at Staunton, to Adjutant-General S. Cooper, at Eichmond : " The depot, woollen factory, government stables, steam mill, wagon shops, and storehouses for tax in kind, were burned. The railroad was effectually destroyed for three miles and partially for three more. The bridge at Christian's Creek, about fifty feet long, was burned ; the telegraph destroyed for six miles — that I have repaired. The GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 29 hands are slowly at work on the railroad. At the rate they are moving, it will take a month or more to repair it. Our sick and wounded at the hospital, with attendants, were paroled by the enemy. They left 300 wounded and 40 nurses here, of their own, with one assistant surgeon. Upon arriv- ing on the 12th I had no guard, and did not know whether we would hold the place or not, so, to be at least even with the Yankees, I paroled all of them." This officer also gives a very long list of commissaiy stores, horse equipments, and ordnance, the latter including a thousand small arms, three howitzers and a 12-pounder Napoleon, destroyed by Hunter, and a "quantity of provisions belonging to or intended for the Ordnance Department in Richmond. The agent in charge of them estimates their value at $400,000." At Staunton, Crook and Averell got shoes for their barefoot men ; while Hunter sent back, under Colonel Moor, a con- voy of prisoners, negroes, and refugees by way of Buffalo Gap and Beverly, escorted by 800 men whose enlistments had nearly expired. He also relieved Stahel, in consequence of a wound received while gallantly leading his command at Piedmont, instructing him to collect a strong escort of spare troops at the foot of the Valley, and to bring it forward in charge of ah important train of supplies. Stahel proceeded to fulfil his instructions, but succeeding events prevented the sending of this train.

## lynchburg-and-retreat

The morning of June 10th, the combined army moved for- ward toward Lynchburg on four nearly parallel roads. Two steady marches, through a charming country, abounding in broad fields of luxuriant wheat, that half hid from view the battalions trampling through them, compassed the thirty- six miles between Staunton and Lexington. McCausland's troopers retreated before Crook's advance on the right, burn- ing the bridge over the North River, on which Lexington is 30 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. situated, and then posting their sharpshooters and artillery among the buildings of the town. Hunter desiring to avoid opening fire on Lexington, as he might have done, sent Averell to flank it, and Crook despatched White's brigade of infantry for the same purpose ; whereupon the enemy hastily withdrew. Lexington contained several public buildings of consequence, notably the Virginia Military Institute, which had furnished to the battle of New Market a large share of its cadets, under their principal, Colonel Smith ; from this building a few defiant shots had been fired at Hun- ter's forces. The institute was burned, as also several iron mills. A misguided sense of exclusive proprietorship in the fame of the First President led some of the troops to seize his statue from the hall of Washington College, load it in their wagons, and carry it to Wheeling, so as to "rescue it," as Colonel Cathcart explained, "from the degenerate sons of worthy sires." At Lexington Hunter found, he says, "a violent and inflammatory proclamation from John Letcher, lately Governor of Virginia, inciting the population of the country to rise and wage a guerilla warfare on my troops ; and ascertaining that after having advised his fellow-citizens to this cause the ex-governor had himself ignominiously taken to flight, I ordered his property to be burned, under my Orders, published May 24th, against persons practising or abetting such unlawful and uncivilized warfare." A few prisoners were taken in Lexington, and some small arms and cartridges, while six canal bai'ges, laden with commis- sary stores, and containing about half a dozen cannon and their ammunition, were also captured and destroyed. In setting out from Staunton the First (Stahel's) division of cavalry, now under Duffie, moving to the left, had demon- strated against the enemy at Waynesboro, and finding him in strong force there, had crossed the Blue Ridge further GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 31 south, at Tye River Gap, whence he moved to Amherst Court House, and broke the Charlottesville and Lynchburg Railroad at Arlington Station. Imboden followed him, but was repulsed with loss. Duffle captured about 100 prisoners, including 17 officers, together with 400 horses, and destroyed two iron furnaces, large quantities of com- missary supplies, and a part of Imboden's train, returning by White's Gap without serious loss. While this expedition was enterprising, it must be adjudged, on the whole, unfor- tunate ; for General Hunter had already made a long delay at Staunton, awaiting Crook and refitting his command, so that to reach Lynchburg before it should be reinforced he needed to leave Lexington the day after he entered it. Yet he seems to have felt constrained to wait for Duffle, perhaps fearing he was lost, while that officer, pleased with his new command, went on raiding until Hunter's couriers at last found him and hurried him back ; but he did not arrive till after noon of June 13th. This delay at Lexington was enough to prove the salvation of Lynchburg ; and, after all, Duffle's breaking of the railroad was not sufficient, as we shall pres- ently observe, to prevent its use in forwarding troops to Lynchburg by the time Hunter arrived there. Here, per- haps, a mistake was committed ; for Duffle, with a cavalry command, ought to have been able, at that season, at least to take care of himself, if he could do nothing more. Prob- ably, instead of waiting for him, Hunter might have safely allowed him to go on, and even to make a circuit around Lynchburg, and then join the main body west of that city at Liberty, for an excursion like this was soon after effected with success by a much smaller body of Hunter's horsemen. There was another cause of delay at Lexington, which per- haps had as much influence as the absence of Duffle, whose return was hourly expected. A train of two hundred wagons 32 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. came up, guarded by two regiments, and loaded with rations, clothing, and ammunition — all very acceptable, and the lat- ter a necessity, for the supply was running short. Hunter had learned that this train was on its way up the Valley, and "I delayed one day in Lexington," he says, "to allow it to overtake us." While anxiously awaiting Duffle, Hunter, the morning of the 13th, sent Averell to Buchanan to dislodge McCausland, and to secure the use of the bridge over the James. Meanwhile Averell had detached 200 picked men to ride completely around Lynchburg, cut its communica- tions, and get news of the enemy. That day Hunter learned positively that Breckenridge had taken command at Bock- fish Gap, and Duffle's prisoners brought " rumors that a formidable rebel force was hastening toward the Valley from Bichmond, and that Sheridan had met with a reverse near Louisa Court House," while other information represented Lynchburg to be weakly defended. These tidings suggested the possible success of a rapid advance against the city by the comparatively open route through the Peaks of Otter, whereas the effort to first dislodge Breckenridge in Bockfish Gap might cause a fatal delay. The 14th, Hunter moved his army by a hard march of twenty-five miles to Buchanan, which Averell had already approached, driving off McCausland, and capturing some loaded canal barges and prisoners. The river was easily fordable here, but McCausland zealously burned the bridge, to the regret of the people, and eleven buildings took fire from it, Hunter's troops helping to check the flames. The Blue Bidge was crossed next day at the Peaks of Otter, McCausland felling the trees behind him, in a vain effort to obstruct the Union march. Powell's brigade, riding in advance, occupied Liberty, the county town of Bedford, on the Virginia and Tennessee Bailroad, twenty-four miles west GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 33 of Lynchburg. There Averell's picked men reported. They had struck and broken the Charlottesville Eailroad near Amherst, crossed the James below Lynchburg, injured the Southside Eailroad, burned two trains at Concordia Station, and thence had moved westward to Liberty; still they brought no trustworthy news of the enemy's strength. Of the prisoners captured, " some reported that Sheridan had been defeated near Louisa Court House, while others said that he was already in Lynchburg." Giving little heed to these stories, Hunter, the 16th, moved through Liberty toward Lynchburg, sending Duffie north to Balcony Falls to see if the enemy was there, and Crook along the railroad, to destroy it as he marched. Averell, followed by Sullivan's division, the reserve artillery and the trains, advanced on the Bedford pike, and drove back Mc- Causland, but with increasing difficulty, indicating that he had now been reinforced by Imboden. At night Hunter encamped seven miles east of Liberty, and then sent through Lewisburg to Charleston the two hundred wagons which had reached him at Lexington, together with many refu- gees, under guard of Colonel Putnam's regiment of Ohio hundred-days men. Crook had destroyed the railroad from Liberty to Big Otter Creek, burning the ties and bending the rails. The next day Averell came upon the enemy at Quaker church, five miles from Lynchburg, and, aided by Duffig, charged his intrenchments. The infantry, hastening for- ward, carried the works, capturing 70 prisoners and one cannon. The troops encamped on the field. Thus far Hunter's campaign had been not only vigorous, but brilliantly successful ; while his penetration of a vital part of the enemy's country was something new after the 2* 34 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. mortifying experiences of Union campaigning in the Valley of Virginia. Nevertheless, events showed that in one respect his plan might have been more fortunate. Instead of march- ing to Lynchburg from Staunton by way of Lexington and Buchanan, which had seemed the most expedient course, from such facts as were known to him, a better route might have been through Eockflsh Gap to Charlottesville. Intrin- sically, the occupation of this town would have been as important as that of Lexington, and would have formed a sat- isfactory close of the campaign, even had it then proved im- possible to visit Lynchburg. For Charlottesville was more closely connected than Lexington with the general scheme of military operations in Virginia, and its capture was the most natural forerunner of a serious attempt on Lynchburg. Not only would a force established there threaten Gordons- ville as well as Lynchburg, thus dividing the enemy's prep- arations for defence, but it would break the railroad connect- ing them, and cut off Lynchburg from reinforcement. That General Lee would succor the latter city unless Richmond itself were on the point of capture, was obvious, since, as a seat of manufactures and the key of a region of plenty, it was to him the most important town in Virginia west of the capita], and its occupation would cut his. chief line of rail- road supply. The reinforcements for this purpose would naturally go by way of Charlottesville by rail, there being no troops to come from the region west of the Blue Bidge. At Charlottesville, Hunter, learning whether these reinforce- ments had already gone forward, would also have known whether he could wisely move to Lynchburg. Vaughan's troops that retreated from Piedmont had themselves broadly suggested the line they wished to secure, by escaping to Waynesboro instead of Staunton — this movement making them available for the defence of Charlottesville and Gor- GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 35 donsville as well as Lynchburg. Finally, at Charlottesville Hunter would have covered his line of retreat down the Shenandoah Valley, whereas a column sent through Char- lottesville, while he was far south, might force him to drift off along the distant line of the Kanawha ; and this form of withdrawal in fact occurred. To explain how Lynchburg was relieved, we must go back a little. After Sigel's defeat at New Market, Lee at once summoned the infantry of Breckenridge to reinforce him against Grant. Experience justified this step, because a Union repulse in the Valley had usually been followed by a period of dazed inaction. But in repeating this manoeuvre with a commander whose policy was that of " hammering continuously," Lee committed an error. The two brigades of Breckenridge, Wharton's and Echols's, were transferred to the North Anna and were of service there ; but mean- while the defeat at Piedmont more than counterbalanced any service they had rendered Lee, and they were hastily sent back to the Valley, reaching Bockfish Gap in season to have reinforced Vaughan, had Hunter moved from Staunton to Waynesboro. Breckenridge pushed on to Lynchburg by a forced march, and long before Hunter's arrival had placed his troops and Vaughan's behind the intrenchments, being able to add to them a considerable array of home guards and convalescents ; for Lynchburg contained not a few of the sick and wounded of Lee's army, and Generals D. H. Hill and Hays, who were among them, aided in the defence. Lee took farther precautions. He directed his Second Corps, Ewell's, now under Early, to withdraw from Cold Harbor, June 13th, and to proceed by Louisa and Charlottes- ville through either Brown's or Swift Bun Gap, across the Blue Bidge, so as to strike the rear of Hunter, then sup- posed to be still at Staunton — for Hunter's men had cut the 36 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. railroad and telegraph lines, " so that there was no commu- nication with Breckenridge." Early crossed the Chicka- horniny, and reached Trevillian's Station, June 15th, in a march of a little over two days ; and the Bivanna, near Char- lottesville, the day after, having marched eighty miles in four days. His was Stonewall Jackson's old corps, famous for quick marches — Jackson's " foot cavalry." Breckenridge, at Lynchburg, had scanty information of Hunter's progress. The 11th, he telegraphed Imboden that Hunter's cavalry was passing through Tye River Gap : " Over- take, engage and whip him. You have the force to do it." Four days later, both to Bragg, at Bichmond, and to Imbo- den himself he telegraphed bitterly in regard to the lat- ter's inactivity. But the 16th Early was at Charlottesville, where the railroad, already repaired, could bring forward his troops to Lynchburg, and then Breckenridge's anxiety was over. "My fear is that the enemy will go away," he telegraphed Early on that day ; and he encouraged General Vaughan by this assurance : " There is no occasion for any disorder. The enemy is advancing slowly. We will have General Early and large reinforcements to-morrow morning, and if the enemy comes in earnest, he will be destroyed." In truth, the next day, the 17th, brought to the city half of Early's corps and Hunter's main body. It has been seen that Crook and Averell promptly attacked the outworks of Lynchburg, the evening of the 17th ; they had shut up the enemy within a redoubt only two miles from the city. Early at that time threw two brigades of Bamseur's division into this redoubt, and placed the third and a part of Gordon's division in support. Throughout the night Hunter heard trains moving, drums beating, and constant cheering, which indicated that Lynch- burg had been succored ; but he still felt confident of tak- GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 37 ing it, provided this succor was not a corps from Bich- mond. The next morning he drove in the enemy's skir- mishers to the toll-gate on the Bedford pike, two miles from the town, and vigorously demonstrated with infantry, cavalry, and artillery against the strong works — redoubts protected by abatis. During the afternoon Hunter attacked in force, bringing into action his two divisions of in- fantry and his artillery in the centre, on and near the Bed- ford turnpike, Duffle along the Forest road on the left, and a part of Averell along the Campbell road on the right. Early's infantry sallied from their works on the Bedford road to meet this attack, but were gallantly driven back by Sullivan, aided by Crook, and the One Hundred and Six- teenth Ohio even planted its colors on Early's breastworks. The Union losses were about two hundred, and the Confed- erate must have been severe. Assured now from many sources that Early's corps had arrived, and that Lynchburg could not be carried, Hunter withdrew at night along the turnpike toward Liberty, bivouacking seven miles east of this town, and thence the following day, July 19th, march- ing on Buford's Gap. When Early discovered that Hunter had disappeared, he put all his forces in pursuit, Elzey receiving the command of Breckenridge's troops during the latter's illness, while Bansom, having arrived from Bichmond, assumed general charge of the cavalry. By hard marching Early's advance, at 4 p.m., came up with Hunter's rear guard, under Averell, and drove it through Liberty after an engagement of two hours. Averell's loss was 122 men, chiefly in Schoon- maker's brigade. Now the infelicity of General Hunter's position became manifest. With the Charlottesville and Lynchburg Bail- road repaired, and in the enemy's possession, he could not 38 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. well return by the Peaks of Otter to Lexington and Staun- ton, for Early, sending a part of his forces by rail, might enter Rockfish Gap in season to plant himself on his oppo- nent's line of retreat and supply, or to attack him in flank. Hunter could perhaps have fought his way through, but he no longer had ammunition for a pitched battle, or series of battles, against a force like Early's. His rations, too, were nearly gone, and he was 200 miles from his base. He re- solved to retreat, not by his Shenandoah line, but through Buford's Gap to Charleston, in the Kanawha Valley — a route which would be in great part unmolested, while Crook had left arnple supplies under guard at Meadow Bluff, and the question of rations was imperative.1 At midnight the retreat was resumed, and Buford's Gap was reached the morning of the 20th. Duffie, who had gone forward to secure this pass, employed his whole force in de- stroying the railroad. Thence the march was continued through Bonsack's Station, on the Tennessee Railroad, to Salem ; and it is worthy of note that, on the way, as if this were still a destroying expedition instead of a retreat, all bridges, water-tanks, and railroad stations were wrecked, and the enemy was repulsed wherever he attacked. Even the 19th, the day when Hunter withdrew from Lynchburg, he had actually issued orders to Averell to break the Rich- mond and Danville Railroad where it crosses the Staunton River, far south of Lynchburg, and to return to "rejoin the 1 At Sweet Springs there was a possibility of an intermediate route, nearer the Shenandoah Valley, but, as General Hunter's report says, it was rejected for sound reasons : " From this point it was suggested that we should move north- ward by the Warm Springs and the Valley of the South Branch of the Potomac, a route lying west of and running parallel to the Valley of the Shenandoah. By this route the army would have reached the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad at New Creek and Cumberland. It was objected that by this road the troops would find it impossible to collect necessary supplies and run risks of being cut off by the enemy coming in by way of Staunton and Harrisonburg." GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 39 •j column moving in the direction of Lewisburg." The next day, the 20th, General Sullivan was directed, as soon as his men were "somewhat rested," to " turn out as many of them as possible to tear up the railroad and destroy as much of it as possible ; also, the telegraph line." Such orders indicate that while at Washington Hunter's westward withdrawal was soon after viewed simply as an escape, it was for him a feasible method of completing a successful expedition. Salem was reached the 21st. That morning Early's advance was repulsed by Crook and Averell, holding Buford's Gap in the rear. The trains and reserve artillery continued along the New Castle road, but through inadvertence the proper guard did not go with them, so that McCausland, dashing in on the guns, rapidly carried off or shot the horses, and began to destroy the caissons and limbers. At once, troops hastened up from the rear*, and drove him away with a loss of about thirty men ; but he made off with three guns, and five others were abandoned for want of horses to drag them, while the wrecked caissons and limbers were also, of course, left behind. A sharp repulse of the enemy's cavalry the following morning ended the pursuit ; for Early, having no mind to be drawn into the Kanawha Valley on a wild- goose chase, through a desolate and waterless region, re- turned to Lynchburg. Still the retreat was continued through New Castle with the same headlong speed, not through fear of the enemy, but through the necessity of reaching supplies. During the week that elapsed before these were obtained, the troops had no hard bread, and only one issue of six ounces of flour per man. But there was beef on the hoof, the cattle being driven by day, and eaten the same night. Many horses and mules died for want of fodder and rest, and not a few wagons were burned for lack of animals to draw them. 40 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. The night of June 24th, having passed Sweet Springs, the column reached White Sulphur Springs, and there had deli- cious water and a good rest. But suitable food was still wanting, and the army pressed on to Meadow Bluff. Here the supplies were expected ; but the officer in charge of them, with 400 men, being alarmed at guerilla demonstra- tions, had fallen back with all his stores to Gauley Bridge. At last, the 27th, a train with seventy thousand rations of hard-tack, sugar, coffee, and bacon reached the hungry troops, a day's march short of Gauley Bridge, and the suf- ferings of the retreat were over. Here a brief account may properly be given of a move- ment made by Grant to co-operate with Hunter : for the reader will have surmised that since Lee, in his strait for troops, found a corps and a division of infantry to spare for checking this officer, the Lieutenant-General may have taken some steps to aid him in his important enterjxrise. In his despatch to Halleck, of May 25th, from Jericho Ford, Grant used the following language: "If Hunter can possi- bly get to Charlottesville and Lynchburg, he should do so, living on the country. The railroads and canals should be destroyed beyond possibility of repairs for weeks. Com- pleting this, he could find his way back to his original base, or from about Gordonsville join this army." While Hun- ter was moving to Staunton, Grant directed Major- General P. H. Sheridan, commanding the cavalry of the Army of the Potomac, to proceed with two divisions to Charlottes- ville, destroy the railroad, and thence accompany Hun- ter's command, if found there, to the Army of the Poto- mac. Crossing the Pamunkey, June 7th, with Torbert's and Gregg's divisions, General Sheridan marched by Aylett's, Dunkirk, Polecat Station, Childsburg, New Market, and An- GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 41 drews's Tavern, and, after four days, reached the Virginia Central Eailroad at Trevillian Station the morning of June 11th. He found that the enemy's cavalry had stolen around in his front, and had constructed breastworks in dense tim-] ber at Trevillian, anticipating that he would strike that point. In a brilliant and severe engagement, Sheridan drove the enemy's cavalry, consisting of Fitz Lee's and Hampton's divisions, back to and beyond the station, where he camped. The next day, the 12th, after breaking the rail- road back to Louisa Court House, he made a vigorous effort, using both Torbert's division and one brigade of Gregg's, to move toward Gordonsville ; but he found the enemy there in too great force. He had hoped and intended to reach the Orange and Alexandria Railroad at Cobham's Station, and to break it in a march toward Charlottesville ; but this plan had to be given up, while to reach Gordonsville had become apparently no less difficult. In his two days' engagements, he had lost 735 men in killed, wounded, and captured, but had severely retaliated on the enemy, bringing off 377 pris- oners. It seemed improbable that Hunter could be any- where around Gordonsville, when such a force of the enemy was left free at Trevillian to oppose Sheridan ; and captured prisoners reported that Hunter had not, up to that time, been near Charlottesville. Sheridan skilfully and rapidly withdrew under cover of the night, and a brief pursuit by the enemy was easily repulsed by General Davies. A field telegram of June 16th, from General E. E. Lee's headquar- ters at Drewry's Bluff to Hampton at Polecat Station, shows that the Confederate general made an unsuccessful effort to cut off Sheridan's withdrawal, by means of the cavalry forces which he had retained on both sides of the Chickahominy when despatching Hampton to foil the attack on Gordons- ville and Charlottesville : " Our cavalry north and south of 42 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Chickahoniiny have been advised of movements by bearer of despatches ; also to endeavor to ascertain movements of Sheridan, and to unite with you when practicable to crush him." But Sheridan succeeded in carrying his command safely through to White House. His subsequent adventures at that point do not come within the scope of the present volume. General Halleck had sent word to Hunter, June 12th, " that General Grant is about to move his army to the James Eiver, at or near City Point, and that he will continue to hold the bridge across the Pamunkey, at the White House, to facilitate the junction of yourself and General Sheridan with the Army of the Potomac ; " but this despatch doubt- less reached Hunter only on his return from Lynchburg. Several days earlier, June 6th, Grant had written Hunter the following letter, to be delivered by Sheridan : General Sheridan leaves to-morrow morning with instructions to pro- ceed to Charlottesville, Va., and to commence there the destruction of the Virginia Central Railroad, destroying this way as much as possi- bls. The complete destruction of this road and of the canal on James River is of great importance to us. According to the instructions I sent General Halleck for your guidance, you were to proceed to Lynch- burg for a single day. But that point is of so much importance to the enemy, that in attempting to get it, such resistance may be met as to defeat your getting on to the road or canal at all. I see, in look- ing over my letter to General Halleck on the subject of your instruc- tions, that it rather indicates that your route should be from Staunton via Charlottesville. If you have so understood it, you will be doing just what I want. The direction I would now give is, that if this letter reaches you in the Valley between Staunton and Lynchburg, you im- mediately turn east by the most practicable road until you strike the Lynchburg branch of the Virginia Central road. From there move eastward along the line of the road, destroying it completely and thor- oughly until you join General Sheridan. After the work laid out for General Sheridan and yourself is thoroughly done, proceed to join the GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 43 Army of the Potomac by the route laid out in General Sheridan's in- structions. If any portion of your force, especially of your cavalry, is needed back in your department, you are authorized to send it back. If on receipt of this you should be near to Lynchburg, and deem it prac- ticable to reach that point, you will exercise your judgment about going there. If you should be on the railroad between Charlottesville and Lynchburg, it may be practicable to detach a cavalry force to destroy the canal. Lose no opportunity to destroy the canal. This letter of course did not reach Hunter. The 19th, Secretary Stanton wrote to Stahel as follows : " General Sheridan, who was sent by General Grant to open commu- nication with General Hunter, by way of Charlottesville, has just returned to York River without effecting his object. It is therefore very probable that General Hunter will be compelled to fall back into West Virginia." A despatch of Grant to Meade, at City Point, June 21st, is also noteworthy. "The only word I would send Hunter," he said, "would be verbal, and simply to let him know where we are, and tell him to save his army in the way he thinks best, either by getting back into his own department or by joining us. If we had the enemy driven north of the Appomattox, I think he would have no difficulty in joining us by taking a wide sweep south." Thus two campaigns in the Shenandoah Valley, Sigel's and -Hunter's, had ended. Grant's plan in regard to them has been pronounced faulty, on the ground that it unduly scattered his forces, rendering them liable to be beaten in detail. This criticism seems strained, since when he crossed the Eapidan Grant had provided for his main army all the troops it needed at that time, and all that could be handled to advantage. The alternative instruction to Hunter to join the Army of the Potomac from Gordonsville, after a specific 44: THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. work, shows that this outlying force was looked on as a reserve, to be used for watching a dangerous flank and for menacing the enemy's communications till needed in the main army. Lee, on his part, so highly appreciated the importance of the Valley, that he held it at first with a large force. Even the temporary detention of the division of Breckenridge from him had made easier the first stage of Grant's Virginia task. Hunter's movement in turn forced Lee to strip his Richmond intrenchments to avoid a fatal disaster at Lynchburg. General Hunter had relieved his command with address from a critical position, and his campaign throughout had been one of exceptional audacity and vigor, even though the great effort made by Lee checked its final stage. That there was no precise understanding between Grant and Hunter as to the latter's course has been made apparent ; but as the Lieutenant-General had expressly made it op- tional with Hunter in all the despatches that ever reached him, to end his campaign either by joining the Army of the Potomac or by returning to his own department, and as the results achieved surpassed any that Grant had expected, since he had doubted whether this expedition could remain at Lynchburg, " for a single day," or be able to reach the Tennessee Eailroad at all, he lauded his subordinate's en- ergy. Hunter's own view of his campaign was given in a despatch from Loup Creek, near Gauley Bridge, June 28th, in which he declared that the expedition had been " extremely success- ful, inflicting' great injury upon the enemy," going forward until short of ammunition, and until the hostile army had been so strongly reinforced that he could no longer collect subsistence. " The command," he added, " is in excellent heart and health." Mr. Stanton, in replying, referred to GENERAL HUNTER'S LYNCHBURG CAMPAIGN. 45 " the great satisfaction your operations have given." Jef- ferson Davis told the people of Georgia, after the fall of Atlanta, that " an audacious movement of the enemy up to the very walls of Lynchburg had rendered it necessary that the Government should send a formidable body of troops to cover that vital point, which had otherwise been intended for the relief of Atlanta." Colonel Strother, General Hun- ter's chief of staff, in his report of the expedition, sets forth these results : " About fifty miles of the Virginia Central Railroad had been effectually destroyed ; the Virginia and Tennessee road had been destroyed to some extent for the same distance ; an incredible amount of public property had been burned, including canal-boats and railroad trains loaded with ordnance and commissary stores, numerous ex- tensive iron works, manufactories of saltpetre, musket-stocks, shoes, saddles and artillery-harness, woollen cloths, and grain mills. About three thousand muskets and twenty pieces of cannon, with quantities of shells and gunpowder, fell into our hands, while immense quantities of provisions, cattle, and horses were captured and used by the army." Colonel Strother also claims the infliction of a loss of 2,000 killed and wounded on the enemy, besides the taking of 2,000 prisoners, with a total loss of only 1,500 men and eight guns in Hunter's command.

## appendix-b-april-returns

APPENDIX B. TABLES INDICATING NUMEEICAL STBENGTH. -Abstract from Tri-monthly Return of the Department of West Virginia, Major-General Franz Sigel, Commanding, for April 30, 1864. Commanding Officer. Command. Present fob Duty. Station. E o a bo 01 u so to < Martinsburg . . Charleston Harper's Ferry Nhw Creek . . . Major-Gen. Franz Sigel. . Bg.-Gen. J. C. Sullivan.. Brig.-Gen. Geo. Crook . . Brig. -Gen. Max Weber . . Col. N. Wilkinson Capt. Ewald Over Major-Gen Jul. Stahel . Brig.-Gen. W. W. Averell. Brig.-Gen. A. N. Duffle.. Col. J. E. Wynkoop Col. R. M. Richardson . . Capt. Frank Smith General and Staff. First, Division .... Third Division. . . . Separate Brigade. . Separate Brigade . . Independent Co. . . Total Infantry.. General and Staff. Second Division. . . 10 208 145 114 103 3 i597 3,331 3. til 2 2,545 71 10 5,435 4,359 4,177 2,968 82 578 14,156 17,021 Cumberland . . Charleston Charleston 3 139 97 65 28 1 2 3 3,'355 2,747 1,676 730 48 51 40 3 4,392 3,343 Cumberland . . 2,008 Burlington . . . Cumberland . . Cumberland . . Webster 15th New York.... 3d Ind. Co. Ohio.. Co. M, 4th Va . . . . Co C, 16di Illinois Total Cavalry . . . 1,007 68 56 56 Bg.-Gen. J. C. Sullivan.. 338 S,647 10,933 8 3 7 48 14 3 361 76 248 2.075 531 29 SS4 Charleston . . . Bg.-Gen. W. W. Averell. 79 Charleston . . . 283 Harper's Ferry 2,539 Col. N. Wilkinson 570 Wheeling 85 Lieut. James Drysdale . . Lieut. V. N. Hisrgins. . . . Capt. F. E. Town Total Artillery1. 132dCo. V. R. C. .. 147th Co. V.R.C... Det. Signal Corps . Total 83 3,320 3,S90 Frederick Cumberland . . Cumberland . . 1 1 13 18 40 96 54 41 112 1,024 26,277 32,061 1 Eighty -six pieces of artillery. 264 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. II. — Abstract from Return of the Army of Western Virginia, Maj.- Gen. John C. Breckinridge, C. S. Army, Commanding, for the month of April, 1864. General Staff Echols's Brigade 1 McOausland's Brigade Wharton's Brigade 2 Forty-fifth Virginia Regiment Bosang's Company Total Infantry Jackson's Brigade Jenkins's Brigade (collecting) Thirty-seventh Virginia Bat'n, Co H. Total Cavalry Artillery (7 batteries) Engineer Troops (1 Co. ) Grand total Present for Duty. "3 1 > a 1| Sfcj Q, 0 si < 0 a u (0 o o a * w S < 21 ~1^339~ 1,548 "749 39 3,675 810 1,332 67 2,209 21 1,615~~ 1,774 "840 48 21 10? 99 "42 1.139 1,548 ' 749 41 2,182 2,257 "971 96 248 3,677 4,277 1,010 1.616 71 2.697 5,506 89 115 4 208 810 1,315 67 2,192 1,994 3,008 99 5,101 30 642 597 57 6,538 675 7,731 822 3 57 73 510 6,568 11,523 III. — Strength of the Infantry of the Army of the Valley District, August 20, 1 864, as shown by Inspection Report of this date. Troops. Aggregate present for duty. Aggregate present. Aggregate present and absent. Gordon's Division 7 614 858 1,344 803 963 1,597 8 3,708 Terry's Brigade Evans's Brigade 6,042 4,254 Total 2,823 3,370 14,012 966 918 699 803 1.154 1,113 902 991 3,271 3,317 2,447 4,085 Total 3,386 4.160 13,120 11 595 600 854 11 831 742 928 12 2,334 2,410 2,627 Total 2,060 2,512 7,383 8,269 10,042 34,515 1 " This brigade, under the command of Major-General John Echols, entered upon the campaign of 1864 with 2.150 men and a full complement of officers on May 6, 1864. The brigade was then well armed, equipped, and provided with a full supply of cloth- ing, and in a thorough state of discipline and efficiency. . . . The military bearing and appearance of the brigade was soldierly and inspiring. In this thorough state 01 organization and discipline the brigade opened its campaigning with the battle of New Market" (abstract from Inspection Report of Col. G. S. Pattern's brigade. Sept. 29th). "The brigade entered the present campaign with an aggregate effective of 2,100 men. It now numbers but little over 400 aggregate effective. ... At Cloyd's Farm, May 9, 1864, it fought the Eighth Corps, and June 5th, at Piedmont, in conjunction with a small force of dismounted cavalry and the orty -fifth regiment of infantry, it fought the command of General Hunter " ( abstract from Inspection Report of Smith's brigade. Wharton's division. September 29th J. 2 Not reported, the returns being delayed.
